
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (Reserved)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (Reserved)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (Reserved)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 WATER
Title 14 SEWER CODE
Title 15 STORMWATER
Title 16 (Reserved)
Title 17 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 18 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 19 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.16 ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.20 NOTICE PROCEDURES
Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
Chapter 1.28 CODE VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 1.30 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 1.32 GENERAL PENALTY

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
        There is hereby adopted the “Buellton Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Quality Code Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 95-02 § 1, 1995)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
        This code shall be known as the “Buellton Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Buellton Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Buellton Municipal Code.” References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Buellton Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 95-02 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
        Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Buellton Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Buellton, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 95-02 § 3, 1995)

 

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
        Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 95-02 § 4, 1995)

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
        The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 95-02 § 5, 1995)

 

1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
        All ordinances through 10-03 were included in this code. The following ordinances passed prior to the adoption of this code are adopted and made a part of this code:

        A.    Ordinance No. 10-04;

        B.     Ordinance No. 10-05;

        C.     Ordinance No. 10-06. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 95-02 § 6, 1995)

 

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
        The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 95-02 § 7, 1995)

 

1.01.080 Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 95-02 § 8, 1995)

 

1.01.090 References to prior code.
        References in city forms, documents, and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 95-02 § 9, 1995)

 

1.01.100 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Buellton, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases:

        “City” means the city of Buellton, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

        “Council” means the city council of the city of Buellton. “All its members” or “all councilmembers” means the total number of councilmembers holding office.

        “County” means the county of Santa Barbara.

        “Law” denotes the applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

        “May” is permissive.

        “Month” means a calendar month.

 

        “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

        “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmative may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

        “Owner” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land.

        “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

        “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

        “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

        “Property” includes real and personal property.

        “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

        “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

        “State” means the state of California.

        “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

        “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

        “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise produced in permanent visible form.

        “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.110 Interpretation of language.
        All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.120 Grammatical interpretation.
        The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

        A.    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

        B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

        C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.130 Acts by agents.
        When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.140 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
        Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.150 Computation of time.
        Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.160 Construction.
        The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.170 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
        The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Holidays observed by the city.
        A.    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained within California Government Code Section 6700, the public offices of the city, excluding those offices which must remain open for the continuation of essential public services such as police and fire protection, shall be closed on Saturdays, Sundays, and on the following, and only the following holidays:

        1.     New Year’s Day (January 1);

        2.     Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday;

        3.     Presidents’ Day;

        4.     Memorial Day;

        5.     Independence Day (July 4);

        6.     Labor Day;

        7.     Admission Day (September 9);

        8.     Veterans’ Day (November 11);

        9.     Thanksgiving Day;

        10.   Day After Thanksgiving Day;

        11.   Christmas Eve (December 24);

        12.   Christmas Day (December 25).

        B.     Holidays falling on Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. Holidays falling on Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday.

        C.     Other holidays may be designated by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

        D.    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the city manager shall be authorized, by administrative regulation or otherwise, to direct that all or a portion of the public offices of the city shall remain open for business, on a full or reduced staff basis, on any of the days or holidays prescribed above, when it is determined to be necessary for the public interest to do so. (Ord. 93-4 § 2, 1993; prior code § 2.55.010)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
1.08.010 Adoption.
        The corporate seal for the city is adopted, the design of which seal shall be as follows in Section 1.08.020. (Prior code § 1.04.010)

 

1.08.020 Design.
        The seal adopted in Section 1.08.010 shall be circular in form; shall be not less than two inches in diameter. Around its circumference shall appear the words “City of Buellton, California,” and, within the words “Incorporated February 1, 1992.” (Prior code § 1.04.020)

 

1.08.030 City seal approved.
        A city seal for the city is approved. The seal shall contain the name of the city and the date of incorporation and shall appear substantially as follows:

(Ord. 92-7 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 1.16 ELECTIONS
1.16.010 Municipal elections consolidation.
        Pursuant to Section 36503.5 of the California Government Code, general municipal elections, which would otherwise be held on the second Tuesday in April of even-numbered years, shall be consolidated with statewide general elections held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. (Ord. 92-12 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.05.010)

Chapter 1.20 NOTICE PROCEDURES
1.20.010 Public hearing notices—Content.
        A.    All posted or mailed notices of public hearings to be conducted by the city council, planning commission, or any other body of the city, shall contain the following:

 

        Any petition for judicial review of a decision of the Buellton City Council, (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) is controlled by the statute of limitations provisions set forth in Sections 1.24.050 and 1.24.060 of the Buellton Municipal Code and Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, or void any decision of the Buellton City Council (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) is controlled by Sections 1.24.050 and 1.24.060 of the Buellton Municipal Code. In any such action or proceeding seeking judicial review of, which attacks or seeks to set aside, or void any decision of the Buellton City Council (Planning Commission or other body as appropriate) shall be limited to those issues raised at the hearing as provided in Chapter 1.24 of the Buellton Municipal Code. Copies of the procedures for the conduct of City Council public hearings are available from the City Clerk.

 

        B.     All published notices of public hearings to be conducted by the city council, (planning commissioner or other appropriate body), shall contain the following:

 

        If you wish to challenge the above in court, the challenge will be limited only to those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the City Clerk at, or prior to, the public hearing described in this notice, and must be commenced within the time limits specified in Chapter 1.24 of the Buellton Municipal Code.

(Prior code § 1.01.290)

 

1.20.020 Notices—Service.
        Whenever a notice is required to be given, or may be given, under any provision of this code or any provision of any code adopted by reference by this code or any provision of any ordinance or resolution of the city not included within this code, such notice may be given as provided in this chapter. Unless different or special provisions are otherwise specifically made in this code or in some other applicable enactment, any such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the persons to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at the person’s last known residence or business address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or in the official receptacle thereof. (Prior code § 1.01.300)

 

1.20.030 Notices—Proof.
        Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by the affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this code or other provision of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1.01.310)

Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
1.24.010 Appeals to council.
        A.    Except when an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this code, any person excepting to the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of a permit, license, or other approval applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any provision of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city, if the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of such permit, license, or approval, or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any provision of this code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal.

        B.     No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any provision of this code unless such decision has been first taken up with the department head concerned and with the city manager, and each such official has not adjusted the matter to the appellant’s satisfaction. Decisions of the director of community development are appealable to the planning commission without being processed through the city manager. In such a case, the party appealing the community development director’s decision shall follow the notice and time limits set forth in this chapter.

        C.     No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any provision of this code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, conditional approval, suspension, or revocation of a permit, license, approval, or any other administrative decision. There shall be no such right of appeal with regard to law enforcement activities involving state law. (Prior code § 2.04.100)

 

1.24.020 Notice of appeal—Time limit—Contents.
        A.    A written notice of appeal must be filed by an aggrieved party within twenty (20) days after the date of the city’s notice of decision from which the appeal is sought. No notice of appeal shall be acted upon, after the twenty (20) day period and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to reject as untimely any such appeal. If a notice of decision has not been served upon the aggrieved party in writing, the aggrieved party may, within ten days after having knowledge of such determination, demand service of written notice thereof, and shall have twenty (20) days following such service in which to file the notice of appeal.

        B.     The notice of appeal shall set forth the following:

        1.     The specific action appealed from;

        2.     The specific grounds for the appeal; and

        3.     The relief or action requested from the city council. Any notice of appeal not containing the information required by this section shall be returned to the aggrieved party, hereinafter the “appellant,” by the city clerk with a statement specifying those parts of the notice of appeal that are incomplete and indicating the manner in which they can be made complete. The appellant shall thereafter be allowed five days in which to perfect and refile the notice of appeal.

        C.     Except in those instances where an appeal is filed by the city manager or other public official pursuant to official duties, the written notice of appeal from the determination of an administrative official or from an administrative body of the city, as the case may be, shall be accompanied by an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 2.04.110)

 

1.24.030 Appeals—Hearings—Notices.
        A.    Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, and together with the payment of the requisite appeal fee, the city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing before the city council at the earliest possible date authorized by law and shall cause written notice of the appeal, including the time, place, and date of the hearing on the appeal, to be given to the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant. The city clerk shall also cause a copy of the notice of appeal to be transmitted to the official or body upon whose decision the appeal was filed.

        B.     If two or more members of the city council file with the city clerk, within the time limitations set forth in Section 1.24.020(A) of this chapter, written requests to have any decision of the planning commission submitted to the city council for review, the city clerk shall schedule the matter for council consideration at the earliest possible date authorized by law. The filing of any such written requests shall be tantamount to an appeal brought pursuant to this subsection. An appeal brought pursuant to this subsection shall not require payment of the appeal fee as set forth in Section 1.24.020(C) of this chapter. (Prior code § 2.04.120)

 

1.24.040 Appeals—Hearings.
        A.    The city council may limit participation at the hearing to those parties directly interested, or may allow participation by the public. Such public participation, however, shall only occur when the council deems the same necessary to further the public interest. If a hearing is ordered open to public participation, notice thereof shall be given by publishing notice of the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days prior to the date of such hearing, and by such other means as the city council deems necessary.

        B.     At the time of consideration of the appeal by the city council, the appellant shall be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of appeal and matters set forth in the notice of appeal. Appellant shall have the burden of establishing cause why the decision appealed from should be altered, reversed, or modified. The council may continue the hearing on the matter from time to time to a date certain. At the conclusion of its consideration the city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in the first instance by the official or body from whose decision the appeal was filed. In ruling on the appeal, the finding and action of the council shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

        C.     Within five days after city council action on the appeal, the city clerk shall cause to be served by first-class mail a written notice of decision on the appellant. The notice of decision shall be substantially in the following form:

 

CITY OF BUELLTON
NOTICE OF DECISION OF APPEAL

 

        Notice is hereby given that the City [Council, Commission, etc.] has [action taken] on the appeal filed by [      Party      ]. City [Council, Commission, etc.] action on this matter is now final.

 

        If you wish to challenge this decision in court, PLEASE BE ADVISED that you may be limited to the statute of limitations period set forth in Chapter 1.24 of the Buellton Municipal Code. This statute of limitations may be as short as ninety (90) days from the date of this Notice.

 

Dated: ___________

___________________

 

[City Clerk or other responsible officer)

(Prior code § 2.04.130)

 

1.24.050 Judicial review—Definitions—Time for filing petition—Records request.
        A.    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as set forth below:

        1.     “Decision” means a decision subject to review pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, suspending, demoting, or dismissing an officer or employee; revoking or denying an application for a permit, license, or other entitlement; or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance.

        2.     “Party” means an officer or employee who has been suspended, demoted, or dismissed; a person whose permit, license, or other entitlement has been revoked or suspended, or whose application for a permit, license, or other entitlement has been denied; or a person whose application for a retirement benefit or allowance has been denied.

        B.     Judicial review of any decision of the city, its city council, or any commission, board, officer, or agent thereof, may be made pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to the section is filed within the time limits specified in this chapter.

        C.     Any such petition for a matter not involving a specific application or grievance shall be filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision became final. Whenever a decision is made on a specific application, grievance, or property, any such petition shall be filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date of the notice to the applicant, person aggrieved, or property owner of the decision of the city, its council, or any board, commission, officer, or employee thereof. Where there is no provision for reconsideration of the decision in any applicable provision of any statute, charter, or rule, for the purposes of this section the decision is final on the date it is made, or on the date of the notice of the decision to the applicant, grievant, or property owner. Where there is a specific provision for reconsideration, the decision is final for the purposes of this section upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided that, if reconsideration is sought pursuant to any such provision, the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. In making a final decision, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this section.

        D.    The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the city or its commissions, boards, officers, or agents which made the decision. Upon written request, the record shall be delivered to the petitioner within one hundred ninety (190) days after filing of the written request therefor. The city is authorized to recover from the petitioner its actual costs for transcribing or otherwise preparing the record. Such record shall include a transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearing officer, a final decision, all admitted exhibits in the possession of the city, or its commissions, boards, officers, or agents, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case.

        E.     If the petitioner files a request for a record as specified in subsection C of this section, within ten days after the date the decision becomes final as provided above in subsection B of this section, the time within which a petition pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure may be filed shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the petitioner or his or her attorney of record, if he/she has one.

        F.     The provisions of this section comply with requirements established by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure and prevails over any conflicting provision in any otherwise applicable law relating to the subject matter, unless the conflicting provision is a state or federal law which provides a shorter statute of limitations, in which case the shorter statute of limitations shall apply. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995; prior code § 2.50.010)

 

1.24.060 Actions attacking certain decisions—Time limitation.
        A.    Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of matters listed in Section 65901 and 65903 of the California Government Code of the state of California, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety (90) days after the date of the notice of the legislative body’s decision and the legislative body is served within one hundred twenty (120) days after the notice of the legislative body’s decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity of any unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations.

        B.     The provisions of this section comply with the requirements established by Section 65907 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2.50.020)

 

1.24.070 Limitations of issues raised.
        A.    In an action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul a finding, determination, or decision of the city made pursuant to Section 1.20.010 of the Buellton Municipal Code at a properly noticed public hearing, the issues raised shall be limited to those issues raised in the public hearing or in written correspondence delivered to the city prior to, or at the public hearing, except where the court finds either of the following:

        1.     The issue could not have been raised at the public hearing by persons exercising reasonable diligence; or

        2.     The body conducting the public hearing prevented the issue from being raised at the public hearing.

        B.     The city clerk shall include in any public notice issued pursuant to Section 1.20.010, a notice substantially stating all of the following:

 

        If you wish to challenge the (nature of the proposed action) in court, you will be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the city clerk at, or prior to, the public hearing.

 

        C.     The application of this subsection to causes of action brought pursuant to subsection E of this section applies only to the final action taken in response to the notice to the city clerk. If no final action is taken, then the issue raised in the cause of action brought pursuant to subsection E shall be limited to those matters presented at properly noticed public hearing or to those matters specified in the notice given to the city clerk pursuant to subsection E, or both.

        D.    Except as provided in Section 1.24.050 of this code and subsection E, no action or proceeding shall be maintained in any of the following cases by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced and service made on the legislative body one hundred twenty (120) days after the date of the notice of the legislative body’s decision:

        1.     To attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the decision of the city council (or planning commission as appropriate) to adopt or amend a general or specific plan. This subdivision does not apply where an action is brought based upon the complete absence of a general plan or a mandatory element thereof, but does apply to an action attacking a general plan or mandatory element thereof on the basis that it is inadequate.

        2.     To attack, review, set aside, void, or annul the decision of the city council to adopt or amend a zoning ordinance.

        3.     To determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any decision to adopt or amend any regulation attached to a specific plan.

        4.     Concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to any of the decisions listed in subdivisions (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection.

        E.     An action or proceeding shall be commenced and the legislative body served within two years after the accrual of the cause of action as provided in this subdivision, if the action or proceeding meets both of the following requirements:

        1.     It is brought in support of the development of housing projects which meet the requirements for housing for persons and families with low or moderate incomes set forth in Section 65915 of the Government Code; and

        2.     It is brought with respect to actions taken pursuant to Article 10.6 (commencing with Section 65580) of the Government Code, Chapter 3 of that Division, pursuant to Section 65589.5, 65863.6, 65915, or 66474.2 or pursuant to Chapter 4.2 (commencing with Section 65913 of the Government Code). A cause of action brought pursuant to this subdivision shall not be maintained until sixty (60) days have expired following notice to the city clerk by the party bringing the cause of action, or his or her representative, specifying the deficiencies of the general plan, specific plan, or zoning ordinance. A cause of action brought pursuant to this subdivision shall accrue sixty (60) days after notice is filed before the legislative body takes a final action in response to the notice, whichever occurs first. A notice or cause of action brought by one party pursuant to this subdivision shall not bar filing of a notice and initiation of a cause of action by any other party.

        F.     Upon the expiration of time limits provided in this section, all persons are barred from any further action or proceeding.

        G.    The provisions of this section comply with the requirements established by Section 65009 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2.50.030)

 

1.24.080 City action, effect of error.
        A.    No action, inaction, or recommendation by the city, or its city council, or any board or commission, or any of its administrative agencies or officials, on any matter shall be held invalid or set aside by any court of competent jurisdiction on the ground of improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission (hereafter, “error”) as to any matter pertaining to applications, notices, findings, records, hearings, reports, recommendations, appeals, or any matters of procedures, unless the court finds that the error was prejudicial and that the party complaining or appealing suffered substantial injury from that error and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred. There shall be no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury was done if the error is shown.

        B.     This section satisfies and complies with the requirements of Section 65010 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2.50.040)

Chapter 1.28 CODE VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
1.28.010 Purpose and intent.
        The provisions of this chapter represent the general means and methods by which the city may secure compliance with the provisions of this code and city approvals, permits or licenses. The city may use any available legal remedy to secure compliance and multiple enforcement remedies may be used to achieve compliance with respect to persons who commit continuing violations. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.020 Code violations.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any requirement of this code.

        B.     Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, maintaining, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission.

        C.     Any person violating any of the provisions of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the offense is specifically classified in this code or by state law as an infraction, or the city attorney reduces the charge to an infraction.

        D.    Each day that any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code continues will constitute a new and separate violation.

        E.     The owner of any property, building or structure within the city has the responsibility for keeping such property, building or structure free of violations related to its use or condition. The owner of such property, building or structure is separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition of the property. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.030 Permit, license, land use entitlement violations.
        A.    Each person or the successor of each person who holds a land use permit, a zoning exception or a variance permit, or any other permit or license issued by the city shall comply with each provision of the permit or license and with each term that is imposed as a condition to the exercise of the permit or license.

        B.     Each person or the successor of each person who receives a rezoning or subdivision approval shall comply with each provision of the approval and with each term that is imposed as a condition to the approval of the rezoning or subdivision.

        C.     Each person who violates either subsection A or subsection B of this section may be prosecuted for violation of a misdemeanor offense and may be punished as provided in Section 1.28.050. The penalty provided in this section is in addition to other provisions of this code that provide for revocation of the permit, license or land use approval or authorize the imposition of a civil fine or penalty. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.040 Authority to issue criminal citations.
        Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the city’s law enforcement officers are authorized to issue criminal citations following the procedures set forth in California Penal Code Sections 853.5 through 853.6a, or such other procedures as the state of California may enact. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.050 Criminal prosecution.
        Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, the city attorney, designee (collectively “city attorney”), or the Santa Barbara County district attorney, or designee (“district attorney”) may prosecute any violation of this code in the name of the people of the state of California. In any such criminal prosecution, the city attorney and district attorney is authorized to reduce the charge for any misdemeanor violation to an infraction. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.060 Misdemeanor penalties.
        Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of this code may be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by the imposition of both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.070 Infraction penalties.
        A.    Except as provided in subsection B of this section, any person convicted of an infraction for the violation of this code may be punished by:

        1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.

        2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same code section within one year.

        3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same code section within one year.

        B.     Any person convicted of an infraction for a violation of any city buildings and construction code may be punished by:

        1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.

        2.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation of the same code section within one year.

        3.     A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation of the same code section within one year. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.080 Public nuisances.
        In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code is deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city in any manner provided by law or in this code for the abatement of a nuisance. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.090 Administrative citations.
        Upon a finding by a city official vested with the authority to enforce the provisions of this code that a violation exists, such official may issue an administrative citation under Chapter 1.30. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

 

1.28.100 Civil actions.
        The city attorney or designee, at the direction of the city council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate any condition found to be in violation of this code or any approval, order, rule or regulation issued by any duly authorized officer or agent of the city in the manner provided by law. The prevailing party in any such civil action will be entitled to recovery of attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in such action. The recovery of such attorneys’ fees and costs shall be limited to those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceedings, or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 1.30 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.30.010 Purpose and intent.
        The enforcement of the city’s municipal code is vital to the protection of the public’s health, safety and quality of life. Under Government Code Section 53069.4, the city is authorized to adopt an administrative citation program, which program offers an alternative method of enforcing code violations. The purpose of issuing administrative citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage compliance with the provisions of this code and to provide a method of holding persons responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this code. The use of this chapter is also intended to minimize the expense and delay associated with pursuing code violations through the civil or criminal justice system. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply to these words and phrases:

        “Administrative citation” or “citation” means a written notice to a responsible person that a violation of this code has occurred and an assessment of a civil fine issued by a code enforcement officer.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s designee.

        “Code enforcement officer” means any person authorized to enforce certain provisions of this code.

        “Continuing violation” means either (1) a particular violation of the code continuing for more than seventy-two (72) hours without correction or abatement, or (2) a repeated, consecutive violation of the same offense as determined by the city manager, without intervening days.

        “Hearing officer” means any person authorized by the city manager to conduct an administrative citation hearing pursuant to this chapter. The hearing officer shall not be a city employee. The employment, performance, evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer.

        “Legal interest” means any interest that is represented by a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the county recorder.

        “Notice of violation” means a written notice to a responsible person that a violation of this code has occurred and a warning that an administrative citation assessing fines will be issued unless the violation is ceased and abated.

        “Responsible person” means any person or persons that a code enforcement officer determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code. The term “responsible person” includes but is not limited to a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real or personal property, or person in possession or control of real or personal property. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.030 General citation authority and applicability.
        A.    This chapter authorizes use of administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, that the city may pursue to address any violation of this code.

        B.     The use of this chapter is at the discretion of the city manager, city attorney, and the city’s code enforcement officers.

        C.     Any code enforcement officer, upon determining that a provision of this code which such officer is charged to enforce has been violated, has the authority to issue an administrative citation to any responsible person.

        D.    Any responsible person violating any provision of this code, or causing, permitting or maintaining a violation of any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by a code enforcement officer.

        E.     Each and every day a violation of this code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and will be subject to a separate fine. A single citation may charge a violation for one or more days on which a violation exists, and for the violation of one or more code sections. Continuing violations will automatically accrue fines beginning on the date the citation is issued until verification of abatement pursuant to Section 1.30.080(C).

        F.     The owner of any property, building or structure within the city has the responsibility for keeping such property, building or structure free of violations related to its use or condition. The owner of such property, building or structure is a responsible person and is separately liable for violations committed by tenants or occupants relative to the use or condition of the property. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.040 Notice of violation.
        A.    Whenever a code enforcement officer determines that a violation of this code exists, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to a responsible person prior to issuing an administrative citation. The notice of violation serves as a written warning of responsibility and requires immediate action by the responsible person to cease and abate the violation. The notice of violation must include the information set forth in Sections 1.30.060(B)(1) through (5) and a date by which the violation can reasonably be ceased and abated. If the violation is not ceased or abated by the end of the correction period stated in the notice, the code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation.

        B.     In accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4, no responsible person will be assessed an administrative fine under this chapter for a continuing violation pertaining to a building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural or zoning issue that does not create an immediate danger to the public health or safety without first receiving a notice of violation and a reasonable opportunity to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. In such circumstance, the stated period available to correct the violation prior to the assessment of a fine must be appropriate to the violation as determined by the code enforcement officer, but in no event less than seven days. If, after the correction period stated in the notice, the violation is not ceased or abated, the code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation.

        C.     Any responsible person receiving notice for a continuing violation may petition the city manager for an extension of time to correct the violation so long as the petition is received before the end of the correction period. The city manager may grant an extension of time to correct the violation if the responsible person has supplied sufficient evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the stated period.

        D.    The requirement of a reasonable opportunity to cure a violation does not apply in instances where in the discretion of the city manager, a code violation poses an immediate danger to the public health or safety. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.050 Service procedures.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever notice is required to be given under this chapter, it must be given in one of the following ways:

        1.     Personal service;

        2.     Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Concurrently, the same notice should be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service will be deemed effective by regular mail, provided that notice is not returned. Service by mail will be effective on the date of mailing;

        3.     Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the affected property or any other real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest.

        B      The failure of any interested person to receive any notice served in accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.

        C.     The notice procedures in this section do not apply to an initial notice of violation, which may be sent by regular mail or personally served. Service of a notice of violation by mail is effective on the date of mailing. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.060 Administrative citation procedure.
        A.    Upon determining that a violation of this code exists, a code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to any responsible person.

        B.     Administrative citations will be issued on a form approved by the city attorney, and at a minimum will contain the following information:

        1.     Name of the person who is charged as a responsible person for the violation;

        2.     Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation was observed;

        3.     The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation;

        4.     A description of the actions necessary to correct the violation;

        5.     An order to the responsible person to immediately correct the violation and an explanation of the consequences of the failure to correct the violation;

        6.     Whether the offense is a continuing violation which will accrue fines until properly ceased and abated;

        7.     The amount of the fine for the violation, including the amount due for the initial violation and any prospective daily fine for failure to abate the violation (if applicable to a continuing violation);

        8.     An explanation of how the fine must be paid and the time period by which it must be paid;

        9.     An explanation of how the abatement of the violation can be properly verified. A request for verification must be made within twenty (20) days of the citation date. The request must be made in writing to the code enforcement department setting forth the reasons why the responsible person does not believe a violation occurred or that he or she is not responsible for the violation. A copy of the citation and return mail address must be provided with this initial review request;

        10.   Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

        11.   The name and signature of the enforcement officer and if possible the signature of the responsible person;

        12.   Notice that the violation is a nuisance and that collection of unpaid fines and costs can be enforced as a lien against the property where the violation occurs and that an unpaid lien can result in the property being involuntarily sold. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.070 Assessment of administrative citation fine.
        A.    The amount of the fine may be assessed according to a schedule of fines adopted by city council resolution. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat violations occurring within specified periods of time, and fines may vary depending on the particular code provision violated.

        B.     Where no amount is specified by resolution of the city council, the following fines will apply:

        1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for a first violation.

        2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for a second violation of the same code provision or permit within one year from the date of the first violation.

        3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each additional violation of the same code provision or permit within one year from the date of the first violation.

        C.     A penalty of ten percent will be added on any delinquent fines on the last day of each month after the due date.

        D     In addition to the late penalty provided by this section, delinquent fines will accrue interest at the rate of one percent per month, exclusive of penalties, from the due date. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.080 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
        A.    Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following:

        1.     Pay the fine within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed are payable to the city. Payment of a fine does not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation nor will it bar further enforcement action by the city.

        2.     Cease and abate the violation. If the offense is a continuing violation and the responsible person fails to properly cease and abate the violation, fines will accrue for each day until the abatement is properly verified. Additionally, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation. The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation will increase at the rate specified in this chapter or as established by city council resolution.

        B      At any time following thirty (30) days after the issuance of the citation, the city may deliver a collection bill to the responsible person requiring payment for all outstanding amounts owed for the violation, including the amount due for the initial violation and any accrual of daily fines from the date the citation was issued to the date the abatement of the offense is properly verified (if applicable) plus any appropriate late payment charge, less any amount remitted pursuant to subsection A of this section.

        C.     The abatement of a continuing violation must be verified by a code enforcement officer. The responsible person must contact the phone number designated on the citation and schedule an inspection by a code enforcement officer. Fines will accrue until the abatement is verified, less any days delayed by action of the city in scheduling such inspection. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.090 Collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
        A.    The failure of any person to pay a fine or penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to the city. To enforce that debt, the city may file a civil action, lien the subject property as set forth below, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such debt. A person who fails to pay any fine or other charge owed to the city under this chapter is liable in any action brought by the city for all costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and attorneys’ fees. Such collection costs are in addition to any fines, interest, and late charges.

        B.     In addition to any other legal remedy, the city may place a lien on property that is the subject of a citation if the citation has been issued to the property owner. The following procedure will apply:

        1.     The city manager may initiate proceedings to record a lien against the subject property.

        2.     Before recording the lien, the city manager shall submit a report to the city clerk stating the amounts due and owing. The report may include a fee, as established by city council resolution, for the administrative costs associated with the preparation and recordation of the lien.

        3.     The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing before the city manager to consider the report and any protests or objections to it.

        4.     The city clerk must serve the property owner with a hearing notice not less than ten days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be delivered first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the property owner’s address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the county of Santa Barbara, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of property owner to actually receive notice does not affect its validity.

        5.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may adopt a report confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount.

        6.     Following the adoption of the report imposing a lien, the city clerk shall cause the lien to be filed in the county recorder’s office.

        7.     After confirmation and recordation, the city shall present a copy of the lien to the county finance director to add the amount of the lien to the next regular property tax bills levied against the parcel for municipal purposes. This amount will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected, and will be subject to the same penalties and procedures under foreclosure and sale as provided for with ordinary municipal taxes. Or, after recording, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.

        8.     Once the city receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs related to a lien, the city clerk will cause to be recorded a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the county recorder’s office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.100 Request for administrative hearing.
        A.    Any person receiving an administrative citation may contest the citation by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within fifteen (15) days after the issuance date of the administration citation. Any request for hearing must be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine assessed by the citation for the initial violation, unless waived by subsection C of this section. If it is determined, after a hearing, that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation, the advance deposit will be refunded.

        B.     A request for hearing will not postpone or avoid the requirement of a responsible person to abate a violation nor toll the daily fines accruing for a continuing violation until the abatement of the offense is properly verified. In the event the hearing officer upholds the citation, the responsible person will be liable for the total fines accrued from the issuance of the citation to the date the abatement is properly verified.

        C.     A person seeking an administrative hearing may request a hardship waiver of the fine deposit by filing with the city clerk a completed city form, which must be signed under penalty of perjury. The request must be submitted along with the request for hearing. The person requesting the waiver bears the burden of establishing that such person does not have the financial ability to make the deposit. The request will be decided by the city manager within ten days from date the request is received, and the city manager’s decision is final. The applicant will be notified by telephone, facsimile, or in person of the decision on the request. The filing of a request for hardship waiver does not extend the time to file for an administrative hearing or pay the fine when due. If the request for hardship waiver is denied, an administrative hearing will not be scheduled unless the fine deposit is paid within ten days following the city manager’s determination on the request for a hardship waiver.

        D.    The failure to submit a timely and complete request for hearing will terminate a person’s right to contest the citation and result in a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation will serve as a final determination and conclusive evidence of the named responsible person’s liability for the citation.

        E.     The city clerk shall set a hearing before a city hearing officer on a date that is not less than fifteen (15) and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section. The city shall notify the person requesting the hearing by regular mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing and give that person any additional written reports filed concerning the violation that are provided to the hearing officer. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.110 Administrative hearing procedure.
        A.    A city hearing officer will conduct the administrative citation hearing.

        B.     No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer will be held until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance, unless a hardship waiver is granted in accordance with Section 1.30.100(C).

        C.     The hearing officer may only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation of this code on the date specified in the administrative citation.

        D.    At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city must provide the recipient of an administrative citation with copies of the citation, reports and other documents to be submitted to the hearing officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence will not apply.

        E.     The person contesting the administrative citation will be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.

        F.     Unless requested in advance by the person contesting the administrative citation, neither the code enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city is required to attend the hearing, provided that any such appearance may be made at the discretion of the code enforcement officer or city manager.

        G.    The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing will constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and the order of the citation will become the final determination.

        H.    The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the code enforcement officer to the hearing officer will constitute prima fascia evidence of the violation and the respective facts contained in those documents.

        I.      The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the code enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.120 Administrative hearing decision.
        A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within fifteen (15) business days after the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and must list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The hearing officer will use preponderance of evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding issues. The decision of the hearing officer will be final.

        B.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then any applicable fine amount on deposit with the city will be retained by the city. The hearing officer may also impose conditions and deadlines to correct the violation or require payment of any outstanding fines, penalties, and interest.

        C.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled or reduced because of an error in calculating the fine, the city will promptly refund the applicable amount of the deposited fine.

        D     The city shall serve the recipient of the administrative citation with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by certified mail. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

 

1.30.130 Right to judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Santa Barbara County superior court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 05-07 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 1.32 GENERAL PENALTY
1.32.010 Violation of municipal code—Misdemeanor.
        It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code or any provision of any ordinance of the city not included within this code. Any person violating any such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code or any code adopted by reference by this code or any other city ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such violation is specifically designated as constituting an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code, or any provision of any code adopted by reference by this code, or of any other city ordinance, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly. (Prior code § 1.01.200)

 

1.32.020 Aiding and abetting.
        Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful by this code, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Prior code § 1.01.210)

 

1.32.030 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Any conviction of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        B.     Any conviction of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).

        C.     Any provision or requirement of this code or of any code adopted by reference by this code or of any ordinance of the city not included within this code, the violation of which or failure to comply with which is designated as an infraction, shall be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon a fourth violation within a period of one year and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual within a period of one year.

        D.    Any violation expressly declared to be punishable, in the discretion of the court by either a fine, or by a fine or imprisonment, or both, shall become an infraction for all purposes under any of the following circumstances:

        1.     Where a judgment imposes a punishment of a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) in the case of a first offense; or

        2.     When the court grants probation to a defendant without the imposition of a sentence and, at the time of granting probation, or an application of the defendant or probation officer thereafter, the court declares the offense to be an infraction; or

        3.     When the city attorney or any deputy district attorney files in a court having jurisdiction over misdemeanor offenses a complaint specifying that the offense is an infraction. (Ord. 03-01 § 3, 2003)

 

1.32.040 Imprisonment in county jail.
        Imprisonment for violation of any city ordinance shall be in the county jail. (Prior code § 1.01.230)

 

1.32.050 Violation of administrative provisions.
        The violation of, or the failure or omission to perform in accordance with, any administrative provision of this code by any officer or employee of the city shall generally not be considered a criminal act, but may be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office, commission, or board within the meaning of the city service ordinances and rules and regulations of the city, if applicable. (Prior code § 1.01.260)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DIRECTOR
Chapter 2.20 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.24 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.28 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 2.32 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.40 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.44 TRAFFIC COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.48 OPEN MEETINGS
Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Chapter 2.56 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Date of regular meetings and study sessions.
        The regular meetings and regular study sessions of the city council commencing in February, 1992, shall be held as determined by enactment of the city council. (Prior code § 2.04.010)

 

2.04.020 Place of regular meetings.
        The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at a location to be designated by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 2.04.020)

 

2.04.030 Improper conduct at meeting.
        Any person using profane, vulgar, loud, or boisterous language at any meeting or otherwise interrupting the proceedings, who refuses to be seated or keep quiet when ordered to do so by the mayor or other presiding officer of the council, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 2.04.030)

 

2.04.040 Adoption of procedures.
        The city council shall, by resolution, adopt guidelines of procedure to govern the conduct of its meetings, any of its other functions and activities, and regulations pertaining thereto. (Prior code § 2.04.040)

 

2.04.050 Approved minutes as official record of proceedings.
        A.    Approval of Minutes. Unless the reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. Minutes shall be approved by voice or roll call vote.

        B.     Designated as Official Record. The approved written minutes constitute the official record of city council proceedings and actions and are superior to any other record, recordation, document, transcript, audiotape, videotape, or other memorial or writing of said proceedings and actions. Any other recordings, tapes, and records of council proceedings which may be deemed duplicate records shall be kept only as required by Government Code Section 34090.7 as it presently exists and as it may from time to time be amended. The city council authorizes the city clerk to store and destroy said duplicate records in accordance with the section of the Government Code.

        C.     Audio Tape Retention. Whenever an audio tape of city council proceedings is made by the city clerk to assist in the preparation of the minutes, the tape should only be kept until the minutes for that meeting are prepared and approved by the city council. Thereafter, any tape so made shall be destroyed in accordance with Government Code Section 34090.7.

        D.    Audio Tape Accessibility to the Public. During the period that an audio tape of a city council meeting is in the custody of the city clerk, the city clerk shall, upon request, make the tape available to interested members of the public during normal business hours.

        E.     Subsections A through D of this section shall apply to the minutes of the meetings of any city board, commission, committee, task force, or agency after the board, commission, committee, task force, or agency and the city council have approved the same. The city clerk, and every board, commission, committee, task force, or agency secretary or clerk shall cause any audio tape made of the proceedings to assist in the preparation of the minutes to be destroyed in accordance with Government Code Section 34090.7.

        F.     The provisions of this section shall apply to all minutes and tapes which have been approved by the body conducting the meeting and by the city council. (Prior code § 2.04.041)

 

2.04.060 Council compensation.
        The compensation for city councilmembers shall be four hundred forty dollars ($440.00) per month in accordance with Section 36516, as amended, of the Government Code. (Ord. 08-04 § A, 2008; Ord. 06-08 § A, 2006; prior code § 2.04.050)

 

2.04.070 Reimbursement.
        Each member of the council shall receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the city, pursuant to the provisions of Section 36514.5 of the California Government Code. (Prior code § 2.04.051)

 

2.04.080 Commission appointments.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by state law, all city board and commission appointments, except for ex officio members where applicable, shall be made by the city council. (Prior code § 2.04.060)

 

2.04.090 Initiative measure establishing term limits for city councilmembers.
        No person shall serve, whether by means of election or appointment, more than three consecutive terms of office as a city councilmember of the city of Buellton. A partial term of office shall be considered to be a full term where more than one-half of the regular term of office has been served. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event one or more city councilmembers have served three consecutive terms and no one has been nominated at the next election to serve such vacant council seat(s), such city councilmember(s) is entitled to serve a fourth term of office either by election or appointment by the city council. (Res. 12-08 § 2, 2012)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created—Term.
        The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications. The city manager shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2.08.010)

 

2.08.020 Eligibility.
        No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Prior code § 2.08.020)

 

2.08.030 Compensation.
        The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.08.030)

 

2.08.040 Expense reimbursement.
        The city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses he or she incurs in the performance of his or her official duties, including those incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city. (Prior code § 2.08.040)

 

2.08.050 Designation of acting city manager.
        The city manager, by letter filed with the city clerk or acting city clerk, shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. (Prior code § 2.08.050)  

 

2.08.060 Powers and duties.
        The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to the general powers as administrative head of the city government, and not as a limitation thereon, the city manager shall be expected to, and shall have the power to:

        A.    Enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed;

        B.     Appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the city except elected officers, the city attorney, the city clerk, and the city treasurer, subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the city council;

        C.     Control, order, and give directions to all department heads who are subject to his or her appointment and removal authority and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

        D.    Conduct studies and effect such organization and reorganization of offices, positions, or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the city’s business;

        E.     Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary;

        F.     Attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council as a whole, except when his or her removal is under consideration;

        G.    Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval;

        H.    Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city;

        I.      Make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract or other obligation of the city; and further to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

        J.      Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city;

        K.    Have the same authority as the mayor, as the convenience of the parties may dictate, to sign documents specified in Section 40602 of the California Government Code whenever such documents have been approved by the city council for execution by resolution, motion, minute order, or other appropriate action; and

        L.     Perform such other responsibilities and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Prior code § 2.08.060)

 

2.08.070 Relations with council.
        The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. For purposes hereof, “inquiry” means any and all communications short of giving orders, directions, or instructions to any member of the administrative staff. Such staff members shall provide all information reasonably requested by any councilmember. The city manager shall take orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilmember shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. The city council shall instruct the city manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination, or omission of the city manager shall be subject to review by the city council. The city council may not overrule, change, or modify any such action, determination, or omission except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. (Prior code § 2.08.070)

 

2.08.080 Departmental cooperation.
        It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, the city attorney, city clerk, and city treasurer to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically, and harmoniously. (Prior code § 2.08.080)

 

2.08.090 Attendance at commission meetings.
        The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, and any other commission, board, or committee created by the city council, upon his or her volition or upon direction of the city council. At any such meeting which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commission, board, or committee as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. The city manager shall inform such commission, board, or committee as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council pertaining to that body, and shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the city council. (Prior code § 2.08.090)

 

2.08.100 Removal.
        The removal of the city manager shall be only on a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting. (Prior code § 2.08.100)

 

2.08.110 Agreements with council.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 2.08.110)

Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
2.12.010 Authority for office.
        The office of city clerk is established pursuant to Section 36501 of the California Government Code. The city manager may be appointed the additional duty of the city clerk and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2.10.010)

 

2.12.020 Compensation.
        If the city council appoints the city clerk as a separate position, the city clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.10.020)

 

2.12.030 Functions.
        The city clerk shall have all of the powers, duties, and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the city clerk by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the state (commencing with Section 40800), other general laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city council.

        The principal functions of the city clerk shall be to:

        A.    Attend all meetings of the city council and be responsible for the recording and maintenance of a record of all the actions of the council;

        B.     Keep all ordinances and resolutions of the council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public. The city clerk shall attach to the original copy of each ordinance a certificate which shall state the date the ordinance was adopted and, as to an ordinance requiring publication, that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law;

        C.     Keep all records of the council and of the office of the city clerk in such manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public until such time as any of the records may be destroyed, or reproduced and the original destroyed, in accordance with state law;

        D.    Serve as the official custodian of all city records;

        E.     Be the custodian of the seal of the city;

        F.     Prepare the council agendas, in conjunction with and under the direction of the city manager;

        G.    Perform the duties prescribed by the California Elections Code in conducting municipal elections;

        H.    Perform the duties imposed upon city clerks by the California Political Reform Act;

        I.      Be responsible for the publication of all official advertising for the city;

        J.      Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the municipal code;

        K.    Process all claims filed against the city and its officers, agents, or employees, pursuant to Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 3.08 of Title 3 of this code;

        L.     Perform the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Section 40802 through 40805 of the California Government Code; and

        M.    Perform such other duties consistent with this code as may be required of the city clerk by the city council. (Prior code § 2.10.030)

 

2.12.040 Deputy city clerk.
        The city clerk shall have the authority and is hereby authorized to appoint a deputy city clerk as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the duties of the office. (Prior code § 2.10.040)

Chapter 2.16 FINANCE DIRECTOR
2.16.010 Office created.
        There is created and established the office of finance director (“director of finance” for the purposes of Government Code Sections 37208, 37209, and 40802 through 40805.5). (Prior code § 2.12.010)

 

2.16.020 Appointment.
        The finance director shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (Prior code § 2.12.020)

 

2.16.030 Bond requirement.
        The finance director shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in the same amount as that required of the city clerk, and it shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory performance of the duties imposed upon the finance director by statute, ordinance, or resolution. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Prior code § 2.12.030)

 

2.16.040 Duties.
        The finance director shall be the head of the finance department of the city, and shall:

        A.    Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city under the direction of the city manager;

        B.     Compile the budget expense and income estimates for the city manager;

        C.     Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its officers, departments, and agencies;

        D.    Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and audit of all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all purchase orders before issuance to ensure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available; audit and approve before payment bills, invoices, payrolls, demands, or charges against the city government; and, with the advice of the city attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges, and prepare and submit to the city council periodically a register of audited demands with his or her affidavit attached thereto as provided in the Government Code;

        E.     Submit to the city council periodic statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; and, at the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report;

        F.     Supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city by all city departments, officers, and agencies; and

        G.    Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the city clerk, and the city clerk shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code of the state of California, and including all such duties imposed upon the city clerk by Section 37208 of the Government Code with respect to the prepayment of demands. (Prior code § 2.12.040)

Chapter 2.20 CITY TREASURER
2.20.010 Authority for office.
        The office of the city treasurer is established pursuant to Section 36501 of the California Government Code. The city treasurer shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the majority of the city council. (Prior code § 2.15.010)

 

2.20.020 Compensation.
        The city treasurer shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.15.020)

 

2.20.030 Functions.
        The city treasurer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by Sections 41000 through 41007 of the California Government Code and by any other provisions of law applicable to deposit, investment, and safekeeping of public funds of the city. (Prior code § 2.15.030)

Chapter 2.24 CITY ATTORNEY
2.24.010 Office created.
        A.    The office of the city attorney is established. It shall consist of the city attorney and such assistants as may be authorized by the council. The city attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. The city attorney shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the council as its legal advisor.

        B.     The council may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants, or special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters or to assist the city attorney therein. (Prior code § 2.16.010)

 

2.24.020 Compensation.
        The city attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.16.020)

 

2.24.030 Functions.
        The functions of the office of the city attorney shall be to:

        A.    Advise the council and all city officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;

        B.     Furnish legal service at all meetings of the council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinion on the legality of all matters under consideration by the council or by any of the boards and commissions or officers of the city;

        C.     Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts, and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the city and approve the form of all contracts, agreements, and bonds given to the city; and

        D.    Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions. (Prior code § 2.16.030)

Chapter 2.28 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
2.28.010 Commissions established.
        A.    The city council shall appoint, by majority vote of the city council, each commissioner who shall be a qualified elector of the city. The term of each commissioner shall be four years, commencing in December of even-numbered years, with staggered terms as provided in this chapter.

        B.     The city council may wish to establish by ordinance such other boards or commissions as it deems necessary. (Ord. 05-04 § 1, 2005: Ord. 97-01 § 2(B), 1997; prior code § 2.06.010)

 

2.28.020 Number of members.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided in the establishing and enabling ordinance, each board or commission shall consist of five members. (Prior code § 2.06.020)

 

2.28.030 Qualifications.
        Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the city council, all members of boards and commissions of the city shall, at all times during their incumbencies, be bona fide residents and registered voters of the city. No member of any board or commission shall be a city employee, nor shall any person be a member of more than one board or commission at any one time. (Prior code § 2.06.030)

 

2.28.040 Applications.
        The city clerk shall maintain all applications submitted to the city for board or commission positions for a period of two years. (Prior code § 2.06.040)

 

2.28.050 Appointment.
        Members of each board and commission shall be appointed, and may be removed, by a majority of the city council, except as otherwise provided in this code, The chairperson of the board or commission shall be selected by a majority of the membership of that board or commission. (Ord. 97-01 § 2(C), 1997; prior code § 2.06.050)

 

2.28.060 Term.
        The term of each board or commission member shall be four years with staggered terms, except as otherwise provided in this code. Initially, all members may be selected at once. In order to achieve staggered terms, three members’ terms shall be for two years and two members’ terms shall be for four years with the determination to be made by drawing lot. In the event a board or commission is established with more than five members, then the majority of the membership shall serve the shorter term. For example, with a seven member board or commission, four members will serve two year terms and three members will serve four year terms. At the completion of any term, a board or commission member may be reappointed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 2.28.050. (Ord. 97-01 § 2(D), 1997; prior code § 2.06.060)

 

2.28.070 Vacancies.
        If vacancies in any board or commission occur, other than by expiration of term, such vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. (Prior code § 2.06.070)

 

2.28.080 Meetings—Quorum.
        The city council shall establish meeting schedules for each board and commission by resolution. A quorum of three for a five member board or commission and a majority of the board or commission for a larger board or commission shall be required for the transaction of any business. (Prior code § 2.06.080)

 

2.28.090 Absence from meetings.
        Should any board or commission member be absent from any three consecutive meetings of the board or commission, without excuse acceptable to the city council, that member shall vacate his or her seat on the board or commission. The vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as any other vacancy. (Prior code § 2.06.090)

Chapter 2.32 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.32.010 Park and recreation commission—Created.
        Pursuant to Section 2.28.010 of this code, there is created an advisory commission to the city council which shall be known as the Buellton parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 04-01 § 1, 2004; prior code § 13.01.001)

 

2.32.020 Commission composition and membership.
        The parks and recreation commission shall consist of five members. The city council shall appoint, by majority vote of the city council, each parks and recreation commissioner who shall be a qualified elector of the city. No officers or employees of the city or persons under an employment contract subject to the jurisdiction of the city council shall be members of such commission. (Ord. 05-04 § 2, 2005: Ord. 04-01 § 2, 2004; prior code § 13.01.002)

 

2.32.030 Oath of office.
        All members of the parks and recreation commission shall be required to take an oath of office, as approved by the city council, prior to commencing their term of office. (Prior code § 13.01.003)

 

2.32.040 Term of office.
        The term of each parks and recreation commissioner shall be four years, commencing in December of even-numbered years, with staggered terms as provided in Section 2.28.060. (Ord. 05-04 § 3, 2005: Ord. 04-01 § 3, 2004; prior code § 13.01.004)

 

2.32.050 Staff assistance.
        The city manager shall ensure that adequate staff will be allocated to provide necessary technical and clerical assistance to the commission. (Prior code § 13.01.005)

 

2.32.060 Time and place of meetings—Rules of procedure.
        The parks and recreation commission shall establish a regular date, time, and place of commission meetings, which shall be open to the public. The meetings shall occur no less frequently than once a month. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the commission, provided public notice has been given at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. A majority of commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 04-01 § 4, 2004; prior code § 13.01.006)

2.32.070 Duties.
        The parks and recreation commission shall advise the city council on all matters subject to the jurisdiction of the council pertaining to the acquisition, development, and maintenance of public parks and recreational facilities. The commission shall also review and advise the council regarding the financing of and budgeting for such functions, including but not limited to, the financing and budgeting for parks and recreation services in the city. The commission shall also advise the parks and recreation director from time to time. (Prior code § 13.01.007)

 

2.32.080 Public hearings—Procedure.
        Whenever the commission determines, by a two-thirds majority of those members present, that its deliberations with respect to a particular matter or matters would be substantially aided by the presentation of testimony from the citizens of the city, or of a certain area of the city, the commission may direct a public hearing be held concerning such matter or matters. Notice of such a hearing shall be provided by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, and/or by posting the same in at least three public places, not later than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. Such hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the rules established for the conduct of hearings before the city council unless the council, by resolution, shall otherwise provide. (Prior code § 13.01.008)

Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.36.010 Created.
        There is created a planning commission for the city. It shall consist of five members, appointed in the manner and for the terms prescribed in Section 2.28.010 of this code, provided, however, that whenever an appointment is made to fill a vacancy or removal on the commission after the commencement of a commissioner’s term, the term of the commissioner appointed to fill such vacancy or removal shall be for the balance of the unexpired term of the commissioner leaving or removed from the commission. (Ord. 97-01 § 2(A), 1997: Ord. 92-20 § 2, 1992)

 

2.36.020 City planning commission—General jurisdiction and functions.
        A.    The planning commission for the city, as created and described in Section 2.36.010 of this code shall perform all functions and take all actions designated in the development code of the county of Santa Barbara, which has been adopted by the city, for the planning commission and for the planning commission subcommittee. In addition, with the exception of decisions on lot line adjustments and certificates of compliance, all discretionary decisions designated in the development code to be made by the planning officer or other officers or offices shall be made by the planning commission of the city. Further, the planning commission shall review and the city council shall act upon all requests for planned residential developments, subject to all other applicable provisions of the city’s ordinances.

        B.     The provisions of this section relating to the city planning commission shall become effective on August 27, 1992. (Ord. 92-20 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.18.015)

 

2.36.030 Compensation of planning commissioners.
        The members of the planning commission shall each receive compensation payable out of the general fund of the city, provided adequate funds have been budgeted therefor in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. The compensation prescribed in this chapter shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the commission as a reimbursement for the actual and necessary expenses authorized by the city council and incurred in the performance of official duties for the city. (Ord. 93-14, 1993; prior code § 2.18.016)

 

2.36.040 Chair—Committees—Staff.
        Designation of chairpersons for the commission shall be governed by Section 2.28.050 of this code. The commission shall be authorized to appoint and fix the membership of such number of standing and temporary committees as it may find expedient for the performance of its duties. The city manager may appoint an executive secretary and other staff and provide such compensation for their services as may be authorized by the city council and by the annual city budget of expenditures. (Prior code § 2.18.020)

 

2.36.050 Meetings—Rules of procedure.
        The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at such time, date and place designated by the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the commission, provided notice has been given to all members at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. A majority of commissioners shall constitute a quorum. (Prior code § 2.18.030)

 

2.36.060 Functions, powers and duties.
        The functions, powers and duties of the planning commission shall be all those functions, powers and duties of a planning commission and board of zoning adjustment as provided in Chapters 3 and 4 of Title 7 commencing with Section 65100 of the Government Code of the state (the planning and zoning law), as the same may be hereafter amended. The planning commission shall perform such other duties and functions as may be designated by the city council. (Prior code § 2.18.040)

 

2.36.070 Rules—Records and meetings.
        The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, and shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Minutes of the planning commission meetings shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior code § 2.18.050)

Chapter 2.40 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.40.010 Redevelopment agency—Need declared.
        It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the community redevelopment law. (Ord. 93-03 § 1, 1993)

 

2.40.020 Redevelopment agency—Created.
        The redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the community redevelopment law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city. The redevelopment agency is hereto authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the community redevelopment law. (Ord. 93-03 § 2, 1993)

 

2.40.030 City declares itself redevelopment agency.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the community redevelopment law, this city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. (Ord. 93-03 § 3, 1993)

 

2.40.040 Designation of city council serves public interest.
        The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency of the city will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the community redevelopment law. (Ord. 93-03 § 4, 1993)

Chapter 2.44 TRAFFIC COMMITTEE
2.44.010 Created.
        A.    There is created a traffic committee for the city. It shall consist of nine members, seven of which shall be recommended by the city manager, subject to approval by the city council, with the remaining two honorary members to be those two members of the city council who are then currently serving as members of the council’s public safety committee. Those members nominated by the city manager and approved by the city council should be qualified by experience and training in one or more areas relating to traffic safety, road design or related matters; also high priority and selection should be considered for persons licensed or certificated in the fields of engineering, construction, and related professions.

        B.     Whenever feasible, the noncity councilmembers should be selected from the following organizations:

        1.     California Highway Patrol;

        2.     The city’s law enforcement department or agency;

        3.     The California Department of Transportation;

        4.     The Automobile Club of Southern California or a comparable company;

        5.     The Buellton unified school district;

        6.     The city’s public works department; and

        7.     A citizen at large.

        Terms of office for committee members shall be four years, and there shall be no limit on the number of terms any committee member shall serve, subject to reappointment as hereinabove prescribed. (Prior code § 2.21.010)

 

2.44.020 Chair—Committees—Staff.
        The chairperson for the committee should be the representative from the public works department or agency of the city unless that person is unwilling or unable to serve in that capacity. The committee shall select a vice-chairperson. The committee shall be authorized to appoint and fix the membership of such number of standing and temporary subcommittees as it may find expedient for the performance of its duties. The city manager may appoint an executive secretary and/or other staff and provide such compensation for their services as may be authorized by the city council and by the annual city budget of expenditures. (Prior code § 2.21.015)

 

2.44.030 Meetings.
        The committee shall establish regular meetings at such time, day and place as it deems necessary. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the committee, provided notice has been given to all members at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting, and as otherwise required by law. A majority of the committee members shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of a quorum, but not less than three, shall be required to pass a motion or other enactment. (Prior code § 2.21.020)

 

2.44.040 Compensation of members.
        No direct compensation shall be paid to committee members; however, members shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses, including travel expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties as members of the committee, authorized by the city council. (Prior code § 2.21.025)

 

2.44.050 Functions, powers and duties.
        A.    The functions, powers and duties of the traffic committee shall be to consider requests for traffic regulatory or control devices, signs, and markings, and make appropriate recommendations to the city council or to any appropriate city department or officer as deemed necessary under the circumstances; the committee may further study and consider apparent unsafe or malfunctioning traffic conditions or devices, and may recommend possible actions or solutions to such conditions or devices to the city council or to any appropriate city department or officer; the committee may also make recommendations to the city council or city departments or officers or planning commission, as appropriate, concerning short- and long-range transportation planning, review of street and highway master plans, truck routes, and complaints concerning traffic safety conditions, concerning proposed major street projects, and such other matters as the city council may request from time to time.

        B.     The functions, powers and duties of the traffic committee shall not be construed as preempting or otherwise interfering with the function of other commissions, boards, committees or officers which are empowered or mandated by law or ordinance or other regulation to act upon certain matters or make recommendations to the city council concerning the repeal of or amendment to city ordinances or regulations or adoption of new ordinances or regulations, or otherwise taking such actions as are mandated, prescribed or permitted by law. (Prior code § 2.21.030)

 

2.44.060 Rules—Records and meetings.
        The traffic committee shall adopt rules for the conduct of its proceedings, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. Minutes of the committee shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior code § 2.21.035)

Chapter 2.48 OPEN MEETINGS
2.48.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions of “legislative body,” “regular meeting,” and “special meeting” as set forth in Section 54950 et seq. of the Government Code of the state of California shall apply. (Prior code § 2.04.023)

 

2.48.020 Seventy-two-hour notice before meetings.
        At least seventy-two (72) hours before a regular meeting, any legislative body of the city, or its designee, shall post an agenda containing a brief general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular meeting and shall be posted in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted agenda; provided, however, nothing in this section shall disallow the legislative body to take action on items of business not appearing on the posted agenda and under any of the conditions set forth at Section 54954.2(b) of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 2.04.024)

 

2.48.030 Public comments provided at regular meetings.
        Every agenda for regular meetings of any legislative body of the city shall provide an opportunity for members of the public to directly address the legislative body on items of interest to the public that are within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body, provided that no action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the agenda unless the action is otherwise authorized by Government Code Section 54954.2(b). The legislative body may adopt reasonable regulations to ensure that the intent of this section is carried out, including, but not limited to, regulations limiting the total amount of time allocated for public testimony on particular issues and for each individual speaker. (Prior code § 2.04.025)

 

2.48.040 Special meetings—May be called at any time.
        A special meeting may be called at any time by the presiding officer of the legislative body, or by a majority of the members of the legislative body, by delivering personally or by mail written notice to each member of the legislative body and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio, or television station requesting notice in writing. The notice shall be delivered personally or by mail and shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of the meeting as specified in the notice. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at these meetings by the legislative body. The written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the clerk or secretary of the legislative body a written waiver of notice. The waiver may be given by telegram. The written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. Notice shall be required pursuant to this section regardless of whether any action is taken at the special meeting. The call and notice shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. (Prior code § 2.04.026)

 

2.48.050 Emergency meetings—Exceptions.
        A.    In the case of an emergency situation involving matters upon which prompt action is necessary due to the disruption or threatened disruption of public facilities, a legislative body may hold an emergency meeting without complying with either the twenty-four (24) hour notice requirement or the twenty-four (24) hours posting requirement of Government Code Section 54956 or both the notice and posting requirement. For the purposes of this section, “emergency situation” means any of the following:

        1.     Work stoppage or other activity which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

        2.     Crippling disaster which severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

        B.     However, each local newspaper of general circulation and radio or television station which has requested notice of special meetings pursuant to Government Code Section 54956 shall be notified by the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee thereof, one hour prior to the emergency meeting by telephone and all telephone numbers provided in the most recent request of such newspaper or station for notification of special meetings shall be exhausted. In the event that telephone services are not functioning, the notice requirements of this section shall be deemed waived, and the legislative body or designee of the legislative body shall notify such newspapers, radio stations, or television stations of the fact of the holding of the emergency meeting, the purpose of the meeting and any action taken at the meeting as soon after the meeting as possible.

        C.     Notwithstanding Government Code Section 54957, the legislative body shall not meet in closed sessions during a meeting called pursuant to this section.

        D.    All special meeting requirements as prescribed in Government Code Section 54956 shall be applicable to a meeting called pursuant to this section, with the exception of the twenty-four (24) hour notice requirement.

        E.     The minutes of a meeting called pursuant to this section, a list of persons who the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee of the legislative body, notified or intended to notify, a copy of the roll call vote, and any actions taken at the meeting shall be posted for a minimum of ten days in a public place as soon after the meeting as possible. (Prior code § 2.04.027)

 

2.48.060 Enforcement.
        The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Sections 54960 through 54960.5, as the sections may be amended. (Prior code § 2.04.028)

Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
2.52.010 General purposes.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparedness and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency or disaster; the direction of the emergency disaster organization; and the coordination of the emergency disaster functions of the city with the county and all other public agencies, corporations and organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.010)

 

2.52.020 Expenditures.
        Any expenditures made by the city in connection with emergency disaster activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.020)

 

2.52.030 Definitions.
        A.    As used in this chapter:

        “State of war emergency” means the condition which exists immediately, with or without proclamation of the Governor, whenever this state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent.

        “State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the Governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a “state of war emergency,” which conditions, by reason of the magnitude, are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.

        “Local emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county, or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, or earthquake or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the California Public Utilities Commission.

        B.     Other terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings as used in the California Emergency Services Act. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.030)

 

2.52.040 Disaster council—Established.
        The city disaster council is created and shall consist of the following individuals; provided, however, that the disaster council shall not exceed fifteen (15) members at any time:

        A.    The mayor of the city, who shall chair the disaster council;

        B.     The director of disaster services who shall be the city manager or shall be designated by the city manager and who shall serve as vice-chair of the disaster council;

        C.     The assistant director of disaster services for the city at such time as an assistant is appointed by the city manager;

        D.    Such chiefs of emergency service as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city adopted pursuant to this chapter;

        E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the coordinator of the office of emergency services with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.040)

 

2.52.050 Disaster council powers and duties.
        It shall be the duty of the Buellton disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the council’s chair or, in the absence of the mayor from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the council’s vice-chair. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.045)

 

2.52.060 Disaster corps.
        The city disaster corps consists of all officers and employees of the city and its agencies, together with all volunteers and all groups, organizations and persons commandeered under the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act and this chapter, with all equipment and material publicly owned, volunteered, commandeered or in any way under the control of the aforementioned personnel, for the support of the aforementioned personnel in the conduct of disaster operations. The disaster corps shall be composed of such elements as are provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city. The officers of the city shall have the authority and duty to plan for mobilization, operation and support of that segment of the disaster corps for which each is responsible as provided for in the disaster operations plan of the city, and to conduct the activities thereof. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.050)

 

2.52.070 Disaster corps—Activation.
        The disaster corps shall be activated and shall function as a disaster relief body, only:

        A.    Upon the existence of a “state of war emergency”;

        B.     Upon the declaration by the Governor of the state, or of persons authorized to act in his or her stead, of a “state of emergency” affecting and including the city;

        C.     Upon the declaration of a “local emergency” by the city council of the city or by persons authorized in this chapter to act in its stead. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.060)

 

2.52.080 Disaster director.
        The city manager shall be the disaster director (the “director”). In the city manager’s absence or inability to act the city manager shall automatically be succeeded as the director by the officials and persons named for this purpose, and in the order specified, in the disaster operations plan of the city. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.070)

 

2.52.090 Disaster director—Powers and duties.
        The director shall have the following powers and duties:

        A.    To request the city council to proclaim the existence of a “local emergency” if the council is in session, or to issue such a proclamation if the council is not in session, subject to ratification by the city council within seven days of such proclamation. If such action is not ratified by the city council as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of the director shall have no further force or effect;

        B.     To request the governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

        C.     To make key appointments, and to make all other appointments or delegate the making of the same, within the disaster corps;

        D.    To represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

        E.     During the existence of a “state of war emergency,” as defined in Government Code Section 8558(a), or the proclaimed existence of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the State Office of Emergency Services, or a “local emergency” affecting the city:

        1.     To control and direct the activities of the disaster corps and all other facets of the emergency organization of the city in the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter,

        2.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be ratified at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

        3.     To use all city resources for the preservation of life and property and to reduce the effects of the disaster,

        4.     To direct cooperation between, and coordination of, services and the staff of the emergency organization of the city and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility which may arise between them,

        5.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other property found needed and lacking for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair market value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

        6.     To delegate to elected and appointed officials of the city such duties and authority as the director deems necessary,

        7.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the city or a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of the city as the director deems necessary in the execution of the duties required of him/her by this chapter; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

        8.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

        9.     To execute all of the ordinary powers of the city manager; all of the special powers conferred upon the director by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the city council; all powers conferred upon the director or city manager by statute or agreement approved by the city council; and, any other lawful authority granted to the director in that capacity or the capacity of city manager,

        10.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by any condition proclaimed an emergency as provided in this chapter,

        11.   To exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws;

        F.     In addition to the powers granted in this chapter, the director shall have such powers incidental to the performance of his or her duties as shall be necessary to allow him/her to carry out the disaster operations plan of the city, it being the intent of this chapter that the enumerated powers in this chapter are not limitations upon his or her powers;

        G.    The director shall designate the order of succession to his or her office subject to approval of the city council; which shall take effect in the event that the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. (Ord. 92-18 § 2, 1992: Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.075)

 

2.52.100 Assistant director of disaster services.
        There is created the office of assistant director of disaster services for the city, which office shall be filled at the time deemed necessary in the discretion of the director. Any appointment to fill this office shall be ratified by the city council. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.080)

 

2.52.110 Powers of assistant director of disaster services.
        The assistant director of disaster services when appointed shall have such powers and duties as may be delegated to him/her by the director. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.085)

 

2.52.120 Office of disaster preparedness.
        There is created the city office of disaster preparedness, which shall consist of such positions as may be established by the city manager. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.090)

 

2.52.130 Powers of succession.
        A.    Each person who shall succeed to each position or office as provided in this chapter, and as provided in the disaster operations plan of the city shall succeed to all the powers and duties of the office succeeded to immediately upon such succession; provided, however, that the succession of authority for members of the city council shall be governed by subsection B of this section.

        B.     The line of succession for the position of mayor during a state of emergency, war emergency, local emergency or other condition of disaster, unless otherwise ordered by the city council, shall be mayor pro tempore, followed by the remaining city council members in the order of their seniority, excluding standby successors who may have been appointed pursuant to Section 8538 of the Government Code of the state. When two or more members of the city council are elected at the same time, seniority shall be determined by the vote received by each such member at the last election with seniority being afforded such city council members in the same rank as the vote attained by each, the higher vote count equating to greater seniority. When two or more city council members have been appointed to the city council, the city clerk shall draw lots to determine seniority for purposes of seniority hereunder. Seniority shall always be afforded elected members of the city council over appointed members of the city council. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.100)

 

2.52.140 Orders by members of disaster corps.
        During the existence of a “state of war emergency,” or of a proclaimed “state of emergency” or “local emergency” affecting the city, each member of the disaster corps shall have authority to require that all persons shall follow reasonable orders given by him/her within the scope of his or her functions in order to execute the disaster operations plan of the city, and the wilful failure of any person to follow such reasonable order or orders is a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.32.010, et seq. of this code. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.110)

 

2.52.150 Emergency plan.
        The disaster council shall be responsible for development of the city emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organizations. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.130)

 

2.52.160 Prohibited acts during emergencies.
        It is unlawful and a criminal act and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.32.010, et seq. of this code, for any person, during a “state of emergency,” “war emergency,” “local emergency” or other condition of disaster:

        A.    To wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster corps in the enforcement of any law or lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon such disaster corps member by virtue of this chapter;

        B.     To do any act forbidden by any lawful rule, regulation or order issued pursuant to this chapter if such is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil life or property, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of persons or property; or

        C.     To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency services of disaster or civil defense agencies of the federal or state governments. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.140)

 

2.52.170 Proclamation of emergency—Determination—Authority.
        Whenever riots, general civil disobedience, multiple law violations or the threat of the same occur in the city, the director, or in the event of his or her inability to act, the sheriff may determine that a local emergency disaster exists at such time the director shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of a state of local emergency. He/she shall cause widespread publicity and notice to be given to such proclamation. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.150)

 

2.52.180 Proclamation of emergency—Effective when—Termination.
        The proclamation of local emergency by the city council or the director, as provided in this chapter, shall become effective immediately upon its issuance and shall be disseminated to the public by appropriate news media. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the local emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven days from the time the proclamation is issued unless it has been ratified by the city council. The city council shall review, at least every fourteen (14) days, until such local emergency is terminated, the need for continuing the local emergency and shall proclaim the termination of such local emergency at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant. (Ord. 92-18 § 2, 1992: Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.160)

 

2.52.190 Proclamation of emergency—Rules and regulations—Powers of disaster director.
        A.    After the issuance of a proclamation of local emergency, the director shall have the power to make, issue and enforce rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by the emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed as soon as practicable by the city council. In addition to those powers and duties set forth in Section 2.52.090, the director is granted, but shall not be limited to, the following powers:

        1.     Curfew. The director may order a general curfew applicable to the entire city or such geographical areas thereof as he/she deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals.

        As used in this chapter, “curfew” means a prohibition against any person or persons walking, running, loitering, standing, riding or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or private property except as authorized by the owner, lessee or person in charge of such private property. Persons officially delegated to duty with reference to such civil emergency and representatives of news media, physicians, nurses, ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firemen and law enforcement officers and other such personnel as well as those specifically authorized to duty by duly delegated authority are exempt from the foregoing curfew requirements;

        2.     Business Closing. The director may order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within the city; such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling alcoholic beverages, gasoline or firearms;

        3.     Alcoholic Beverages. The director may order that no person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or place which is publicly owned or in any other public or private area on which the consumption of such alcoholic beverages shall be found by the director, on just cause, to precipitate a clear and present danger to the well-being of the community during the emergency;

        4.     Weapons. The director may order that no persons shall carry or possess any gun, bomb, fire bomb, knife, rock or other weapon or item, the use of which would tend to inflict great bodily harm on persons or damage to property;

        5.     Closed Areas. The director may designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicular parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic during the course of such an emergency;

        B.     The foregoing specific authorizations of authority vested in the director and other such authorizations as may be deemed necessary during such emergencies are declared to be imminently necessary for the protection of life and property during such period. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2.20.170)

Chapter 2.56 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
2.56.010 Declaration of intent.
        The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1, Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Prior code § 2.44.010)

 

2.56.020 Adherence to state standards.
        Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 referred to in Section 2.56.010, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission of Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Prior code § 2.44.020)

Chapter 2.60 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.60.010 Purpose—System adopted.
        In order to formalize an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available to ensure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on the merit principal and fitness and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees; the following personnel system is adopted. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.010)

 

2.60.020 Administration of system.
        The personnel system established by this chapter shall be administered by the city manager who shall be the ex officio personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as ex officio personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.020)

 

2.60.030 Duties of officer.
        The personnel officer shall:

        A.    Administer all of the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules.

        B.     Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel rules, such revisions and amendments to be submitted to the city council for adoption.

        C.     Maintain and administer a position classification plan including class specifications and revisions of the plan.

        D.    Prepare or cause to be prepared a plan of compensation and revisions thereof covering all classifications. Positions having similar duties and/or levels of responsibility shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.030)

 

2.60.040 Contracts for technical services—Authorized.
        The city council, upon recommendation of the personnel officer, may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be necessary for the effective operation of the personnel system, subject only to such limitations or the total consideration as may be or have been established by the city council for contracts not requiring the prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.040)

 

2.60.050 Positions divided into classified, exempt services.
        All offices and positions of the city are divided into the classified service and exempt service. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.050)

 

2.60.060 Positions in exempt service.
        The exempt service shall include the following:

        A.    All elected officials and members of boards and commissions;

        B.     The city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and city treasurer;

        C.     All department heads;

        D.    Architects, consultants, counsel and others rendering temporary professional services;

        E.     Voluntary personnel and personnel appointed to service without pay;

        F.     Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property;

        G.    Such other positions involving seasonal or part-time employment;

        H.    Any new position hereafter created at the department head, assistant department head, or staff level, if it is specified as exempt by the city council at the time of creation. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.060)

 

2.60.070 Positions in classified service.
        The classified service shall include all other positions that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this chapter. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.070)

 

2.60.080 Applicability.
        The provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules shall be applied only to the classified service unless otherwise specifically provided. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.080)

 

2.60.090 Rules authorized.
        The personnel rules are to supplement this chapter and are to be prepared by the personnel director and adopted by the city council by resolution. These rules may be amended from time to time by the adoption of a resolution by the city council. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.090)

2.60.100 Scope of rules.
        Rules may be formulated as necessary and proper to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, and rules must be formulated to establish specific procedures to conform with the following phases of the personnel system:

        A.    The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the classified service;

        B.     The formulation of guidelines for the minimum standards and qualifications for each class of positions;

        C.     The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the acceptance of applications for employment;

        D.    The preparation and conducting of examinations and the establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for employment;

        E.     The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists to fill vacancies and the making of acting and emergency appointments;

        F.     The evaluation of employees during the probation period and at least annually thereafter;

        G.    The transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the personnel system;

        H.    The separation from the service of employment through layoff, dismissal, suspension and termination and incapacity to perform required duties;

        I.      The development of work schedules, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee training programs;

        J.      The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms;

        K.    Suitable provision for orderly and equitable presentation to the city council by an employee of matters relating to general conditions of employment;

        L.     The establishment of criteria for employee representation and establishing limitations and prohibitions in connection therewith;

        M.    The criteria for determining management personnel. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.100)

 

2.60.110 Procedure for changing rules.
        Prior to any consideration by the city council of any proposed rule amendment or revision of rules, the rule amendment or revision of rules shall be publicly posted and any recognized employee organization shall be given reasonable written notice of such rule amendment or revision of rules together with notice of time, place and date of hearing by the city council. At the time of consideration, any interested person or recognized employee organization may appear and may be heard. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.110)

 

2.60.120 Appointments—Guidelines.
        A.    Appointments to vacant positions in the classified service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of recognized selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates. Examinations may include, but are not limited to, written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples, or any combination thereof. In any examination, the personnel officer may set minimum standards therefor. Physical and/or medical tests may be given to those applicants who are offered employment with the city, and such offers of employment may be contingent upon the successful completion of the physical or medical tests.

        B.     Appointments to the classified service shall be made by the appointing authority subject to the approval of the city manager.

        C.     Vacant positions in the classified service may be filled only by appointment from an eligibility list, by acting appointment, by transfer, by reinstatement or by demotion.

        D.    In the absence of an appropriate eligibility list, an acting appointment may be made by the appointing authority. An eligibility list shall be established within six months for any permanent position filled by acting appointment. No person shall be employed by the city under acting appointment for a total of more than six months in any fiscal year, except that the city manager may extend the period of any acting appointment for successive thirty-day periods with notification to the city council of such extensions.

        E.     Appointment to emergency or seasonal positions may, but need not be, made from eligibility lists and those appointments shall not be in the classified service.

        F.     During the period of suspension of any employee, or pending final action on proceedings to review the suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee, the vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority only by an acting appointment. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.120)

 

2.60.130 Tenure of employees.
        A.    Tenure of employees in the classified service shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory work performance, necessity for the performance of work and the availability of funds.

        B.     All regular appointments including promotional appointments shall be subject to a probationary period. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time, for any reason or for no reason, without the right of appeal or hearing.

        C.     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted, unless he or she is discharged from city service as provided in this chapter and the rules. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.130)

 

2.60.140 Demotion—Dismissal—Reduction in pay—Suspension.
        A.    Any appointing authority shall have the right for cause to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for not more than thirty (30) calendar days any person holding a position or employment made in the classified service. Notice of intent of such demotion, dismissal, reduction in pay or suspension must be in writing and served personally on such employee. The employee shall have five days within which to respond orally or in writing to the charges in the notice of intent to demote, dismiss, reduce in pay or suspend without pay for more than five days, or salary reductions of more than one pay period. Employees shall not be entitled to the notice of intent or the five-day response period for lesser discipline.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.140)

 

2.60.150 Appeals.
        A.    Any employee in the classified service shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. All appeals shall be concluded as expeditiously as possible and in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, except in instances where the right of appeal is prohibited by this chapter.

        B.     Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any employee or the public agency from seeking redress under the law after having followed the appeal procedures provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.150)

 

2.60.160 Political activity.
        The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law. The violation of any provision of this law shall be grounds for discharge of any officer or employee. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.160)

 

2.60.170 Discrimination.
        There shall be no discrimination against any person seeking employment or against any employee in the classified service because of any considerations of religious or political affiliation or belief, membership in or attitude toward an employee organization, ethnic or geographical origin or race, sex, disability or for any other unlawful reason. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.170)

 

2.60.180 Employee representation.
        A.    Any employee of the city shall have the right to join or associate with an employee organization, have the right of individual representation, or have the right to refuse to join or participate in any employee organization.

        B.     Neither the city nor any organization representing employees within the city shall interfere with, intimidate, restrict, coerce or discriminate against any public employee because he or she has joined or refused to join any employee organization. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.180)

 

2.60.190 Abolition of positions.
        Whenever, in the judgment of the city council and upon recommendation of the city manager, it becomes necessary in the interest of economy or because the necessity for the position involved no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position or employment in the classified service and the employee holding such a position or employment may be laid off effective thirty (30) days after notice in writing, exclusive of any vacation period accrued, without the right of appeal. The name of such employee so laid off shall be placed on the appropriate reemployment list as provided by the rules, or such employee may be reappointed should such position or employment of any position involving all or a major portion of the same duties be reinstated or created within one year. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.190)

 

2.60.200 Appropriation required.
        The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules, provided that at the time of appropriation, the provisions of this chapter do not require actions which would be contrary to sound fiscal management. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.200)

 

2.60.210 Retirement system reciprocity.
        A.    The purpose of these reciprocal provisions is to implement an agreement pursuant to Section 20042, Government Code, entered into between the city council and the Board of Administration, Public Employees’ Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as P.E.R.S.).

        B.     All provisions of this system are amended to the extent necessary to provide the following obligations, rights and benefits with respect to members who become members of P.E.R.S., or are members of P.E.R.S. and become members of this system; provided, that the termination of and entry into employment resulting in such membership change, occur within a period of six months.

        1.     A member whose movement between systems occurs as specified in this chapter shall have the right to elect to leave his or her accumulated contributions on deposit irrespective of the amount of such contributions or the length of service credited to him or her, such election to be irrevocable while membership in P.E.R.S. continues.

        2.     Age of entry for a person entering this system, for purposes of fixing member contribution rates in this system, shall be his or her age at entry into P.E.R.S. membership.

        3.     The average monthly salary during any period of service as a member of P.E.R.S. shall be considered compensation earnable by a member of this system for purposes of computing final compensation for such member, provided he or she retires concurrently under both systems and is credited with such period of service under P.E.R.S. at the time of retirement.

        4.     Service, solely for purposes of meeting minimum service qualifications for benefits and retirement allowances under this system, shall also include service rendered as an officer or employee of P.E.R.S. if the salary for such service constitutes compensation earnable by a member of this system.

        5.     A member shall be retired for disability and receive a retirement allowance based on the service credited to him or her at the time of retirement during any period in which he or she receives a disability retirement allowance under P.E.R.S.; provided, that such allowance shall not exceed an amount which, when added to the allowance paid under P.E.R.S., equals the allowance which would be paid for a nonindustrial disability if all the member’s service had been credited under P.E.R.S.; and provided further, that such allowance shall in no event be less than an annuity which is the actuarial equivalent of the member’s contributions, whether or not the disability is for industrial reasons.

        6.     The death benefit for a member who dies from nonindustrial causes as a member of P.E.R.S. shall not exceed an amount which, when added to the death benefit paid for such member under P.E.R.S., equals the maximum death benefit payable under that system; provided, however, that such death benefit shall be at least the amount of the accumulated contributions; and provided further, that if death is caused by industrial injury or disease while a member of P.E.R.S., the death benefit shall be the amount of the member’s accumulated contributions.

        7.     The governing body of this system shall, on the request of P.E.R.S., supply information and data necessary for administration of such system as it is affected by membership in and service credited under this system.

        8.     Interpretation of these provisions shall be made with reference to interpretations that have been made relative to the Public Employees’ Retirement System, 1937 Act, county employees’ retirement reciprocal provisions upon which they are based.

        9.     These provisions shall apply only to a member whose termination and entry into employment resulting in a change in membership from this system to such other system or from such other system to this system occurred after such acceptance by the city council or after the effective date specified in the agreement; provided, however, that provisions relating to computation of final compensation shall apply to any other member if such provision would have applied had the termination and entry into employment occurred after such acceptance or determination by a system’s governing board.

        10.   All rights under this system are subject to modification as may be necessary to conform to amendments to the Public Employees’ Retirement Law or the County Employees’ Retirement Law of 1937, as provided in Section 20042, Government Code. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.210)

 

2.60.220 Contract membership with P.E.R.S.
        A.    The city council finds and determines that its employees have voted to participate in the P.E.R.S., and the employee’s participation in the P.E.R.S. is financially sound and beneficial to the general health, safety and welfare.

        B.     That the city adopts and agrees to participate in the P.E.R.S. pursuant to contract and California Government Code § 20000 et seq. (Ord. 92-16 § 2, 1992; prior code § 2.60.220)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
Chapter 3.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 3.16 PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Chapter 3.20 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.26 EMERGENCY COSTS RECOVERY
Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.32 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.36 PLANNING FEES
Chapter 3.40 TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE

Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
3.04.010 Assessment and collection of city taxes by county.
        Pursuant to, and in compliance with Section 51501 of the California Government Code, and except as otherwise provided in this code the assessment and tax collection duties which otherwise might be performed by a city assessor and finance director are transferred to the assessor and finance director respectively of the county of Santa Barbara. (Prior code § 3.18.010)

 

3.04.020 Investment of city moneys and deposit of securities.
        Pursuant to, in accordance with, and to the extent allowed by Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest moneys of the city, to sell or exchange securities, and to deposit them and provide for their safekeeping is delegated to the city treasurer. (Prior code § 3.08.010)

 

3.04.030 Authorized investments.
        Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.04.020, the city treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under any provision of state law relating to the investing of general city funds, including, but not limited to, Sections 53601, 53635 and 53635.5 of the Government Code, as the sections now read or may hereafter be amended, from moneys in his or her custody which are not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he or she may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. (Prior code § 3.08.020)

 

3.04.040 Sales of securities.
        From time to time the city treasurer shall sell the securities in which city moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter, so that the proceeds may, as appropriate, be applied to the purchase for which the original purchase money may have been designated or placed in the city treasury. (Prior code § 3.08.030)

 

3.04.050 City bonds.
        Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to this chapter may be cancelled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise if proper or appropriate; provided, however, that the bonds may be held uncancelled and while so held may be resold. (Prior code § 3.08.040)

 

3.04.060 Reports.
        The city treasurer shall make a monthly report to the city council of all investments made pursuant to the authority delegated in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.08.050)

 

3.04.070 Deposits of securities.
        Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.04.020, the city treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping the securities in which city moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter in any institution or depository authorized by the terms of any state law, including, but not limited to, Section 53608 of the Government Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended. In accordance with this section, the city treasurer shall take from such institution or depository a receipt for the securities delivered to and receipted for by such institution or depository until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city treasurer. (Prior code § 3.08.060)

 

3.04.080 Trust fund administration.
        Any departmental trust fund established by the city council pursuant to Section 36523 of the Government Code shall be administered by the city treasurer in accordance with Section 36523 and 36524 of the Government Code and any other applicable provisions of law. (Prior code § 3.08.070)

 

3.04.090 Collection of debts to the city.
        The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by this code or by any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation, or in any other fashion by the city shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto, as prescribed by this code or any other enactment. Such action may also be commenced for the collection of any other amount or debt determined to be due the city on account of any contractual obligation or on account of any tortious act or conduct by any person. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of a civil action to collect such an amount as a debt shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. (Prior code § 3.10.010)

 

3.04.100 Independent audit.
        The council shall require annually an independent audit of the accounts and records of the treasurer and department of finance. This auditor shall be selected by council and shall be qualified as a certified public accountant. (Prior code § 2.12.050)

 

3.04.110 Dissolution of special districts and special charges zone.
        A.    Findings.

        1.     In 1965, the Buellton community services district (the “BCSD”) conducted proceedings and formed the Buellton special street lighting assessment district 1965-1 (“AD 1965-1”) pursuant to the Municipal Improvement Act of 1913, Government Code Section 10000, et seq.

        2.     The BCSD issued bonds (the “bonds”), dated July 2, 1966, pursuant to the Improvement Act of 1911, Government Code Section 5000, et seq. (the “1911 Act”), in the aggregate principal amount of five thousand four hundred fifty-five dollars and ninety-two cents ($5,455.92) to finance improvements within AD 1965-1.

        3.     The final interest and principal payment on the bonds occurred on January 2, 1977.

        4.     In 1965, the BCSD conducted proceedings and formed the Buellton special street lighting maintenance assessment district 1965-1 (“MD 1965-1”) pursuant to the 1911 Act.

        5.     The BCSD adopted its Ordinance No. 110 ordering the establishment of a special charge zone (the “special charges zone”) for street lighting purposes for properties fronting on the Avenue of Flags pursuant to the Community Services District Law (being Division 3 of Title 6 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 61000).

        6.     On June 20, 1991, the local agency formation commission of the county adopted its Resolution No. 91-821, providing that the incorporation of the city be subject to, among other conditions, the condition that pursuant to subdivision (m) of Section 56844 of the Government Code, the city be designated as the successor to the BCSD.

        7.     Resolution No. 91-821 also conditioned the incorporation of the city on the condition that all taxes, charges and assessments in the territory of the new city levied by the county and the BCSD continue in effect.

        8.     No assessments have been levied and collected in assessment district 1965-1 subsequent to the defeasement of the bonds in 1977.

        9.     No assessments have been levied and collected in maintenance district 1965-1, if at all, subsequent to the incorporation of the city (the “city”) in 1991.

        10.   The charges within the special charges zone have been suspended by the city council and are no longer being levied and collected for the maintenance of the street lighting located on the Avenue of Flags.

        11.   On June 22, 2000, the city council adopted its resolution of intention (the “resolution of intention”) which declared its intent to dissolve the district and set a time and place for a public hearing. The resolution of intention was duly and legally published in the time, form and manner required by law, shown by the affidavit of publication of the resolution of intention on file in the office of the city clerk; and

        12.   At the time and place for which notice was given, the city council conducted a public hearing and gave every interested person an opportunity to be heard on the matter of the dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags.

        13.   The city council considered all oral and written testimony, if any, relating to the proposed dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags made by interested persons.

        14.   The city council, having duly received and considered oral and documentary evidence concerning the jurisdictional facts in this proceeding and concerning the necessity for the dissolution, has acquired jurisdiction to order the proposed dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags.

        B.     Order of Dissolution. The public interest and convenience require the ordering of the dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags and the city council hereby orders the dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags, as set forth in the resolution of intention.

        C.     Adoption Constitutes Dissolution. The adoption of this Section 3.04.110 constitutes the dissolution of AD 1965-1, MD 1965-1 and the special charges zone for the Avenue of Flags. (Ord. 00-05 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
3.08.010 Claims for money or damages.
        As a prerequisite to bringing suit thereon against the city or any officer, employee, department, commission, or board of the city, any claim for money or damages, including claims which would otherwise be excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code of California, which is not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910), of the California Government Code. This section shall relate only to the bringing of suit upon any claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the director of finance, the city council, and other city officers to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, the just obligations of the city, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments for purchases, and other like expenditures for which there is an express budget appropriation and in connection with which there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount being payable. (Prior code § 3.16.010)

 

3.08.020 Auditing prerequisite to payment.
        No payment shall be made from the city treasury or out of the funds of the city unless the demand which is to be paid is duly audited as prescribed in this chapter or by other provisions of law. (Prior code § 3.16.020)

 

3.08.030 Forms—Blanks for demands.
        Claims against the city shall be paid on demands on the treasury as herein provided on forms to be prescribed by the city manager. (Prior code § 3.16.030)

 

3.08.040 Departmental approval of claims.
        Except for tort claims, every claim and demand received against the city shall be first presented to and approved in writing by the receiving department or office, which shall certify to the actual delivery or rendition of the supplies, materials, property or service for which payment is claimed. The receiving department or office shall also certify that the quality and prices correspond with the original specifications and contracts, if any, upon which the claim is based, that the demand in all other respects is proper and valid, and shall indicate the budgetary account to which the demand is to be charged. (Prior code § 3.16.040)

 

3.08.050 Approval by city manager.
        Each demand approved by the receiving department or office shall be presented to the city manager, who shall determine whether:

        A.    The claim is legally due and owing by the city;

        B.     There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay the claim;

        C.     The claim conforms to a valid requisition or order;

        D.    The prices and computations shown on the claim are verified;

        E.     The claim contains the approval of other departments and officials as required. (Prior code § 3.16.050)

 

3.08.060 Prepayment of demands.
        A.    Prepayment of demands prior to audit by the city council may be made by the city manager in conformance with the authority provided by Section 37208 of the California Government Code.

        B.     Whenever the city manager determines that a refund of fees, taxes or other receipts collected in error or in advance of being earned, or of money the refund of which is otherwise due pursuant to specific provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of this city, then any such refund shall be deemed as conforming to the currently approved budget, and may be prepaid in the same fashion as other demands encompassed within the terms of subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 3.16.060)

 

3.08.070 Register of demands.
        Following audit of demands, the city manager shall prepare a register of audited demands showing the claimant’s name, amount of demand, the warrant number and date thereof, and transmit said register to the city manager for his or her review and presentation to the finance committee and the city council, with his or her approval or other report. (Prior code § 3.16.070)

 

3.08.080 City council approval.
        The register of demands shall be presented to the city council at the next meeting thereof. The city council may by resolution approve, conditionally or partially approve, or reject such register of demands and in connection therewith consider the recommendations of the finance committee and the city manager. (Prior code § 3.16.080)

 

3.08.090 Record of approved demands.
        Following approval of the register of demands by the city council, the chairperson of the finance committee and the city manager shall endorse the register of audited demands to signify that the demands therein were properly processed prior to any action taken by the city council. (Prior code § 3.16.090)

Chapter 3.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Note
*       Prior history: Prior code §§ 3.12.010—3.12.120 and 3.12.300—3.12.330.

 

3.12.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
        In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needs, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing functions, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.020 Scope of chapter.
        The procedures established by this chapter shall apply only to the purchase of supplies, equipment, and services, and shall not apply to public works projects as defined in Section 20161 of the California Public Contracts Code. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.030 Centralized purchasing division.
        There is created a centralized purchasing division in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.040 Purchasing agent.
        There is created the position of purchasing agent, who may also be known as the “purchasing officer.” The purchasing agent shall be the city manager or designee. The purchasing agent shall be the head and have general supervision of the purchasing division. The duties of the purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to:

        A.    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or the city manager;

        B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

        C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city;

        D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

        E.     Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

        F.     Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

        G.    Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products;

        H.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

        I.      Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications;

        J.      Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;

        K.    Maintain an approved vendors list, vendors’ catalog file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.050 Purchasing regulations.
        The purchasing agent shall be responsible for determining that the regulations and procedures in this chapter are carried out. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.060 Authorized department purchases.
        The purchase of supplies and equipment of an estimated price less than or equal to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) may be made by the department directors designated and approved by the purchasing officer. The department directors shall purchase supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the quality needs. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.070 Open market procedure.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated price between one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) and less than or equal to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be made by the purchasing officer by the procedures as follows:

        A.    Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchase shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

        B.     Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written request to prospective vendors or by telephone.

        C.     Written Bids. If required, written bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer who shall keep a record of all open market bids and the placing of the order. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection.

        D.    Contracts. The purchase and sale of the supplies and equipment shall be memorialized in a contract or purchase order and written confirmation signed by the purchasing officer. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.080 Formal contract procedure.
        Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of an estimated price greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be awarded by written contract to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section.

        A.    Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.

        1.     Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Such notice shall be published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places within the city that have been designated by resolution as the places for posting public notices.

        B.     Bidder’s Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

        C.     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

        D.    Rejection of Bids. At its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids.

        E.     Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided herein.

        F.     Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same amount or unit price (quality and service being equal), and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders prior to awarding of bid.

        G.    Performance Bonds. Before entering a contract the purchasing officer shall have authority to require a performance bond in such amount deemed reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the purchasing officer requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.090 Exemptions from centralized purchasing—Emergencies.
        The city manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies and equipment independent of the purchasing agent; provided, however, that the city manager shall require that such purchases be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases made under such written authorization.

        The city manager may authorize the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, and services where an emergency is deemed to exist and it is determined that service involving the public health, safety, or welfare would be interrupted if the normal procedure were followed. All emergency purchases, which would otherwise require formal bidding procedures, made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the city council for ratification at the next regular council meeting after the purchase is authorized. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.100 Estimates of requirements.
        All using departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.110 Requisitions.
        Using departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing agent by standard requisition forms, or by other means as may be established by the purchasing rules and regulations. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.120 Purchase orders.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase orders. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no purchase order shall be issued unless the prior approval of the purchasing agent or designated representative has been obtained. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.130 Encumbrance of funds.
        Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.140 Inspection and testing.
        The purchasing agent shall, in his or her discretion, inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.150 Surplus supplies and equipment.
        All using departments shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such forms as the purchasing agent shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete and worn out. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.160 Surplus supplies—Trade-ins.
        The purchasing agent shall have authority to exchange for or trade in on new supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.170 Surplus supplies—Sale.
        The purchasing agent shall have authority, subject to approval of the city manager, to dispose of surplus supplies or equipment by auction or by sale or otherwise which, in his or her judgment, provides a fair benefit to the city. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.180 Purchases from or through other governmental agencies.
        Any agreement for the purchase of supplies, equipment or services from another governmental agency shall be exempt from formal contract procedures of this chapter and all such agreements may follow the procedures in Section 3.12.060 or 3.12.070, as deemed advisable by the purchasing officer. Where the city budget authorizes the purchases of materials, supplies or equipment for the city and where the purchasing officer determines that another public agency (hereinafter “the acquiring agency”) has within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the proposed purchase proceeded with steps pursuant to its purchasing procedure to obtain bids and award a contract to the lowest responsible bidder for the same materials, supplies or equipment which this city needs and for which authorization has been given, then, and in that event, the procedures of this chapter need not be followed and the city may proceed to purchase the materials, supplies or equipment on the same terms and conditions as purchased by the acquiring agency. For purposes of this chapter, “acquiring agency” may include, but is not limited to, the state of California, the county of Santa Barbara, a joint powers agency or any other governmental agency. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.190 Personal, professional, consulting services and non-public works.
        Contracts for personal, professional, consultant services and non-public works with an estimated cost less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be awarded pursuant to the open market procedures of this chapter. All contracts for personal, professional, consultant services and non-public works with an estimated cost over than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may only be awarded by the city council following a formal written request for proposals procedure, the scope of which shall be approved by the city manager. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.200 Personal, professional, consulting services and non-public works—City manager authority to contract.
        The city manager is authorized to contract for personal, professional, consulting services and non-public works when the amount of the contract does not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and unencumbered amounts exist in the department against which the expense is to be charged sufficient to cover the contract cost. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

 

3.12.210 Public works contracts.
        Contracts for public projects, as defined in Section 20161 of the California Public Contract Code, as may be amended, shall be awarded in accordance with Chapter 3.16 of this code. (Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 3.16 PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS
Note
*       Prior history: Prior code §§ 3.12.130—3.12.290, 3.13.010—3.13.050 and Ord. 95-03.

 

3.16.010 Authority and purpose of chapter.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 2, part 3, Division 2 (commencing with Section 22030) of the State Public Contract Code and constitutes an “informal bidding ordinance” as described in Section 22034 of said Code. The purpose of this chapter is to establish an informal bidding procedure applicable to certain contracts for public projects as a result of the city having elected, by resolution of the city council, to become subject to the uniform construction cost accounting procedures promulgated by the State Controller. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

 

3.16.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context or provision clearly requires otherwise:

        “Commission” means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, as created under Section 22010 of the Public Contract Code.

        “Facility” means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, real property, streets and highways or other public work improvement.

        “Maintenance work” includes all the following:

        1.     Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any facility owned or operated by the city for its intended purposes;

        2.     Minor repainting;

        3.     Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch;

        4.     Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems;

        5.     Work performed to keep, operate and maintain any water, power or waste disposal systems owned by the city, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs or power plants.

        “Public Contract Code” means the Public Contract Code of the state of California.

        “Public project” means any of the following, excluding maintenance work:

        1.     Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving a facility owned, leased or operated by the city;

        2.     Painting or repainting of any facility owned, leased or operated by the city. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

 

3.16.030 Application of chapter.
        A.    This chapter shall apply to public projects with a cost in excess of the dollar amount specified in Section 22032(a) of the Public Contract Code, but not exceeding the dollar amount specified in Section 22032(b) of the Public Contract Code. Any public project with a cost less than the dollar amount specified in Section 22032(a) of the Public Contract Code may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order as authorized by Section 22032(a), unless the city council shall specifically direct that the provisions of this chapter be followed with respect to such project. All public projects with a cost in excess of the dollar amount specified in Section 22032(c) of the Public Contract Code shall be awarded by contract following formal bidding procedures as specified in the Public Contract Code, the regulations of the Commission and Section 3.12.080 of this code.

        B.     The provisions of this chapter shall in no way restrict the right of the city to perform all necessary repair or replacement work in cases of great emergency, without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts, as authorized by and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 22035 of the Public Contract Code. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

 

3.16.040 List of qualified contractors.
        The city shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work as specified in Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code. The list shall be developed and maintained in compliance with such minimum requirements as may be specified from time to time by the commission. The public works director is designated as the city official having primary responsibility for preparation and maintenance of the list of qualified contractors required by this section. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

 

3.16.050 Notice inviting informal bids.
        A.    Where public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, the public works director shall mail a notice of work to be bid, as shown on the list described in Section 3.16.040 and to all construction trade journals for the category of work as determined by the commission pursuant to Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code, provided, however:

        1.     If there is no existing list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting informal bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the commission; or

        2.     If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

        B.     All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before bids are due.

        C.     The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the public project in general terms, shall indicate the name, address and telephone number of the person from whom detailed information concerning the project can be obtained, and shall state the time and place for the submissions of bids. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

 

3.16.060 Award of contracts.
        A.    Contracts on which informal bids have been obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be awarded in accordance with the same policies and standards customarily followed by the city for public projects requiring formal bids.

        B.     The city manager may award a contract in an amount less than that specified in Section 22032(a) of the Public Contract Code. In addition, the city council may, by resolution, delegate to the city manager or the public works director or other designated employee of the city the authority to award any particular contract for which informal bids will be obtained pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014)

Chapter 3.20 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.20.010 Short title—Adoption.
        This chapter shall be known as the Buellton real property transfer tax. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. (Prior code § 3.22.010)

 

3.20.020 Imposition—Rates.
        There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereof at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) of consideration or value or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 3.22.020)

 

3.20.030 Payment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.20.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 3.22.030)

 

3.20.040 Tax inapplicable to instruments in writing to secure debts.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. (Prior code § 3.22.040)

 

3.20.050 Tax inapplicable to any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate property assets between spouses.
        A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders.

        B.     In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection A of this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Prior code § 3.22.042)

 

3.20.060 Government and its agencies not liable.
        Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 95-03 § 2, 1995; prior code § 3.22.050)

 

3.20.070 Deed, instrument, or other writing for conveyance of realty by state or political subdivision or agency with agreement for purchaser to reconvey.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. (Prior code § 3.22.052)

 

3.20.080 Deed, instrument, or other writing for conveyance by state, political subdivision or agency of realty financed by obligations issued by nonprofit corporation.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Prior code § 3.22.054)

 

3.20.090 Tax inapplicable to conveyances to make effective plan of reorganization or adjustment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

        A.    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

        B.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

        C.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation as defined in Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

        D.    Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

        Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this section shall apply only if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 3.22.060)

 

3.20.100 Tax inapplicable to make effective order of Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision a. of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

        A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

        B.     Such other specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

        C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 3.22.070)

 

3.20.110 Partnerships.
        A.    In case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in partnership or otherwise, if:

        1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

        2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

        B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien of encumbrances remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

        C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section and any transfer pursuant thereto with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 3.22.080)

 

3.20.120 Administration.
        The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and the provision of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 3.22.090)

 

3.20.130 Claims for refund.
        Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096 of Part 9 of Divisions 1) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code. (Prior code § 3.22.100)

 

3.20.140 Tax roll parcel number requirements.
        Each deed, instrument or writing by which lands, tenements or other realty is sold, granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed shall have noted upon it the tax roll parcel number. The number will be used only for administrative and procedural purposes and will not be proof of title and in the event of any conflicts, the stated legal description noted upon the document shall govern. (Prior code § 3.22.110)

Chapter 3.24 SALES AND USE TAX
3.24.010 Short title.
        This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Prior code § 3.19.010)

 

3.24.020 Rate.
        The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Prior code § 3.19.011)

 

3.24.030 Operative date.
        “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.012)

 

3.24.040 Purpose.
        The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interrupted in order to accomplish those purposes:

        A.    To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

        B.     To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

        C.     To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

        D.    To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.013)

 

3.24.050 Contract with state.
        Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the state Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.015)

 

3.24.060 Sales tax.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Prior code § 3.19.020)

 

3.24.070 Place of sale.
        For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Prior code § 3.19.030)

 

3.24.080 Use tax.
        An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use, or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.24.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Prior code § 3.19.040)

 

3.24.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.050)

 

3.24.100 Credit against payment of taxes to redevelopment agency.
        Any person subject to a sales and use tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to credit against the payment of taxes due under this chapter the amount of sales and use taxes due to the redevelopment agency of the city pursuant to Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 93-16 § 2, 1993)

 

3.24.110 Limitations on adoption of state law.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Prior code § 3.19.060)

 

3.24.120 Permit not required if seller’s permit has been issued.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6068 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.070)

 

3.24.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
        There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

        A.    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

        B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state.

        C.     The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use, or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city.

        D.    The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. (Prior code § 3.19.080)

 

3.24.140 Amendments.
        All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 3.19.090)

3.24.150 Enjoining collection forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the state or this city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Prior code § 3.19.100)

 

3.24.160 Penalties.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.32.010 to 1.32.040 of this code. (Prior code § 3.19.110)

Chapter 3.26 EMERGENCY COSTS RECOVERY
3.26.010 Response and enforcement fees—Driving, boating or flying under the influence.
        The following guidelines and procedures are established for implementation and administration of Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 8 of the California Government Code entitled “Costs of Emergency Response” (Section 53150, et seq.) as it may be amended from time to time.

        A.    All city line departments (police, public works, etc.) participating in emergency responses to any incident involving a person under the influence of alcohol or drugs, or a person whose conduct is intentionally wrongful, while operating a motor vehicle, boat or civil aircraft shall log all personnel time, equipment time and use, and all incidental costs involved in such emergency response.

        B.     The costs to the city for all such personnel time, equipment use, and incidental items shall be reported by each department within ten days thereafter to the city manager, including, without limitation:

        1.     All direct wage costs for all department personnel so involved, including the department head;

        2.     All equipment costs including reasonable depreciation or standard industry hourly rental amount, plus the cost of all incidental materials and supplies, involved in the emergency response;

        3.     The department head responsible for determining that the person causing the incident was under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, or that the person’s conduct was intentionally wrongful, shall be responsible for coordinating the preparation and furnishing of the department reports to the city manager.

        C.     The provisions hereof shall be applied uniformly against all such persons charged with a Penal Code, Vehicle Code, Health and Safety Code, or other state law statutory violation. No city official other than a majority of the city council shall have the authority to reduce or cancel the debt obligation after criminal charges arising from the incident have been approved by the district attorney.

        D.    The debt obligation herein shall only be excused or cancelled upon an explicit verdict or finding by a court, or by the city council after a duty noticed public hearing, that the incident was not caused as a result of the person being under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs and that the incident was not caused as a result of intentionally wrongful conduct.

        E.     All judicial actions for judgment and collection of the dept obligation herein shall be filed in the Santa Barbara County Municipal Court, Small Claims Division.

        F.     All monies collected shall be placed in the city’s general fund, and shall be included in city budget projections. (Ord. 94-17 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 3.28 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Note
*       Adopted by Ordinance No. 98-02 pursuant to a vote of the electorate on April 14, 1998.

 

3.28.010 Title for citation.
        This chapter shall be known as the Buellton uniform transient occupancy tax. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.010)

 

3.28.020 Definitions.
        Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

        “Hotel” means any structure or portion of any structure, or any other lodging which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house dormitory, public or private club, and shall further include any recreational vehicle situated on a recreational vehicle site, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof, duplex, triplex, single-family dwelling units except any private dwelling house or other individually-owned single-family dwelling rented only infrequently and incidental to normal occupancy or any timeshare as set out in California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7280; provided that the burden of establishing that the facility is not a hotel shall be on the owner or operator thereof.

        “Occupancy” means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms, or portion thereof, offered for rent for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

        “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent also is an operator for the purposes of this chapter and has the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent is, however, considered to be compliance by both.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

        “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

        “Tax administrator” means the city manager or designated agent, whether a city employee or county officer or employee.

        “Time-share occupancy” means occupancy related to the situation wherein a purchaser receives the right or entitlement in perpetuity, for life, or for a term of years or other extended term, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, room(s), hotel or portion thereof, or segment of real property, annually or on some other seasonal or periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the time-share project which is involved has been divided. The right or entitlement to occupancy may attach in advance to a specific lot, parcel, unit, room(s), or portion of a hotel, or segment of real property, or may involve designation or selection of the same at a future time or times.

        “Transient” means any person who occupies or is entitled to occupy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel is a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, an uninterrupted period of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 94-14 § 2, 1994; Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.020)

 

3.28.030 Rate.
        For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, the city council may, by ordinance, establish a tax rate at no greater than twelve (12) percent of the rent actually charged or customarily charged by the operator for the rooms and/or facilities occupied by the transient. Each transient is subject to and shall pay the tax in the amount set by the city council. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The unpaid tax is due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 13-01 § 1, 2013; Res. 12-20 § 2, 2012; Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.030)

 

3.28.040 Exemptions—Listed.
        A.    No tax shall be imposed upon:

        1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

        2.     Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business;

        3.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

        B.     No exemption is granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.040)

 

3.28.050 Operator’s duties.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.050)

 

3.28.060 Registration.
        Within thirty (30) days after commencing business, each operator of any hotel renting to transients must register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a “transient occupancy registration certificate” to be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the premises. This certificate shall state, among other things, the following:

        A.    The name of the operator;

        B.     The address of the hotel;

        C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

        D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This Certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this city.” (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.060)

 

3.28.070 Reporting and remitting.
        Each operator shall, not later than twenty (20) days after the last day of each month, file a return with the tax administrator, on forms provided by the tax administrator, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies during the preceding month. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. Any return and/or tax not received by the tax administrator by the twentieth (20th) day after the last day of the month to which such return relates, or during which such tax was collected, shall be deemed delinquent pursuant to Section 3.28.080 of this chapter. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if it is deemed necessary to ensure collection of the tax, and may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter are held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.070)

 

3.28.080 Penalties and interest.
        A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

        B.     Continued Delinquency. For each subsequent thirty (30) day period following the date on which an operator’s remittance first becomes delinquent the operator shall pay a delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed, up to a maximum of fifty (50) percent.

        C.     Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

        D.    Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.080)

 

3.28.090 Failure to collect and report.
        A.    If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she deems best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the tax administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of business. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed.

        B.     After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.28.120. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.090)

 

3.28.100 Cessation of business.
        Each operator shall notify the tax administrator, ten days prior to the sale or cessation of business for any reason and returns and remittances are due immediately upon the sale or cessation of business. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.092)

 

3.28.110 Cost of audits.
        Should the tax administrator be required to perform an audit of the records of any operator pursuant to Section 3.28.090 to determine the proper amount of any tax owed pursuant to this chapter, the entire cost of the audit shall be assessed against the operator. In the event that the books and/or records required to perform an audit are not made available within the city, the assessment shall include the cost of transportation, lodging, meals, and portal-to-portal travel time. The assessment shall be due and payable not more than thirty (30) days after written notice of the assessment is sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the operator. Should the operator fail to pay assessment within the thirty (30) day time limit, the assessment shall constitute a lien against the property for which the audit was performed. After confirmation of the assessment lien by the city council, the city assessor and finance director shall be notified, and shall add the amount of the assessment lien to the next regular tax bill levied against the property for municipal purposes. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.095)

 

3.28.120 Appeal.
        Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Sections 1.24.010 to 1.24.040 of this code. The findings of the city council are final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due is immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.100)

 

3.28.130 Records.
        It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax for which the operator may be or may have been liable. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times and may subpoena the records of any operator who refuses to make them available for examination. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.110)

 

3.28.140 Fraud.
        If the tax administrator determines that the failure to make any remittance or payment due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the tax and penalties shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Section 3.28.080. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.115)

 

3.28.150 Refunds.
        A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

        B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit is allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

        C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

        D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 98-03 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1998; Ord. 98-02 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1998; Ord. 97-06 § 1, 1997: Ord. 97-05 § 1, 1997: Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.120)

 

3.28.160 Actions to collect.
        Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter is liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.130)

 

3.28.170 Violations designated misdemeanor.
        Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.32.010 et seq. of this code. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.32.010 et seq. of this code. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.140)

 

3.28.180 Revocation of certificate.
        Whenever any operator fails to comply with any provision of this chapter relating to occupancy tax or any rule or regulation of the tax administrator relating to occupancy tax prescribed and adopted under this chapter, the tax administrator upon hearing, after giving the operator ten days notice in writing specifying the time and place of hearing and requiring him/her to show cause why his or her certificate or certificates should not be revoked, may suspend or revoke any one or more of the certificates held by the operator. The tax administrator shall give to the operator written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his or her certificates. The notice required in this chapter may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. The tax administrator shall not issue a new certificate after the revocation of a certificate unless he/she is satisfied that the former holder of the certificate will comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the occupancy tax and regulations of the tax administrator. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.160)

 

3.28.190 Closure of hotel without certificate.
        During any period of time during which a certificate has not been issued, or is suspended, revoked or otherwise not validly in effect, the tax administrator may require that the hotel be closed. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.170)

 

3.28.200 Recording certificate—Lien.
        If any amount required to be remitted or paid to the city under this chapter is not remitted or paid when due, the tax administrator may, within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the office of the county of Santa Barbara recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax administrator has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be remitted and paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be remitted together with penalties and interest constituting a lien upon all real property in the county owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him or her. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.180)

 

3.28.210 Priority and lien of tax.
        A.    The amounts required to be remitted and/or paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

        1.     Whenever the person is insolvent;

        2.     Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his or her assets;

        3.     Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all the debts due from the deceased;

        4.     Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

        B.     The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preferences given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.190)

 

3.28.220 Warrant for collection of tax.
        At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount in this chapter, required to be remitted or paid or within three years after the last recording of a certificate under Section 3.28.200, the tax administrator may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff, marshal or constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff, marshal or constable the same fees, commissions and expenses for his or her services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator, and not the court, shall approve the fees for publication in a newspaper. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.200)

3.28.230 Seizure and sale.
        At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount, the tax administrator may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner. The tax administrator shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.210)

 

3.28.240 Successor’s liability—Withholding by purchase.
        If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his or her business or quits the business, his or her successor or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.220)

 

3.28.250 Liability of purchaser—Release.
        If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold purchase price as required, he or she shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty (60) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within sixty (60) days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than ninety (90) days after receiving the request, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his or her address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.230)

 

3.28.260 Withhold notice.
        If any person or operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of the amount required to be remitted or paid by him/her or in the event a determination has been made against him/her for the remittance of tax and payment of the penalty, the city may, within three years after the tax obligation became due, give notice thereof personally or by registered mail to all persons, including the state or any political subdivision thereof, having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the taxpayer. After receiving the withholding notice, the person so notified shall make no disposition of the taxpayer’s credits, other personal property or debts until the city consents to a transfer or disposition or until sixty (60) days elapse after the receipt of the notice, whichever expires earlier. All persons, upon receipt of the notice, shall advise the city immediately of all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. If such notice seeks to prevent the transfer or other disposition of a deposit in a bank or other credits or personal property in the possession or under the control of the bank, to be effective the notice shall be delivered or mailed to the branch or office of such bank at which such deposit is carried or at which such credits or personal property is held. If any person so notified makes transfer or disposition of the property or debts required to be held hereunder during the effective period of the notice to withhold, he/she shall be liable to the city to the extent of the value of the release up to the amount of the indebtedness owed by the taxpayer to the city. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.250)

 

3.28.270 Extension of time.
        The tax administrator, for good cause, may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or paying any amount required to be paid under this chapter. The extension may be granted at any time, provided a request therefor is filed with the tax administrator within or prior to the period for which the extension may be granted. Any person to whom an extension is granted shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax would have been due without the extension until the date of payment. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.270)

 

3.28.280 Divulging of information forbidden.
        It is unlawful for any person having an administrative duty under this chapter to make known in any manner whatsoever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of the records of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to knowingly permit any return or copy thereof or any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax, penalties and interest required to be collected. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.280)

 

3.28.290 Agreement with county.
        The city is empowered to enter into a joint powers agreement with other cities and the county of Santa Barbara, and if such agreement or agreements can be made wherein central collection for the county of Santa Barbara is provided, then it may be done upon approval by the city council. (Ord. 92-08 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.25.290)

Chapter 3.32 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.32.010 Created.
        To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the California Streets and Highways Code, and to avail the city of the benefits of Sections 2105, 2106, 2107 and 2107.5 of the code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 92-3 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.20.010)

 

3.32.020 Moneys included.
        All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property, or interests therein, for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance and improvement of streets or highways by the city, shall be paid into the fund. (Ord. 92-3 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.20.020)

 

3.32.030 Expenditures.
        All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 92-3 § 1, 1992; prior code § 3.20.030)

Chapter 3.36 PLANNING FEES
3.36.010 Planning fees—Purpose.
        In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing for orderly development within the city and to administer the planning laws and regulations of the city, the city must maintain a planning department. The policy of the city is that the cost of providing planning services should be borne to the extent possible by those who benefit from the service. In establishing planning fees, it is the intent of the city that the fees be set at a level that covers the cost of providing such services. (Ord. 93-8 § 1, 1993; prior code § 2.70.010)

 

3.36.020 Establishment of fees.
        A.    Planning fees are established for, and shall be paid prior to, the processing of any planning application within the city.

        B.     The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees. The amount of the fees shall be in reasonable relation to the costs of processing the application which is the subject of the fee.

        C.     The city council shall each year review the fees to determine whether such fees accurately reflect the cost of processing the application which is being assessed the fee.

        D.    Fees established in this chapter shall be used only to pay the direct costs of the processing of the application, including city staff salaries, payments to contract staff, travel costs, and other reasonable expenses incurred during processing of planning applications for the city.

        E.     Any person subject to planning fees may appeal to the city council for an adjustment, reduction or waiver of such fees based on the absence of any reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of providing the service. The appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk, along with any applicable appeal fees, and shall state the factual basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal, though council action on the appeal may be continued from time to time. The decision of city council on the appeal shall be final. If an appeal for adjustment, reduction or waiver from fees is granted, any change in the development proposal shall invalidate the adjustment, reduction or waiver. (Ord. 93-8 § 1, 1993; prior code § 2.70.020)

Chapter 3.40 TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE
3.40.010 Title.
        The title of this chapter is the “Traffic Mitigation Fee.” (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.020 Purpose and intent.
        It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a program to provide funding for the construction of the necessary circulation system improvements to serve the new developments within the city. This fee is not intended to duplicate any existing mitigation fees. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to any other requirements imposed by city ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations. The fees required by this chapter are in addition to any other means of financing facilities or improvements which may be available under state law, this code or city policy. This chapter establishes a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which the development or redevelopment of land will generate traffic volumes which impact the circulation system. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.030 Definitions.
        Whenever the following terms or phrases are used in this chapter, they shall have the following meanings:

        “Applicant” means the owner, or duly designated agent of the owner, of property as to which a request for development approval is received by the city.

        “Calculate” means to determine the amount of the traffic mitigation fee to be collected, based on the type of land use.

        “Capital improvement program” means the plan for capital improvements adopted or updated annually by the city council. The capital improvement plan indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of capital improvement to be financed with appropriate funds and traffic mitigation fee monies.

        “Capital improvements” means the public improvements for transportation and transit, including, but not limited to, streets and supporting improvements, overpasses, bridges and freeway ramps identified in the city’s current capital improvement plan and/or the traffic fee program.

        “Circulation system improvements” means those improvements necessary to attain the goals and

        “Collection” means the time when the traffic mitigation fee due is actually paid by the applicant to the city.

        “Commitment” means earmarking, budgeting, or appropriation of traffic mitigation fees to fund or partially fund capital improvements to the circulation system.

        “Development” means any discretionary or ministerial action by the city resulting in the issuance of grading, building, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical permits, conditional use permits or certificates of occupancy issued by the city to construct or change the use of a building or property.

        “Traffic fee program report” means the report adopted by the city council that sets forth the projected revenue, the circulation system improvement list, the estimated cost to construct the improvements, funding gap between the projected revenue and the estimated costs. The report method of fee computation and a traffic improvement fee schedule based upon land use categories and units of measurement. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.040 Establishment of traffic mitigation fee.
        A.    Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new development, and to the redevelopment of any existing building or parcel, which will generate additional p.m. peak hour trips.

        B.     Basis of Traffic Mitigation Fee. The fee is based upon the “Traffic Fee Program Report” as adopted by the city council. The traffic fee program report is to be reviewed annually to determine if there have been significant changes in conditions that require a modification to the traffic improvement fee schedule. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.050 Adoption by city council.
        The traffic improvement fee schedule will be adopted by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.060 Payment of fee.
        A.    Requirement to Pay. All projects, which are determined by the city engineer to generate additional p.m. peak hour trips, are required to pay the traffic mitigation fee established under Section 3.40.040.

        B.     Time of Payment. The traffic mitigation fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for any development required to pay such a fee, except that in the case of a development which is not required to secure a building permit, the fee shall be paid prior to initiation of a change of use which requires a fee payment under this section. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.070 Funds.
        The fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be set aside by the city in a fund to be used solely for the purpose of constructing streets and related improvements or acquiring right-of-way necessary to complete the city’s adopted circulation system. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

 

3.40.080 Appeal process.
        The city engineer will be responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. Decisions made by the city engineer may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days from the date of the city engineer’s determination. The appeal process shall be as provided for in Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 95-06 § 1, 1995)

Title 4 (Reserved)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 CABLE TELEVISION
Chapter 5.05 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.06 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.10 CARD GAMES
Chapter 5.14 MOBILEHOME RENT CONTROL
Chapter 5.18 BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.22 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Chapter 5.26 TAXICABS

Chapter 5.04 CABLE TELEVISION
5.04.010 Subscriber service standards and complaint procedures.
        Section 2-95.23 of the Santa Barbara County Code, as adopted by reference by the city of Buellton, is amended to read as follows:

 

        Section 2-95.23 Subscriber Service Standards and Complaint Procedures.

 

        (a) Subscriber Service Standards. Beginning ninety (90) days from the date this Ordinance No. 95-09 is adopted, grantee shall comply with the Customer Service Standards established by the Federal Communications Commission at Section 76.309 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the standards contained at Section 76.309 are amended as follows:

 

        1. 47 CFR § (c)(1)(i)(A) is revised to provide that:

 

        Knowledgeable, qualified customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquires a minimum of 49 hours weekly, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and at least four additional hours as selected by the cable operator.

 

        2. 47 CFR § 76.309(c)(1)(v) is revised to provide that:

 

        A business and service office located within twenty miles of the City shall be open Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and adequately staffed to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints. Additionally, the cable operator will staff the business and service office at least four additional hours per week.

 

        3. Subsections (vi), (vii) and (viii) are added to 47 CFR § 76.309(c)(2) to provide that:

 

        (vi) The cable operator will maintain an emergency maintenance system and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four (24) hour basis shall be provided.

 

        (vii) The cable operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m.

 

        (viii) The cable operator shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames:

 

        (i) System outages: Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one (1) or more channels, affecting all the subscribers of the system or a considerable number thereof.

 

        (ii) Service interruptions: Within twenty-four (24) hours, including weekends, after receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

 

        (iii) Inferior reception quality: Within forty-eight (48) hours, including weekends, after receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

 

        (b) Verification of Standards. Upon reasonable notice, grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards. Grantee shall provide sufficient detail to permit the City to verify the extent of compliance.

 

        A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for three (3) years. The log shall indicate the time and date of all service interruptions, request for cable service or repairs, and responses to request for cable service or repairs.

 

        (c) Complaints. The City does hereby designate the City Manager’s office as the official responsible for receiving complaints or comments from any subscriber or potential subscriber as to the manner in which the grantee is providing cable television service. Grantee shall annually notify each subscriber that the Office of the City Manager is available to assist in resolving complaints regarding cable television service.

 

        (d) Rebates. Whenever service is interrupted to any subscriber due to system failure for any continuous period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, the subscriber shall upon application receive a rebate of one-thirtieth (1/30th) of the subscriber’s monthly service fee for each day or part thereof between the end of the twenty-four (24) hours and the time service is restored to proper standards.

 

(Ord. 95-09)

Chapter 5.05 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
5.05.010 Purpose and application.
        This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city.

        On January 1, 2007, the state of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city of Buellton shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government (PEG) purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city acquired the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the city from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the state. DIVCA leaves unchanged the city’s authority to regulate the city’s existing cable franchises until the expiration of any such franchises. (Ord. 07-08 § 2, 2007)

 

5.05.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
        A.    Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

        B.     Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall also pay the city a fee equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city only for public, educational, and/or governmental (PEG) purposes consistent with state and federal law, which laws currently require the city to use such fees for capital costs.

        C.     In addition, any state franchisee that has held a locally issued franchise agreement shall, consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5870, continue to fully provide and support PEG channel facilities and institutional networks and to provide cable services to community buildings to the maximum extent permitted by law.

        D.    Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections A and B of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 07-08 § 2, 2007)

 

5.05.030 Audit authority.
        Not more than once annually, the city manager or the manager’s designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 5.05.020. (Ord. 07-08 § 2, 2007)

 

5.05.040 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
        A.    The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

        B.     The city manager or the manager’s designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30) day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

        1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.

        2.     For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.

        3.     For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation.

        C.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty (60) days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 07-08 § 2, 2007)

 

5.05.050 City response to state video franchise applications.
        A.    Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the city manager.

        B.     Within thirty (30) days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 07-08 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 5.06 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES
5.06.010 Purpose and intent.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.012 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:

        “Adult-oriented business” means:

        1.     Any business, where employees, independent contractors, or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

        Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients. Adult-oriented businesses also do not include athletic or exercise facilities where specified anatomical areas may be exposed within a single-sex locker room or similar facility used for changing clothing where such exposure is primarily done in conjunction with changing or showering after use of the athletic or exercise facilities. An adult-oriented business also does not include a bona fide theater as defined in this section.

        Adult-oriented businesses do not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. Adult-oriented businesses shall also include any business establishment or concern, which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides or allows performers, models, actors, actresses, employees or independent contractors to appear in any place semi-nude or in attire which does not opaquely cover specified anatomical areas.

        In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct shall be considered. Substantial conduct includes any use which has twenty-five (25) percent of its floor area, stock-in-trade, entertainment/performance, or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this section as characterizing an adult-oriented business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct.

        2.     Adult-oriented business includes, but shall not be limited to, the following:

        a.     Adult Arcade. An “adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing, devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

        b.     Adult Bookstore. An “adult bookstore” is an establishment which has, as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area, or revenue derived from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

        i.      Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;

        ii.     Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or

        iii.    Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities, to cause sexual excitement.

        c.     Adult Cabaret. An “adult cabaret” is a bar, nightclub, lounge, restaurant, juice bar or similar establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct any type of live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, other photographic reproductions or other oral, written, or visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas, including, dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers who appear semi-nude and expose specified anatomical areas of their bodies or simulate or engage in specified sexual activities.

        d.     Adult Motel. An “adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

        i.      Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions or other medium, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

        ii.     Offers or advertises a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period; or

        iii.    Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours in a twenty-four (24) hour period.

        e.     Adult Motion Picture Theater. An “adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

        f.      Adult Tanning Salon. An “adult tanning salon” or “parlor” means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons, employees, or independent contractors of the establishment appear semi-nude or expose specified anatomical areas. Adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude, semi-nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where the employees or independent contractors thereof are nude, semi-nude or expose specified anatomical areas.

        g.     Adult Theater. An “adult theater” is any place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure, partially or entirely used for live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure is used for presenting matter characterized by an emphasis on simulating, pantomiming, exposing, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, on-going performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or by specified anatomical areas. An adult theater shall not mean a bona fide theater.

        h.     Reserved.

        i.      Nude Model Studio. A “nude model studio” means any place or premises where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any public agency or school licensed under state law to provide art education, while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license.

        j.      Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall. A “sex supermarket/sex mini-mall” means the establishment or operation of more than one type of adult-oriented business or use as defined in this chapter within the same building.

        k.     Sexual Encounter Center. A “sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:

        i.      Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same or opposite sex when either or both of them are nude, semi-nude or displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas; or

        ii.     Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude.

        l.      Sexual Novelty Store. A “sexual novelty store” is an establishment having, as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area, or a majority of its revenue derived from goods which are replicas of, or which simulate specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas, or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities, to cause sexual excitement, including, but not limited to, dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas.

        m.    Sexually-Oriented Business. A “sexually-oriented business,” is any business not otherwise defined or provided for herein where employees, independent contractors, or patrons appear in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or expose specified anatomical areas or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas located, or proposed to be located, within the city.

        n.     Theater. A “theater” means a theater, concert hall, or similar establishment that is primarily devoted to the production of artistic dance, literary, dramatic, or comedic performances on stage. If any such performance depicts, exposes, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the theater shall be an adult-oriented business unless one or more of the following is true:

        i.      In every single regular performance, any emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas is on an occasional or incidental basis; or

        ii.     The performance is primarily devoted to a verbal presentation and the spoken emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas is not a significant portion of the entire verbal display; or

        iii.    The performance is primarily devoted to a visual presentation and the emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas is not intended to appeal to prurient or sexual interests.

        “Couch dance” or “couch dancing” also includes “chair dancing” and “table dancing” and means an employee or independent contractor of an adult-oriented business intentionally touching any patron while appearing in a state of nudity, semi-nudity or engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or while simulating any specified sexual activity. A couch dance also includes an employee or an independent contractor of an adult-oriented business performing off-stage and within ten feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or while simulating any specified sexual activity.

        “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:

        1.     The opening or commencement of an adult-oriented business as a new business;

        2.     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business;

        3.     The addition of any adult-oriented business to any other existing adult-oriented business or to another existing business, with or without expansion of floor area;

        4.     The relocation of any adult-oriented business; or

        5.     The expansion or enlargement of the adult-oriented business premises by ten percent or more of the existing floor area.

        “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.

        “Person” means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations, limited liability companies, joint ventures, or any other form of business organization or group(s).

        “Private viewing area” means an area or areas in an adult-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be established, maintained, or authorized, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls or other enclosures creating a private viewing area.

        “Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast.

        “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas:

        1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or,

        2.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

        “Specific criminal act” also means specified criminal acts and includes sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; convictions involving the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. Specified criminal acts shall exclude those acts which are authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900.

        “Specified sexual activities” means and includes all the following:

        1.     The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts;

        2.     Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;

        3.     Human masturbation, actual or simulated;

        4.     The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon him or herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast;

        5.     Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal; or

        6.     Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (5), above.

        “Straddle dance” or “straddle dancing” has the same meaning as couch dance or couch dancing as defined in this section. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.014 License required.
        A.    A person commits a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with this code, if he or she owns, operates, or manages an adult-oriented business within the city without a valid adult-oriented business license issued by the city for the particular type of business.

        B.     1. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises.

        2.     At a minimum, the application form shall include the following:

        a.     The applicant’s full name and any other names or aliases used by the individual during the last five years:

        i.      If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall provide the corporate name and state of incorporation as well as provide the name and address each of the officers, directors, and controlling stockholders owning, not less than ten percent of the stock of the corporation;

        ii.     If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall provide the name and address of each of the partners, including limited partners;

        b.     Age, date, and place of birth of the applicant;

        c.     Height, weight, and color of hair and eyes of the applicant;

        d.     Present business address and telephone number (a post office box or a postal annex address is not sufficient to meet this requirement);

        e.     Exposed business address and telephone number (a post office box or a postal annex address is not sufficient to meet this requirement);

        f.      Present residence address and telephone number of the applicant;

        g.     State driver’s license or identification number of the applicant;

        h.     Social Security number of the applicant;

        i.      Evidence that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

        j.      A statement describing the business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;

        k.     A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended regarding a business in this state or anywhere else. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application;

        l.      A statement listing all criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere for a specified criminal act, except those which have been expunged or sealed by court order, or authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600—900, and the disposition of all arrests of the applicant, individual, or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter, for two years prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall include identification of all such violations, stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of each conviction or other disposition; identifying the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court providing court identifying case numbers or docket numbers;

        m.    Attached to the application form as provided above, two color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual’s face, and the individual’s fingerprints on a form provided by the entity providing law enforcement services to the city. For persons not residing in the city, the photographs may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. The application form shall be signed under penalty of perjury; and,

        n.     Payment of the application fee, if any, as set by resolution of the city council.

        3.     Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a public record under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which information is personal, private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or Social Security number, and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality, or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above.

        C.     The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the city and by the Santa Barbara County fire department. Such inspections shall occur within twenty (20) days of the application being found or deemed complete, otherwise the requirement that the premises be inspected shall be waived.

        D.    Any person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business must sign the application for the license under penalty of perjury as the applicant.

        E.     The fact that a person possesses any other valid license issued by the city or the county does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business license. A person who operates an adult-oriented business and possesses any other city or county license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter and all city codes as well as the requirements and provisions of such other license.

        F.     Any existing adult-oriented business which currently exists as a lawful use on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective shall have six months from the effective date of this chapter to obtain a license hereunder. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.016 Issuance of license.
        A.    The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue or deny the issuance of a license as provided below to an applicant within twenty (20) days after receipt of a properly completed and executed application. The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the license unless he/she finds one or more of the following to be true:

        1.     An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;

        2.     An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of fees owed by the applicant in relation to the adult-oriented business, which is the subject of the application;

        3.     An applicant has failed to completely fill out the application for the license, has filed an incomplete application packet, or has provided materially false information on the application;

        4.     The license fee required by this chapter, if any, has not been paid;

        5.     The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business has not been approved by the city and the Santa Barbara County fire department, as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances subject to Section 5.06.014C this chapter;

        6.     The applicant is operating the adult-oriented business without a license in violation of Section 5.06.014 of this chapter;

        7.     That an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which:

        a.     Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering;

        b.     Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering;

        c.     Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; convictions of any such offense occurring within twenty-four (24) hours prior to the application;

        d.     The applicant is on parole or probation in connection with a conviction of a felony or misdemeanor offense, for a specified criminal act.

        8.     The premises contain one or more private viewing areas.

        The city’s decision to grant or deny license shall not be based upon information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600—900.

        B.     The city manager, or designee thereof, shall, immediately upon receipt of an application, refer the application to the designated head of the law enforcement entity providing police services to the city for an investigation. The results of such investigation shall be returned to the city manager within ten days of the receipt of a complete application by the city. In the event the results of the investigation are not available within said ten-day period, the designated head of the law enforcement entity providing police services to the city shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this chapter, issue a status report on the issuance of the adult-oriented business license, whereupon, the city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the same within twenty (20) days of receipt of a complete application by the city. In the event the city manager fails to issue or deny the license within said twenty (20) day period, the license shall be issued by the city subject to all other laws and city ordinances or regulations. Should the information obtained pursuant to the investigation vary in a material degree from that set forth by the applicant in the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license in accordance with Sections 5.06.024 to 5.06.026 of this chapter.

        C.     The license shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.

        D.    The city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license. A written notice of denial shall include the findings upon which the denial is based. The decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, to deny issuance of the license shall be final subject to appeal pursuant to Section 5.06.017. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.017 Appeals of denials.
        If the application for an adult-oriented business license is denied by the city manager, such denial is subject to judicial review according to the expedited provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.018 Fee.
        The initial application fee, the initial license fee, the annual renewal fee, and all appeal fees for an adult-oriented business license shall, at the discretion of the city council, be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.020 Inspection.
        An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city and/or the Santa Barbara County sheriffs department, Santa Barbara County department of health, the Santa Barbara County fire department, the city building and safety department, and the community development department to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter at any time the premises is open for business, provided reasonable and normal business operations shall not be interfered with and the inspection is conducted in the same manner as an inspection for other businesses. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.022 Expiration and renewal of license.
        Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application upon penalty of perjury that there has been no material change in the business or its operation. Applications for renewal shall be filed at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date; the filing of a complete application for renewal shall extend the license until a final decision is reached by the city. The city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the license or schedule an administrative hearing on the application for renewal within ten days of receipt by the city of a complete renewal application. If in reviewing the application for renewal of the license, the city manager, or designee thereof, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within twenty (20) days at which time the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, to deny renewal of the license shall be subject to judicial review according to the expedited provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.024 Suspension and revocation hearings.
        The city manager or designee or the city council may initiate proceedings to consider the suspension or revocation of an existing adult-oriented business license as may be necessary to assure the preservation of the public health and safety. Such proceedings shall include a hearing wherein the license holder is provided the opportunity to refute any evidence or findings of the city. If the evidence presented at the hearing establishes that one or more of the conditions exist as set forth in Section 5.06.025 then suspension shall be ordered; and, if the conditions set forth in Section 5.06.026 exist, then revocation of the adult-oriented business license shall be ordered. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.025 Suspension.
        An adult-oriented business license shall be suspended if the evidence at the hearing establishes any one or more of the following conditions exist:

        A.    The conduct of the adult-oriented business does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s fire, building, zoning, or health and safety codes; or the design and performance standards set forth in this chapter are violated or not complied with by the adult-oriented business;

        B.     There was not a responsible person over eighteen (18) years of age on the premises to act as a manager at all times during which the adult-oriented business was open;

        C.     The licensee, manager, any agent, employee, or independent contractor of the licensee or manager knows or should have known that the adult-oriented business, including the parking lot thereof, has been used as a place where sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, prostitution or other lewd acts occur or have occurred;

        D.    The licensee, his or her employees, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder or manager has violated any provision of this chapter or this code;

        E.     The licensee or manager has failed to remove all materials harmful to minors, including, but not limited to, wrappers, covers, labels, packaging, bags, and magazines that have been discarded upon the grounds within one thousand (1,000) feet of the premises of the adult-oriented business;

        F.     The adult-oriented business is being operated, managed, or conducted in violation of any condition of approval of the adult-oriented business license;

        G.    The licensee, manager, any agent, employee, or independent contractor of the licensee or manager refused to allow the lawful inspection of the premises by a city inspector or official, the law enforcement agency providing police services to the city, the Santa Barbara fire department, city code enforcement officer, director of community development, or Santa Barbara County health department or any designee thereof;

        H.    The licensee, manager, any agent, employee or independent contractor of the licensee or manager knowingly permitted gambling on the premises;

        I.      The manager or person acting in that capacity was found to be intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled substance while on duty at the adult-oriented business;

        J.      The adult-oriented business is operating in violation of the permitted hours of operation.

        The suspension shall be for a period of up to thirty (30) days or until the violation is corrected, whichever is longer. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.026 Revocation.
        An adult-oriented business license shall be revoked and no new adult-oriented business license may be requested by the licensee for any location within the city or by any other person for that same location within a one-year period following revocation if the evidence presented at the hearing on the revocation of the license establishes that one or more of the following conditions exists:

        A.    The licensee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license or permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city’s law enforcement agency, county health department, or any other city department or office in connection with the operation of the business;

        B.     The licensee, manager, any agent, employee or independent contractor of the licensee or manager has been convicted of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of the adult-oriented business;

        C.     The licensee, manager, any employee, or independent contractor of the licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this chapter, allows any minor into the establishment, permits the use of the facilities by a minor, and/or sells adult-oriented materials to a minor and/or material harmful to minors to a minor;

        D.    The approved adult-oriented business has been expanded, or partially or wholly converted to another adult-oriented business without the required city approvals and permits;

        E.     There have been two suspensions of an adult-oriented business license within a one-year period;

        F.     The licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this chapter and state and federal law allowed the sale of controlled substances or allowed acts of prostitution on or about the premises;

        G.    The licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this chapter, has allowed, suffered, or permitted waiter(s) or waitress(es) to appear nude or semi-nude or expose or display specified anatomical areas on the premises;

        H.    The licensee or manager continued to operate the adult-oriented business during a suspension period of the adult-oriented business license;

        I.      The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the required time period has not yet elapsed;

        J.      That on two or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees or independent contractors of the adult-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;

        K.    The licensee or manager is operating more than one adult-oriented business in the same building;

        L.     The adult-oriented business contains one or more private viewing areas as defined in this chapter; or

        M.    The adult-oriented business has failed to provide, inaccurately provided, or failed to keep current the street address of the principal place of business or the location of any adult-oriented business in the city in accordance with Section 5.06.014B of this code. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.028 Appeal of suspension or revocation.
        If the city manager, or designee thereof, suspends or revokes a license, the city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular first-class mail, written notice of the action. The decision to suspend or revoke the license shall be effective twenty (20) days after the notice of the decision has been deposited in the U.S. mail. Such decision to suspend or revoke a license is subject to judicial review according to the expedited provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.029 Status of license during pendency of denial of renewal, suspension, revocation or appeal thereof.
        During the administrative and/or judicial process relating to a denial of a renewal, a suspension or a revocation of an adult-oriented business license, or an appeal thereof, the licensee shall be allowed to operate until a final decision has been issued by a trial court or the time for filing an appeal of an administrative decision of the city has expired. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000)

 

5.06.030 Transfer of license.
        Any license shall be immediately void if the licensee attempts to transfer the license to another person or location. The attempted transfer of the adult-oriented business license includes the transfer of ownership or control of the adult-oriented business by any of the following:

        A.    The sale, lease, or sublease of an adult-oriented business;

        B.     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or

        C.     The establishment of a trust, gift, or similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.032 Prohibited conduct at adult-oriented businesses.
        A.    No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a license or permit has been issued under this code, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing any employee or independent contractor:

        1.     To engage in a live showing of a specified anatomical area;

        2.     To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

        3.     To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;

        4.     To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business while appearing in a state of semi-nudity or simulating a specified sexual activity;

        5.     To voluntarily be within ten feet of any patron while appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or simulating a specified sexual activity;

        6.     To solicit, request, or accept any gratuity, pay, or any other form of consideration from a patron on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

        B.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee or independent contractor who is appearing in a state of semi-nudity engaging in or simulating, a specified sexual activity at the adult-oriented business.

        C.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee or independent contractor at the business who is appearing in a state of semi-nudity engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

        D.    No person shall directly pay, offer to pay, or otherwise seek to provide a gratuity, pay, or any other form of consideration to a performer at an adult-oriented business. No person shall use an intermediary, such as a nonperforming entertainer or other employee or independent contractor to offer, provide or otherwise pay a gratuity or other form of consideration to a performer at an adult-oriented business.

        E.     No waiter(s) or waitress(es) employed at an adult-oriented business shall appear on the premises thereof in the nude, semi-nude, or display or expose specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

 

5.06.034 Injunction.
        A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 5.06.032 of this chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. (Ord. 00-02 § 2, 2000: Ord. 00-01 § 3, 2000)

Chapter 5.10 CARD GAMES
5.10.010 Business prohibited.
        It is unlawful, in the city, to operate or engage in the business of conducting or operating card games or card tables for hire or for a consideration. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 5.14 MOBILEHOME RENT CONTROL
5.14.010 Purpose.
        A growing shortage of housing units resulting in a critically low vacancy rate and rapidly rising and exorbitant rents exploiting this shortage constitutes serious housing problems affecting a substantial portion of those city residents who reside in rental housing. These conditions endanger the public health and welfare of the city. Especially acute is the problem of low vacancy rates and rapidly rising and exorbitant rents in mobilehome parks in the city. Because of such factors and the high cost of moving mobilehomes, the potential for damage resulting therefrom, requirements relating to the installation of mobilehomes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation, the lack of alternative homesites for mobilehome residents and the substantial investment of mobilehome owners in such homes, the city council finds and declares it necessary to protect the owners and occupiers of mobilehomes from unreasonable rents while at the same time recognizing the need for mobilehome park owners to receive a fair return on their investment and rent increases sufficient to cover their increased costs. The purpose of this chapter is to alleviate the hardship caused by this problem by imposing rent controls in mobilehome parks in the city. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.020 Definitions.
        The following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:

        A.    “Capital improvement” is any addition or betterment made to a mobilehome park which consists of more than mere repairs or replacement of existing facilities or improvements and which has a useful life of five or more years.

        B.     “Capital expense” is a repair or replacement of existing facilities or improvements which has an expected life of more than one year.

        C.     “Homeowner” is an owner of a mobilehome in a mobilehome park, responsible for paying rent to management.

        D.    “Homeowner majority” is fifty (50) percent plus one vote or more of the number of votes homeowners of a mobilehome park are entitled to cast at the time of voting. A homeowner is entitled to cast one vote for each mobilehome site that he or she is renting in the mobilehome park and that is occupied by a mobilehome; provided, however, that no homeowner who is a party to a lease is entitled to cast a vote for the site that is the subject of the agreement. The total number of votes homeowners are entitled to cast equals the total number of mobilehome sites rented, occupied by mobilehomes, and not subject to a lease at the time of voting.

        E.     “Lease” is an agreement between management and a homeowner establishing the terms and conditions of a tenancy and providing for a fixed rent and a fixed term exceeding three months.

        F.     “Lessee” is the owner of a mobilehome in a mobilehome park, responsible for paying rent to management under a lease.

        G.    “Management” is the owner of a mobilehome park or an agent or representative authorized to act on his or her behalf in connection with matters relating to a tenancy in the park.

        H.    “Meet and confer” is an informal meeting between authorized representatives of management and homeowners of the same park for the purpose of discussing a proposed increase in rent and the basis for it.

        I.      “Mobilehome” is a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway, whether commonly referred to as a “mobilehome” or as a “trailer.”

        J.      “Mobilehome park” is an area of land where two or more mobilehome sites are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

        K.    “Once a year” is once every twelve (12) months.

        L.     “Park” is a mobilehome park.

        M.    “Rent” is any consideration demanded or received in connection with the use or occupancy of any mobilehome site. Rent does not include charges for the use of coin-operated washing machines and dryers nor for storage facilities off the mobilehome site.

        N.    “Rent schedule” is a statement of the rent charged for each tenancy in a mobilehome park.

        O.    “Services” means those facilities which enhance the use of the mobilehome site, including, but not limited to, repairs, replacements, maintenance, water, utilities, security devices, security patrols, storage, bath and laundry facilities and privileges, janitorial services, refuse removal and recreational and other facilities in common areas of the mobilehome park.

        P.     “Tenancy” is the right of a tenant to the use of a site within a mobilehome park on which to locate, maintain and occupy a mobilehome, site improvements and accessory structures for human habitation, including the use of the services and facilities of the park. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.030 Exemptions.
        This chapter applies as of November 21, 1979, to all mobilehome tenancies in mobilehome parks located in the city, except:

        A.    Tenancies used primarily for commercial purposes.

        B.     Tenancies in mobilehome parks of four spaces, or fewer, where one space is occupied by the owner.

        C.     Tenancies in mobilehome parks, the construction of which began after the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, that such exemption shall continue in effect for only five years after such construction began.

        D.    Tenancies which a government agency owns, manages, or operates.

        E.     Tenancies as to which there is no rental agreement and which both the management and the tenant do not expect to exceed three months.

        F.     Tenancies the rental of which are subsidized by any governmental agency, if federal or state law or regulations pertaining thereto specifically exempt such spaces from rent regulation.

        G.    Tenancies governed by a lease between management and homeowner. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.040 Arbitration.
        A.    Arbitration shall be used to fix maximum rent increase schedules for mobilehome tenancies under this chapter, following a petition by a homeowner majority. The method of selection, appointment and compensation of an arbitrator, and hearing procedures shall be in accordance with the mobilehome rent control ordinance rules for hearings and amendments thereto as approved by the city council.

        B.     The arbitrator shall set and adjust rents in accordance with the standards set out in this chapter.

        C.     The real property division manager of the department of public works shall serve as clerk under this chapter. The duties and responsibilities of the clerk shall be stated in the rules for hearings.

        D.    The rules for hearing shall provide for the collection of fees or costs from the parties not to exceed the actual costs of administration and of arbitration services. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.050 Increases in maximum rent schedule.
        A.    Management’s notice of an increase in the maximum rent schedule shall:

        1.     Comply with state law; and

        2.     Indicate whether or not the percentage of noticed increase in relation to the previous maximum rent schedule, less allowed costs for capital improvements and/or capital expenses, if any, is in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of the percentage by which the most recently published edition of the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim area, all items, Base Index 1967=100, shows that such index has increased during the immediately preceding twelve (12) months for which said index has been published at the time notice of said increase was given or since the last rent increase (hereinafter called “in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI”); and

        3.     Where the noticed increase is in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI, management shall:

        a.     Itemize amounts for increased operating costs; any capital expenses incurred in the prior year to be undertaken for which reimbursement is sought, hereinafter “new” capital expenses; any capital expenses allowed in prior years but not fully reimbursed, hereinafter “old” capital expenses; any offset against new or old capital expenses; and capital improvements.

        b.     Set a meet and confer session. The procedure for meet and confer shall be set out in the rules for hearing.

        B.     Homeowners may, no later than forty-five (45) days after the date of notice, file a petition for hearing to contest the proposed increase but only if the increase is in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI.

        C.     The hearing shall be set by the clerk, held before an arbitrator, and governed by the provisions of this chapter and of the rules for hearing.

        D.    The arbitrator shall deny a hearing on a noticed increase:

        1.     Where management has not waived its right to object and proves by a preponderance of evidence that:

        a.     The homeowners’ petition for hearing was not supported by a homeowner majority or was untimely filed. For purposes of this determination, management may require the testimony of the clerk but may not require the production of homeowner’s petitions or copies thereof, except that said petitions may be examined by the arbitrator; or

        b.     The noticed increase is not in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI; or

        2.     Where no homeowners’ representatives attended meet and confer.

        E.     The arbitrator shall deny an increase in the maximum rent schedule where homeowners prove by a preponderance of evidence that:

        1.     Management has previously increased the maximum rent schedule such that the effective date of the proposed increase will be less than twelve (12) months after the effective date of the previous increase; or

        2.     Management has failed to provide a meet and confer session.

        F.     If the hearing and/or increase is not denied pursuant to the foregoing paragraphs, the arbitrator shall consider all relevant factors to the extent evidence thereof is introduced by either party or produced by either party on request of the arbitrator.

        Such relevant factors may include, but are not limited to, increases in management’s ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating expenses, insurance and repairs; increases in property taxes and fees and expenses in connection with operating the park; capital improvements; capital expenses; increases in services, furnishings, living space, equipment or other amenities; and expenses incidental to the purchase of the park except that evidence as to the amounts of principal and interest on loans and depreciation shall not be considered.

        G.    The arbitrator shall automatically allow a rent increase of seventy-five (75) percent of the CPI increase (hereinafter “automatic increase”).

        H.    The arbitrator may allow an increase in excess of the automatic increase for increased costs where increases in expenses and expenditures of management justify such increase.

        I.      To determine the amount of any increase in excess of the automatic increase, the arbitrator shall:

        1.     First, grant one-half of the automatic increase to management as a just and reasonable return on investment. The arbitrator shall have no discretion to award additional amounts as a just and reasonable return on investment.

        2.     Next, grant one-half of the automatic increase to management to cover increased operating costs. The arbitrator shall have no discretion to award less than this amount for operating costs.

        3.     Next, add an amount to cover operating costs, if any, in excess of one-half of the automatic increase. The arbitrator shall have discretion to add such amounts as are justified by the evidence and otherwise permitted by this chapter.

        4.     Next, add an amount to cover new capital expenses. Where one-half of the automatic increase is more than the actual increase in operating costs for the year then ending, the arbitrator shall offset the difference against any increases for new capital expenses.

        5.     Next, add an amount to cover old capital expenses. Where one-half of the automatic increase is more than the actual increase in operating costs for the year then ending, the arbitrator shall offset the difference against any increase for old capital expenses unless such difference has already been used to offset an increase for a new capital expense or another old capital expense. The arbitrator shall have discretion to review operating costs and the sufficiency of any offset, but not to redetermine the right of management to reimbursement for an old capital expense.

        6.     Finally, add an amount to cover increased costs for capital improvements, if any. The arbitrator shall have discretion to add such amount as is justified by the evidence and otherwise permitted by this chapter.

        J.      The total increase shall not exceed the amount in management’s notice of rent increase.

        K.    Evidence as to costs to be incurred prior to the next rent increase may be considered only where such evidence shows that these costs are definite and certain.

        L.     Increases in the maximum rent schedule set by the arbitrator shall become effective as of the effective date in the notice or rent increase. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.060 Capital improvements and capital expenses.
        A.    Capital Improvements.

        1.     The cost of capital improvements incurred or proposed, including reasonable financing costs, may be passed on to homeowners at the time of an annual increase:

        a.     After written approval of a homeowner majority without hearing; or

        b.     After failure of homeowners to contest a rent increase which includes costs for capital improvements; or

        c.     After approval at hearing.

        2.     Any notice of a rent increase which is in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI and includes costs for capital improvements shall contain a payment plan showing the cost of the improvement per mobilehome space and the time period required to amortize the cost of the improvement, e.g., ten dollars per space for seventy-two (72) months.

        3.     Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the cost of capital improvements required by a change in governmental law or regulation may be automatically passed on to homeowners at the time of an annual increase. Any hearing on such costs shall be solely for the purpose of determining whether management’s plan for compliance or for recoupment of costs is unreasonable if so alleged by homeowners.

        4.     Management shall deduct increases allowed for capital improvements at the time which was specified by the arbitrator, or if no time was so specified, then at the time specified by the payment plan.

        a.     If management fails to automatically deduct such increase, then such increase shall be considered an increase in the maximum rent schedule and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, amount and frequency of increase.

        b.     If the arbitrator finds that management failed to deduct the increase, the arbitrator shall order management to credit such amount to each homeowner retroactive to the date the increase should have been deducted together with interest at the legal rate.

        5.     If management fails to begin construction of a capital improvement within six months after approval of the cost of the capital improvement, then management shall discontinue the increase for the capital improvement and shall credit any amounts collected to each homeowner. If management fails to automatically discontinue such increase, then such increase shall be considered an increase in the maximum rent schedule and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, amount and frequency of increase.

        B.     Capital Expenses.

        1.     The cost of capital expenses incurred or proposed, including reasonable financing costs, may be passed on to homeowners at the time of an annual increase.

        2.     Any notice of a rent increase which is in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of CPI and includes costs for capital expenses shall contain a payment plan which shows the amount needed per month to amortize the cost of the capital item(s) over the useful life of the item(s). Payment plans for old capital expenses are not subject to modification by the arbitrator unless mutually agreed to by management and homeowners.

        3.     Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the cost of capital improvements required by a change in governmental law or regulation may be automatically passed on to homeowners at the time of an annual increase. Any hearing on such costs shall be solely for the purpose of determining whether management’s plan for compliance or for recoupment of costs is unreasonable, if so alleged by homeowners.

        4.     Management shall deduct increases allowed for capital expenses at the time which was specified by the arbitrator, or if no time was so specified, then at the time specified by the payment plan.

        a.     If management fails to automatically discontinue such increase, then such increase shall be considered an increase in the maximum rent schedule and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, amount and frequency of increase.

        b.     If the arbitrator finds that management failed to discontinue the increase, the arbitrator shall order management to credit such amount to each homeowner retroactive to the date the increase should have been deducted together with interest at the legal rate.

        5.     If management fails to begin construction of a capital expense item within six months after approval of the cost of the capital expense, then management shall discontinue the increase for the capital expense and shall credit any amount collected to each homeowner. If management fails to automatically discontinue such increase, then such increase shall be considered an increase in the maximum rent schedule and shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, amount and frequency of increase.

        C.     Whenever costs for capital improvements and/or capital expenses are included in rent, management shall provide each homeowner at least once a year a statement showing the following:

        1.     The amount of rent without charges for capital improvements and/or capital expenses; and

        2.     The monthly amount for each capital improvement and/or capital expense;

        3.     The date by which the charge for each capital improvement and/or capital expense will be fully amortized;

        4.     If this information is provided in an annual notice of rent increase, an additional statement is not required. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.070 Leases.
        Nothing in this chapter shall operate to restrict the right of a homeowner and management to enter into a lease. During the term of the lease, rent shall be that amount agreed to by management and lessee under the terms of the lease. Prior to the lease and following the expiration or termination of the lease or any continuance thereof, the rent shall be in accordance with the maximum rent schedule for the same, or if there is none, similar tenancies of the same park. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.080 Collection and frequency of increases.
        A.    Management may increase the maximum rent increase schedule no more than once a year for tenancies not subject to a lease. Assuming proper notice, management may collect increases as of the effective date of increase specified in the notice.

        B.     Where a homeowner majority has petitioned for a hearing on an increase and the hearing is to be held after the effective date of increase, management may collect the increase pending the arbitrator’s decision; however, any portion of an increase in excess of seventy-five (75) percent of the CPI increase shall be placed in an interest-bearing account in the name of management as trustee for the homeowners of that park.

        1.     Where the arbitrator approves the full amount of noticed increase, management shall be entitled to retain the full amount in the interest-bearing account together with accrued interest, if any.

        2.     Where the arbitrator approves an increase in an amount less than the amount noticed, management shall be entitled to the full amount in the interest-bearing account subject to a homeowner credit against future rent. The amount of the credit shall be the difference between the amount deposited in the interest-bearing account and the amount approved, plus a proportional amount of the interest, if any, prorated among the tenancies. Management shall notify each homeowner in writing of the amount of credit.

        C.     Where a new maximum rent increase schedule has been set by the city council upon review or by the arbitrator upon rehearing, adjustments in rent paid shall be made in accordance with subsection (B)(1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.090 Cost savings.
        If management reduces or eliminates any service to a homeowner in effect on the date the ordinance codified in this section became effective, management shall reduce each homeowner’s rent by his or her proportionate share of the cost savings due to such reduction or elimination. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.100 Subleases and assignments.
        Management may make reasonable rules regarding subleases and assignments and may increase the maximum rent schedule during the duration of the sublease or assignment by an amount not to exceed ten percent.

        A.    This increase is in addition to other increases authorized under this chapter and is not subject to the once-a-year limitation of Section 5.14.080(A).

        B.     After an increase under this section, further increases shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter.

        C.     After the termination of the sublease or assignment, the maximum rent increase schedule shall be reduced to the level it would have been but for the sublease or assignment, provided that the owner tenant resumes occupancy. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.110 Retaliation.
        Management shall not retaliate against any homeowner because of his or her assertion or exercise of any rights provided by this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.120 Penalties.
        A.    Any wilful violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.

        B.     Any homeowner aggrieved by the wilful violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may sue thereon and recover actual damages therefor, plus a civil penalty not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.130 Judicial intervention.
        A.    Should the operation or enforcement of this chapter, as amended, be stayed or temporarily restrained or preliminarily enjoined by a court of competent jurisdiction, petitions may continue to be filed as authorized herein and will be heard as provided herein on the discharge of such stay or temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, to the extent permitted by the court. The time in which to decide such petitions shall be extended by the time such stay, order or injunction was in effect.

        B.     Should any decision of a mobilehome rent control board be set aside and remanded, the petition on which such decision was based shall be reheard by the arbitrator and a new decision made within ninety (90) days of the date the previous decision was set aside, excluding from the computation of such period any time during which this chapter, as amended, was stayed, temporarily restrained or preliminarily enjoined.

        1.     The new decision shall become effective as if it were the original decision subject to Section 5.14.050.

        2.     Any rent paid by homeowners in excess of that approved by the subsequent decision shall be credited to homeowners in accordance with Section 5.14.080(B)(2) insofar as possible.

        3.     Any rent paid by homeowners less than that approved by the subsequent decision shall be prorated among the tenancies. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.140 Increase upon sale.
        A.    Except as provided below, a “sale” is a change of ownership of a mobilehome whether or not for value.

        B.     A change of ownership which, if a mobilehome were real property, would be excluded from reassessment under California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 62 and 63 as the same exist on the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in this section or as later amended is not a sale pursuant to this section.

        C.     Management may increase the maximum rent schedule, less amounts for capital improvements and capital expenses, if any, by an amount not to exceed ten percent upon the sale of a mobilehome in accordance with the provisions of this section and subject to the following:

        1.     This increase may be made on the first sale following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

        2.     Increases may be made following subsequent sales provided that at least sixty (60) months shall have elapsed between that sale and the previous sale.

        D.    This increase is in addition to other increases under this section and is not subject to the once-a-year limitation of Section 5.14.080(A).

        E.     After an increase under this section, further increases shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.14.150 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 5.18 BUSINESS LICENSES
Article I. Private Handbill Distribution Systems
5.18.010 Title.
        This article shall be known and referred to as the handbill regulations of the city of Buellton. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the distribution of handbills of a commercial advertising nature. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.030 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        A.    Handbill. Any sheet or sheets of paper, of a commercial advertising nature, bearing printed or photographic material and passed out by hand. This definition, however, shall not include any newspaper. This definition also shall not include any printed matter solicited by the occupants of the premises to which delivery is made.

        B.     Person. Such private handbill distribution system and not its employees or agents.

        C.     Private Handbill Distribution System or Private Postal System. That business which has been determined by the finance director to be engaged in distributing handbills of a commercial advertising nature in the city. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.040 Regulations generally.
        In addition to the other sections of this chapter, a private handbill distribution system engaged in business in the city shall be subject to the following conditions:

        A.    It shall be bonded by a bonding company licensed to do business in the state. It shall deposit cash or a bond from a surety acceptable to and approved by the city council in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The terms of the bond shall include that the applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of this code, the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of handbill distribution systems. The bond shall insure against negligent or intentional harm caused to others by its employees or agents and shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers and employees from and against all claims, liability, suits, damages, costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, losses and expenses in any manner resulting from, arising out of, or connected with the conduct of the business of handbill distribution.

        B.     It shall cause its agents and employees, when distributing handbills, to collect all visible material previously distributed by such private postal system.

        C.     It shall cause its agents and employees to refrain from making deliveries at known vacant buildings.

        D.    It shall cause its agents and employees to deliver the handbills only by placing them on the doorknobs or otherwise harmlessly attaching them to the building. It shall not leave such handbills attached to a mailbox or mailbox post. It shall not leave such handbills in the open and unsecured in a way that the handbills can be scattered by the elements.

        E.     It shall cause its agents and employees to refrain from delivering handbills to any occupant who objects to such distribution and gives reasonable notice of such objection to the distributor.

        F.     No person shall distribute any handbill which does not have printed on the cover or face thereof or on the container thereof the name, address and phone number of the private handbill distribution system along with the following statement:

 

“For cancellation of this free subscription, telephone the private handbill distribution system and so advise.”

 

        In addition, the person, firm or organization causing the handbill to be distributed shall be clearly set forth herein. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.050 Application—Fees—Issuance—Term.
        A.    Every person who wishes to conduct a private handbill distribution system in the city shall apply to the finance director for a license. The applicant shall comply with Section 5.18.040(A) and pay the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which sum is fixed as the annual license fee, prior to receiving approval from the finance director.

        B.     Upon approval of the finance director of an application for such license, the finance director shall issue to such applicant such license. Before commencing the conduct of such business, the application shall be approved and such license shall be issued by the finance director. This license is valid for a period of one year unless revoked pursuant to Section 5.18.060.

        C.     Every person carrying on the business of handbill distribution pursuant to a private handbill distribution system permit, issued pursuant to this chapter, shall pay the license fee required by subsection A of this section. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.060 Revocation.
        In the event that such private handbill distribution system or its agents or employees violate any of the conditions specified under Section 5.18.040, the city council shall have the authority to revoke its permit forthwith. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

5.18.070 Authorization of additional regulations.
        In addition to the regulations contained in this article, the city council may, from time to time by resolution, adopt additional regulations establishing fees for permits hereunder, and otherwise providing control of the distribution of handbills, which resolution shall have the full force and effect of law. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article II. Bingo Games
5.18.080 Bingo games.
        This article is adopted pursuant to Section 19, of Article IV of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, as amended, in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions set out in this article, and in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, as amended. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.090 Definitions.
        Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

        A.    “Bingo” is a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. It shall also include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes; provided, that the winning cards shall not be known prior to a bingo game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the game; and provided further, that all such cards shall bear the legend “for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.”

        B.     “Qualifying organization” is an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701L of the Revenue and Taxation Code and mobile home park associations and senior citizens associations.

        C.     “Minor” is any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.100 License required.
        It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo games in the city unless such person is a member of a qualifying organization pursuant to the provisions of applicable state law, particularly Penal Code Section 326.5 and any successors or amendments thereto; and further pursuant to the provisions of this article and to the terms of any license issued thereunder, not in conflict with applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.110 Applications.
        Applications for a license to operate a bingo game shall be made to the finance director on forms prescribed by the finance director and shall be filed not less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. The application shall be signed by a responsible officer of the organization making the application for a bingo license. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following:

        A.    A list of all members who will operate the bingo game, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description and driver’s license number.

        B.     The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games.

        C.     Proof that the organization is a qualifying organization as defined by Section 5.18.090(B). (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.120 Term of license and fees.
        A.    The term of a bingo license is one year and may be renewed for a period of one year any time within one year from its date of issuance upon application therefor. Any change in the name or names of the persons who will conduct a bingo game licensed hereunder, or in the location where bingo games are to be conducted hereunder shall be reported to the finance director who may conduct such investigation as he or she deems appropriate in connection with such changes.

        B.     The fee for a bingo license and the fee for a renewal thereof shall be as prescribed by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such fees shall not exceed the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each license or each renewal, however. The appropriate fee shall accompany the submission of each application. If an application for a license or renewal is denied, one-half of any license or renewal fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.130 Application investigation.
        A.    Upon receipt of an application for a license, the finance director may send copies of such application to any office or department which the finance director deems appropriate in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant.

        B.     The finance director and every officer or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the members of the applicant to be authorized to conduct bingo games, and may examine the premises to be used for the bingo games.

        C.     Upon approval of any application for a bingo license, the finance director shall issue the license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.140 License not transferable.
        Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific qualifying organization to conduct bingo games at a specific location and shall in no event be transferable to another organization, nor from the location specified in the license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.150 Limitations.
        The following limitations shall apply to all bingo games:

        A.    A qualifying organization shall conduct bingo games only on property owned or leased by it or property whose use is donated to the organization. Furthermore, bingo games shall be conducted only on property used by such organizations for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized; provided, however, that such ownership, leasing, or donation for use need not be exclusively by or to such organization.

        B.     No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

        C.     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the qualifying organization. However, a person may be refused the right to participate for good cause.

        D.    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the qualifying organization which organized it. Such members shall be those listed on the license when issued.

        E.     No person shall receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game, except as otherwise provided by state law. Violation of this provision is punishable as provided in Penal Code Section 326.5(c). Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game, except as otherwise provided by state law.

        F.     No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the organization licensed to conduct bingo games, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any such bingo games, except as otherwise provided by state law.

        G.    With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code (qualifying corporations, community chests or trusts organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, which meet all statutory requirements), all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account, and such profit shall be used only for charitable purposes. On the tenth day of each month during the term of any license issued or renewed hereunder, the licensee shall file with the finance director a full and complete statement of all money collected and costs of operation during the previous calendar month and the amount remaining for charitable purposes.

        H.    With respect to all qualifying organizations not covered by subsection G of this section (qualifying labor, agricultural and horticultural organizations, fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or organizations, nonprofit cemetery companies, business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards and boards of trade, civil leagues for social welfare, local organizations of employees for charitable, educational or recreational purposes, nonprofit pleasure and recreational clubs, and domestic fraternal societies, orders or associations, operating under the lodge system, mobile home park associations and senior citizens associations), all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

        1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

        2.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds after the deduction of prizes, or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead—including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel. On the tenth day of each month during the term of any license issued or renewed hereunder, the licensee shall file with the finance director a full and complete statement of all money collected and the costs of operation during the previous calendar month and the amount remaining for purposes permitted hereunder.

        3.     Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.

        I.      No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

        J.      The total value of the prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

        K.    No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 8:00 a.m. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.160 Inspection.
        Officers and employees of the city shall have the right to see the bingo license and lists of approved staff at all times during the bingo games. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.170 Application denial, license suspension or revocation.
        The finance director may deny an application for a bingo license, or suspend or revoke license, if he or she finds the applicant or licensee or any agent or representative thereof has:

        A.    Made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this article; or

        B.     Violated any of the provisions of this article or of Penal Code Section 326.5; or

        C.     Been finally convicted of a felony which reasonably indicates that conducting a bingo game hereunder would be likely to result in violations of law or fraud.

        If after investigation the finance director determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked or an application for such license denied, he or she shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of application setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant’s or licensee’s last address provided in the application, or shall be personally delivered. An organization which has had an application for a bingo license denied by the finance director, or which has had a bingo license suspended or revoked by the finance director, may appeal the decision in the matter provided in Section 5.18.180. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.180 Appeal procedure.
        Appeals shall be filed and conducted as follows:

        A.    Within ten calendar days after the date of any denial, suspension or revocation by the finance director, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing with the city clerk a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension, revocation or other decision is not proper.

        B.     Upon receipt of such written appeal, the city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing before the city council at the earliest convenient time. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal, the clerk shall notify the appellant and the finance director of the date and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the finance director and the appellant may present evidence relevant to the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the finance director. The chair of the city council shall receive evidence and shall rule on the admissibility of evidence and on questions of law. The formal rules of evidence applicable in a court of law shall not apply to such hearing. Any relevant evidence may be admitted, if it is the sort of evidence responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs.

        C.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may uphold, modify, or reverse any decision which is the subject of the appeal. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.190 Severability, conflict of law.
        It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article is severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this article shall be declared unconstitutional by the final judgment of a court having jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the other phrases, clauses, sentences and paragraphs of this article. The provisions of this article shall be harmonized, whenever possible, with the provisions of state law applicable to bingo games, now or hereafter in effect. In the event of a conflict between state law and the provisions of this article, state law shall prevail, as though written into this article. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.18.200 Violations and penalties.
        Any violation of the provisions of this article or of the conditions of any license granted hereunder shall be and constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this code, except that a violation of Section 5.18.150(E) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be deposited in the general fund of the city, as provided in Penal Code Section 326.5(b). As provided in subsection (d) of Penal Code Section 326.5, the city may bring an action to enjoin a violation of said Section 326.5 and of these code sections adopted pursuant thereto, as well as or in lieu of prosecution of such violations as misdemeanors. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 5.22 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
Article I. General Provisions
5.22.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “solicitors and peddlers chapter,” and will hereinafter be referred to as “this chapter.” (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.020 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:

        A.    “Applicant” means a person who has applied for, but who has not obtained, any license or license renewal required by this chapter.

        B.     “Application” means a written request made to the finance director by an applicant for any license or license renewal required by this chapter.

        C.     “Activity” means a business or occupation and also every other activity for which this chapter requires a license, whether such activity is a business or occupation or neither.

        D.    “Business” means every activity for which this chapter requires a license whether such activity is a business or occupation or neither.

        E.     “Council” means the city council of the city.

        F.     “Person” means a person as defined in this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.030 Duties of the finance director generally.
        The finance director shall collect the license fees and penalties under this chapter when he or she receives the application for a license, and shall issue or deny licenses for business activities regulated by this chapter, and shall issue a receipt for all such sums collected. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.040 Exemptions.
        A.    Statutory—Blind Persons. In addition to those licenses which Section 16102 of the State Business and Professions Code, or any other law of the state, requires be issued without fee, the finance director shall issue without a fee a license to any blind person who otherwise would be entitled to such license, if such person files with the finance director a certificate by a licensed physician and surgeon or by the Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation of the Department of Education of the state of California that he or she is a blind person as those words are used in this section. As used in this section a “blind person” means a person having not more than ten percent visual acuity in the better eye with correction.

        B.     Welfare Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following entities nor to their authorized representatives, students, members, officers, employees or agents acting on the behalf of such entities:

        1.     The federal and state governments;

        2.     Local public entities organized under the laws of the state of California;

        3.     Educational institutions, including private and public schools, colleges and universities;

        4.     Libraries and museums; and

        5.     Organizations or associations organized and operated exclusively and solely for religious, hospital, or charitable purposes if the activity which would otherwise be regulated by this chapter but for this exemption, is engaged in by such organization or association exclusively to further such religious, hospital or charitable purposes.

        a.     “Charitable purposes,” as used in this subsection refers to a purpose the object of which is to promote a charity.

        The term “charity” means a gift to be applied consistently with existing law, for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons either by bringing their hearts under the influence of education, or religion, by relieving their bodies from disease, suffering or constraint, by assisting them to establish themselves in life, or by erecting or maintaining public buildings or works, or otherwise lessening the burdens of government.

        b.     “Religious purposes,” as used in this subsection refers to a purpose the object of which is to promote a religion. The term “religion” includes:

        i.      A belief, not necessarily referring to supernatural powers;

        ii.     A cult, involving a gregarious association openly expressing the belief;

        iii.    A system of moral practice directly resulting from an adherence to the belief; and

        iv.    An organization within the cult designed to observe the tenets of belief.

        c.     “Hospital purposes,” as used in this subdivision refers to a purpose the object of which is to promote a hospital. The term “hospital” means primarily a service organization defined in Cedars of Lebanon Hosp. v. County of L.A., 35 C.2d 729 as:

        It serves three groups: the patients, its doctors, and the public. It furnishes a place where the patient, whether poor or rich, can be treated under ideal conditions. It makes available room, special diet, X-ray, laboratory, surgery, and multitude of other services and equipment now available through the advances of medical science. Essential to the administration of these techniques is the corps of highly trained nurses and student nurses who are on duty twenty-four hours per day. In the large hospitals there are the interns and residents whose presence makes it possible for the hospital to do a better job. In addition, the hospital must have administration to see that its services function properly and are coordinated, and that patients are received and cared for regardless of the hour or the patient’s condition. Nothing can be left to chance because a slip may mean a life or many lives.

        These facilities also stand ready to serve the community in times of epidemic or disaster.

 

        C.     Juvenile. No license shall be required of any juvenile under the age of eighteen (18) years who has a valid work permit issued by authorized school authorities.

        D.    Wholesale Travelers. No license shall be required under the provisions of this chapter, nor any penalty for the nonpayment of a fee enforced against any commercial traveler whose business is limited to goods, wares and merchandise sold or dealt in, in the state at wholesale, and who does not carry with him or her for delivery, goods sold by him or her. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.050 License not to authorize illegal occupations.
         A license granted pursuant to this chapter does not permit any occupation or activity of any kind which is prohibited by this chapter or any other chapter or other ordinance, or by any state statute, law, rule, order or regulation. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.060 Issuance under fictitious name.
        A.    A license may be issued pursuant to this chapter to a corporation duly authorized to transact business in this state, or to a person operating under a fictitious name who has complied with all of the provisions of Section 17900 et seq. of the State Business and Professions Code, or any statute superseding or taking the place of such code or code section. Otherwise all such licenses shall be issued in the true name of the individual or individuals applying therefor.

        B.     Except as above provided, no business so licensed may operate under any false or fictitious name.

        C.     A license issued to a corporation shall designate such corporation by the exact name which appears in the articles of incorporation of such corporation. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.070 Duplicate licenses.
        Where, from such evidence as he or she sees fit to require, the finance director finds, that a license has been lost, he or she shall issue a duplicate license to the holder thereof upon payment to him or her of five dollars. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.080 Additional information may be required.
        Every officer and department to which an application for a license is referred may require such additional information and the filing of such additional forms as he or she deems necessary. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.090 Conditions may be imposed.
        If any officer or department finds that the facts are such that any one or more of the provisions of Sections 5.22.260, 5.22.350 and 5.22.500 relating to the denial of a license would apply if the license is issued without conditions, but that conditions can be imposed which will eliminate any ground for denial provided for, such officer or department shall recommend to the finance director that such license be issued subject to such condition. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.100 Notification of conditions.
        If any officer or department recommends to the finance director that a license be issued with conditions pursuant to Section 5.22.090, the finance director may deny the application for a license, or he or she may issue the license with or without conditions. In the event the license is granted subject to conditions, the finance director shall notify the applicant as required by Section 5.22.250. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.110 Right to impose or change conditions.
        If, at any time, it appears to the council that there are grounds for revocation of a license, but that such grounds could be eliminated by the imposition of conditions, or of additional conditions, or by the amendment of any existing condition to such license, it shall notify the licensee in writing that it intends to impose or amend such conditions and the licensee may, within fifteen (15) days after mailing of such notice, request in writing a hearing under Article V or VI of this chapter, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.120 Request by licensee for change in conditions.
        If a licensee applies in writing to the council for a change in the conditions to which his or her license is subject, the council may grant such application in whole or in part, or may deny such application, based upon the facts found by such body. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.130 Term—Commencement, generally.
        The term for all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year from the date the license is issued by the finance director, including the date of issuance of the license. However, the finance director may issue licenses for transient merchants under Article V of this chapter for terms based on a monthly basis. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.140 Transfer generally.
        Unless otherwise specifically allowed herein, no license issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred from one person to another person or from location to another location. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.150 When transfer allowed.
        Where a license costs more than twenty dollars ($20.00), the licensee upon payment to the finance director of a fee of five dollars may transfer his or her license to do business to another site. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.160 Transfer to admit new partners.
        If a license is issued to a partnership or joint venture and the partnership or joint venture is changed by the addition of new partners, the license may be transferred to the new partnership or joint venture if the new partnership or joint venture makes application for such transfer in the same manner as for a new license and pays to the finance director a transfer fee of five dollars. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

5.22.170 Renewal generally.
        Except as otherwise provided in this article, every licensee who has obtained a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may obtain from the finance director a renewal of such license upon payment of the appropriate fee if no complaint has been filed against such licensee either with the council or sheriff or finance director, and no complaint for or proceedings for the revocation of such license if filed or pending, without any report from the sheriff, planning commission, council, or other commission, board, or officer. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.180 New location not renewal.
        In the case of a business having a fixed location, a license for a different location is not a renewal. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.190 Disposition of funds.
        The finance director shall deposit in the general fund of the city all license fees and penalties collected. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.200 Refunds generally.
        The city may refund to the licensee all moneys collected by the finance director because of excess, erroneous or double payment, if the licensee files a proper claim. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.210 Penalty.
        If any fee required by this chapter for a license renewal is not paid thirty (30) days after the expiration of the license for which the renewal is issued, the applicant shall pay a penalty equal to one-half of the fee for the license renewal in addition to the fee for the license renewal. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article II. Contents and Display
5.22.220 Contents of license.
        Each license shall state the person to whom it is issued, the kind of business and the location for which the same is issued, the date of issuance, the license period for which it is issued and the amount therefor, and be signed by the finance director. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.230 Display—Fixed place of business.
        Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter and conducting, managing or carrying on a business or occupation at a fixed place of business, shall keep such license posted and exhibited while in force in some conspicuous part of such place of business. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article III. Denial and Revocation Generally
5.22.240 Reports against licensee.
        If the sheriff, the director of planning, the council, or any member thereof, or any other commission, board, or officer, finds facts because of which any license granted pursuant to this chapter should not be renewed, or if renewed, renewed subject to conditions not included in the existing license, or if any application for the revocation or modification of such license has been filed or is pending, each such officer shall so notify the finance director, in writing, giving name of the licensee, type of license and reason for denial or addition of conditions. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.250 Notification of denial or conditions.
        Before the finance director denies any license, either a new license or a license renewal, or grants any license subject to conditions, except the renewal of a license containing only those conditions to which the license renewed was subject, or conditions to which the applicant has agreed, unless a hearing already has been held, he or she shall notify the applicant in writing that he or she intends to deny the license or to grant the license subject to conditions, which conditions shall be specified in the notice, and that the applicant may request in writing a hearing before the council pursuant to Article V or VI of this chapter, whichever is applicable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.260 Grounds for denial—Generally.
        The council and the sheriff shall not recommend or grant, and the finance director shall not issue a license to carry on any business, occupation or activity, if such business, occupation or activity has been, will be, or is apt to become any one or more of the following:

        A.    Prohibited by any state law, statute, rule or regulation;

        B.     A public nuisance. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.270 Applicant not real party in interest.
        The council, referee, finance director, or other appropriate officer or body may examine under oath any applicant to determine who is the real party in interest in the business, occupation or exhibition for which a license is sought. If the council, finance director, or such other body finds that the application is in the interest of one whose license has been revoked or who has been refused a license, it may treat the application as though made by the real party in interest, and the application shall have the same effect against any future applications as if it had been made in the name of the real party in interest. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.280 Limitation on reissuance after revocation.
        When a license of any person is revoked for cause, no new or other license shall be granted to the same person within six months after such revocation. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.290 Fee forfeited.
        On revocation of the license, no part of the money in the hands of the finance director shall be returned, but the license fee shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article IV. Violations and Penalties
5.22.300 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 5.22.320, 5.22.430(C), 5.22.460, 5.22.470 and 5.22.590(C) shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions cited in this section are committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by fine or by imprisonment or by both such fine and imprisonment, as provided in this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article V. Transient Merchants, Itinerant Merchants, Itinerant Vendors
5.22.310 Definitions.
        As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

        A.    “Transient merchant” means a person, whether a resident of the city or not, who, on his or her own behalf or through salespersons, engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, cart, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, any room or shops or conference halls in hotels or motels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise.

        B.     The term “transient merchant,” includes itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor.

        C.     “Owner” means a person who owns or controls ten percent or more of the equity of, or otherwise has claim to ten percent or more of the net income of, the transient merchant.

        D.    “Principal” means an owner, an executive officer of a corporation, general partner of a partnership, a sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship, a trustee of a trust, or any other individual with similar supervisory functions with respect to any person.

        E.     “Salesperson” means an individual employed, appointed or authorized by a transient merchant, whether referred to by such transient merchant, as an employee, agent, representative, or independent contractor, who attempts to engage or engages in the temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the city on behalf of the transient merchant. The principals of the transient merchant are themselves salespersons if they engage or attempt to engage in the temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city on behalf of the transient merchant. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.320 License—Required—Valid for specified locations only.
        A.    No person shall engage in the business of a transient merchant, without first securing a license as provided in this chapter, nor during the time a license is revoked or suspended pursuant to Section 5.22.360, nor during the time period an appeal is pending pursuant to Section 5.22.370.

        B.     When a license specifies the location of the activity licensed, the licensee may conduct such activity only at the address specified in the license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.330 Application—Investigation fee.
        A.    Applicants for licenses under this article shall file with the finance director a sworn application in writing, in triplicate, on a form to be furnished by the finance director, containing the following information:

        1.     The name or names of the transient merchant, including the name under which the transient merchant is doing or intends to do business, if different from the name of the transient merchant.

        2.     The transient merchant’s business form and place of organization and, if operating under a fictitious business name, the location where the fictitious name has been registered.

        3.     A complete street address or addresses of all locations from which the transient merchant will be conducting business within the city as a transient merchant.

        4.     A listing of all telephone numbers to be used by the transient merchant and the address where each telephone used is located.

        5.     The name of, and the office held by, the transient merchant’s officers, directors, trustees, general and limited partners, sole proprietor, and owners, as the case may be, and the names of those persons and salespersons who have management responsibilities in connection with the transient merchant’s business activities.

        6.     The complete address of the principal residence and the driver’s license number and state of issuance of each of the persons whose names are disclosed pursuant to subdivision 5 of this subsection.

        7.     The names and principal residence address of each person the transient merchant leaves in charge at each location from which the transient merchant does business as transient merchant within the city, and the business location of which each of these persons will be in charge.

        8.     A statement, meeting the requirements of this subdivision, as to any person identified pursuant to subdivision 5 or 7 of this subsection who:

        a.     Has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving an alleged violation of this chapter, or fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property. For purposes of this paragraph, a plea of nolo contendere is a conviction;

        b.     Has had entered against him or her a final judgment or order in a civil or administrative action, including a stipulated judgment or order, if the complaint or petition in the civil or administrative action alleged acts constituting a violation of this chapter, fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property, the use of untrue or misleading representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of real or personal property, or the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive business practices;

        c.     Is subject to any currently effective injunction or restrictive court order relating to business activity as the result of an action brought by a federal, state, or local public agency or unit thereof, including, but not limited to, an action affecting any vocational license. For purposes of paragraphs a, b, and c of this subdivision, the statement required by this subdivision shall identify the person, the court or administrative agency rendering the conviction, judgment, or order, the docket number of the matter, the date of the conviction, judgment, or order, and the name of the governmental agency, if any, that brought the action resulting in the conviction, judgment, or order.

        9.     A list of the names and principal residence addresses of salespersons who solicit on behalf of the transient merchant.

        10.   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.

        11.   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.

        12.   The identity of the manufacturer or producer of the goods, merchandise, or property proposed to be offered for sale or sold or for which orders are to be taken. The place of manufacturer or production; the location of the goods and products at the time the application is filed; the proposed method of delivery of the merchandise, goods, and property to the customer.

        13.   Copies of all school work permits for minor children under the age of eighteen (18) years who may be working in any capacity, prior to the time such minor begins work.

        14.   Such evidence as may be required by the finance director that the business is in conformity with Title 17 of this code.

        15.   Evidence as may be required by the finance director of permission by the owner of such business location to occupy the premises for business activities.

        B.     The applicant shall file an amended application with the finance director within five days after a change in any information contained in the original application, or amendment thereto, for which the license is granted, and the amended application shall state such changes.

        C.     At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the finance director to cover the costs of investigation of the facts stated therein. The investigation fees shall not be refundable. If a license is granted the said investigation fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be applied or credited to the license fee. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

5.22.340 Investigation and issuance—License to be issued—Record.
        A.    Upon receipt of the application as provided in the preceding section, the two duplicate copies shall be referred to the sheriff, who shall cause such investigation of the such persons identified by the finance director to determine if grounds exist for denial of such application as are set forth in Sections 5.22.260 and 5.22.350.

        B.     If, as a result of such investigation, the sheriff determines that grounds exist as set forth in said sections for denial of the application, the sheriff shall endorse on such duplicate copy of the application, his or her disapproval and his or her reasons for the same, and return the duplicate of the application to the finance director within twenty-three (23) days after referral to the sheriff, and the finance director may notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.

        C.     If, as a result of such investigation, the sheriff has not established grounds for denial of the application, the sheriff shall endorse on a duplicate copy of the application his or her approval and return the same to the finance director, who may within thirty (30) days after the application is referred to the sheriff pursuant to subsection A of this section, and upon payment of the prescribed license fee, issue to the applicant a license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing deputy and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the class of the license issued, and the kind of goods to be sold hereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of the issuance and the date of expiration of the license. The finance director shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued, and may destroy such records as provided by law with the approval of the council. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.350 Grounds for denial of license.
        A.    The finance director may deny an application for a license or for a license renewal on the grounds that the transient merchant, principals of the transient merchant, or salespersons of the transient merchant have done any of the following:

        1.     Been convicted of a crime within ten years of filing of the application. A conviction within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. Any action which a finance director is permitted to take may be taken following the establishment of a conviction when the time for appeal has elapsed, or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, or when an order granting probation is made suspending the imposition of sentence, irrespective of subsequent order under the provisions of Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code;

        The finance director may deny a license pursuant to this subdivision (A)(1) only if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the business or profession for which the application is made;

        2.     Done any act involving misconduct. Misconduct is defined for purposes of this subsection to mean conduct which includes, but is not limited to, rape, theft, arson, burglary, robbery, child molestation, assault or battery which endangers or places in danger a person’s health, safety, welfare or property, if such misconduct relates to the qualifications, functions or duties of the business for which the application is made or for which the permit is issued;

        3.     Done any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with the intent to materially benefit him or herself or another, or materially injure another;

        4.     Done any act which if done by a person licensed pursuant to this would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of the license;

        5.     Been required to register as prescribed by Penal Code Section 290 or Health and Safety Code Section 11590;

        6.     Has failed to pay any of the license fees required by this chapter; or

        7.     Has violated any provision of this chapter.

        B.     The finance director may deny an application for a license regulated by this chapter on the ground that the applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for such license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.360 Grounds for revocation or suspension of license.
        A.    The finance director may suspend or revoke a license to a transient merchant on the grounds that the transient merchant, principals of the transient merchant, or salespersons of the transient merchant have been convicted of a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the license was issued, or on the ground of knowingly making a false statement of fact required to be revealed in an application for such license. A “conviction” within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. Any action which the finance director is permitted to take following the establishment of a conviction may be taken when the time for appeal has elapsed, or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, or when an order granting probation is made suspending the imposition or sentence, irrespective of a subsequent order under the provisions of Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code.

        B.     The licensee has engaged in misconduct as defined in Section 5.22.350(A)(2);

        C.     The licensee has failed to pay licensee fees required by this chapter; or

        D.    The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter;

        E.     The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for such license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.370 Appeal of denial, revocation or suspension of license.
        Within fifteen (15) days after notification of denial, revocation or suspension of license under this chapter, an applicant may appeal such denial, revocation or suspension to the council, in writing, giving the reasons in full as to why the license should be issued over the finance director’s denial, revocation or suspension. Evidence of the mailing of a copy of the appeal by the applicant to the sheriff and to the finance director shall be presented to the city clerk at the time the appeal is filed. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.380 Setting of hearing.
        The council shall set a date and time certain, within sixty (60) days after receipt of applicant’s appeal by the city clerk (or such longer time as may be determined by the council) to hear and consider the appeal of the applicant. The clerk shall notify the applicant, the sheriff and the finance director of the time and place of such hearing. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.390 Conduct of hearing.
        A.    The council may issue subpoenas as provided in Government Code Section 25170 at the request of either the applicant or the finance director, for witnesses to appear at the hearing, with or without specified documents. All testimony at the hearing shall be given under oath or affirmation. The applicant and the finance director shall each have the right to be represented by counsel. The applicant and the finance director shall each have the right to call and examine witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses, and to argue their respective position. The proceeding shall be informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. All evidence shall be admissible which is of the kind that reasonably prudent persons rely on in making decisions.

        B.     The chair of the council shall determine the order or procedure and shall rule on all objections to admissibility of evidence. The applicant and finance director shall each be given a full and fair hearing. The council shall make its decision by majority vote, either at the end of the hearing, or at a date not more than fourteen (14) days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.400 Fees—Adjustment of fees.
        A.    The license fee which shall be charged by the finance director for each license under the provisions of this article shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per month, or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year.

        B.     Upon approval of the sheriff of an application, the finance director may issue to the applicant a license. No person may commence any such business prior to the approval of the application and the issuance of such license by the finance director. Such license shall be valid for a period of up to one year depending upon the amount of fee paid under subsection A of this section unless revoked or suspended pursuant to Section 5.22.360. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.410 License exhibition.
        Transient merchants, itinerant merchants, or itinerant vendors shall exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. Any minor employed by said transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor in any capacity shall exhibit a copy of the license issued their employer at the request of any citizen. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.420 Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his or her license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.430 Immediate suspension for creating a safety hazard.
        A.    The finance director has the authority to immediately suspend the license when it is apparent that the transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor is creating a safety hazard or is interfering with the free flow of pedestrians or traffic. The seizing of a license by written advisement will constitute the suspension.

        B.     The suspension shall remain in force until such time as the finance director deems the hazard no longer exists. The licensee shall have the right to appeal such immediate suspension in accordance with the provisions for appeal in Section 5.22.370.

        C.     Transient merchants, itinerant merchants, or itinerant vendors failing to comply with the finance director’s suspension of a license shall be a violation of Section 5.22.320. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.440 Records.
        The sheriff shall report to the finance director all convictions for violations of this article and the finance director shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article VI. Canvassers, Solicitors and Door-to-Door Salespersons
5.22.450 Canvassers, solicitors and door-to-door salespersons defined.
        A.    For the purpose of this article, a canvasser, solicitor, or door-to-door salesperson is any individual whether a resident of the city or not, who is engaged in the business of traveling either by foot, wagon, cart, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, from door to door, or from street to street, or by telephone selling or attempting to sell goods, wares, or merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, or whether he or she is gathering information for contact by a sales representative at a later time.

        B.     As used in this section and in this article, “individual” means a single human acting on his or her own behalf or on the behalf of another person, including a transient merchant, as defined in Section 5.22.310. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.460 Telephone solicitors license.
        A.    Those individuals who will engage solely in the business of selling or attempting to sell by use of a telephone, goods, wares, or merchandise or personal property of any nature whatever or services, or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, or whether he or she is gathering information for contact by a sales representative at a later time, shall apply for a telephone solicitors license. Such license shall restrict the license to solicitation by telephone only and will differ from the solicitors license by having the restriction plainly printed across the face of the document.

        B.     Telephone Solicitor’s License Fee—Investigation Fee. Notwithstanding Section 5.22.480(B), at the time of filing the application, a nonrefundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid to the finance director to cover costs of investigation of the facts stated therein. If a license is granted, the investigation fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be applied or credited to the license fee.

        C.     Notwithstanding Section 5.22.480(C), the license fee which shall be charged by the finance director for each license issued under the provisions of this section shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.470 License required.
        No canvasser, solicitor or door-to-door salesman shall engage in such business unless (1) he or she has first secured a license as provided in this chapter, (2) nor during the time a license is revoked or suspended pursuant to Section 5.22.510, or (3) during the time an appeal is pending pursuant to Section 5.22.550. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.480 Application—Investigation fee.
        A.    An applicant shall file with the finance director a sworn application in writing, in triplicate, in a form to be furnished by the finance director which shall give the information specified in Section 5.22.330. For purposes of this subsection, all references to transient merchant in Section 5.22.330, shall be deemed to mean canvassers, solicitors, or door-to-door salesman as defined in this article.

        B.     At the time of filing the application, a nonrefundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the finance director to cover costs of investigation of the facts stated herein. If a license is granted, the investigation fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be applied or credited to the license fee.

        C.     The license fee which shall be charged by the finance director for each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) per year. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.490 Investigation and issuance—License to issue—Record.
        A.    Upon receipt of the application required by Section 5.22.480, two duplicate copies shall be referred to the sheriff, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant to determine if grounds exist for denial of such application.

        B.     If as a result of such investigation, the sheriff determines that grounds exist for denial of such application as are set forth in Section 5.22.500 for denial of the application, the sheriff shall endorse on a duplicate copy of the application his or her disapproval and his or her reasons for the same, and shall return the duplicate of the application to the finance director within twenty-three (23) days after referral to the sheriff, and the finance director may notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.

        C.     If as a result of such investigation, the sheriff has not established ground for denial of the application, the sheriff shall endorse on a duplicate copy of the application his or her approval, and return said application to the finance director, who may within thirty (30) days, after the application is referred to the sheriff upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his or her license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.500 Grounds for denial of license.
        A.    The finance director may deny an application for a license or for a license renewal on the grounds that the applicant has done any one of the following:

        1.     Been convicted of a crime within ten years of filing of the application. A “conviction” within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. Any action which the finance director is permitted to take may be taken following the establishment of a conviction when the time for appeal has elapsed, or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, or when an order granting probation is made suspending the imposition of sentence, irrespective of subsequent order under the provisions of Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code. The finance director may deny a license pursuant to this subdivision only if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the business or profession for which application is made;

        2.     Done any act involving misconduct. “Misconduct” is defined for purposes of this subsection to mean conduct which includes, but is not limited to, rape, theft, arson, burglary, robbery, child molestation, assault or battery which endangers or places in danger a person’s health, safety, welfare or property, if such misconduct relates to the qualifications, functions or duties of the business for which the application is made or for which the permit is issued;

        3.     Done any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with the intent to materially benefit him or herself or another, or materially injure another;

        4.     Done any act which if done by an individual licensed pursuant to this would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of the license;

        5.     Been required to register as prescribed by Penal Code Section 290 of Health and Safety Code Section 11590;

        6.     Has failed to pay any of the license fees required by this chapter; or

        7.     Has violated any provision of this chapter.

        B.     The finance director may deny a license regulated by this code on the ground that the applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for such license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.510 Grounds for revocation or suspension of license.
        A.    The finance director may suspend or revoke a license on the ground that the licensee has been convicted of a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or profession for which the license was issued, or the ground of knowingly making a false statement of fact required to be revealed in an application for such license. A conviction within the meaning of this subsection means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. Any action which the finance director is permitted to take following the establishment of conviction may be taken when the time for appeal has elapsed, or the judgment of conviction has been affirmed on appeal, or when an order granting probation is made suspending the imposition of sentence, irrespective of a subsequent order under the provision of Section 1203.4 of the Penal Code.

        B.     The licensee has engaged in misconduct as defined in Section 5.22.500(A)(2);

        C.     The licensee has failed to pay license fees required by this chapter; or

        D.    The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter;

        E.     The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for such license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.520 Form.
        The license shall be on a form approved by the finance director and the sheriff and may be in the form of a license or an identification card, or both such license and identification card. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.530 Renewal of license.
        The applicant shall pay the license fee to the finance director and shall have a new photograph taken at the sheriff’s office, if an identification card is required, prior to the expiration date on the license or identification card. The sheriff shall forward the new identification card or license to the finance director for issuance. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.540 License exhibition.
        Solicitors and canvassers shall exhibit at the request of any person their licenses when engaged in the business for which the license was issued. If an identification card is issued, the licensee shall prominently display the identification card on his or her person when engaged in the business for which the license is issued. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.550 Appeal of denial, revocation or suspension of license.
        Within fifteen (15) days after mailing of notification of denial, revocation or suspension of license under this chapter, an applicant may appeal such denial, revocation or suspension to the council, in writing, giving the reasons in full as to why the license should be issued over the finance director’s denial, revocation or suspension. Evidence of the mailing of a copy of the appeal by the applicant to the sheriff and to the finance director shall be presented to the city clerk at the time the appeal is filed. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.560 Setting of hearing.
        The council shall set a date and time certain, within sixty (60) days after receipt of applicant’s appeal by the city clerk (or such longer time as may be determined by the council) to hear and consider the appeal of applicant. The clerk shall notify the applicant, the sheriff and the finance director of the time and place of such hearing. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.570 Conduct of hearing.
        A.    The council may issue subpoenas as provided in Government Code Section 25170 at the request of either the applicant or the finance director, for witnesses to appear at the hearing, with or without specified documents. All testimony at the hearing shall be given under oath or affirmation. The applicant and the finance director shall have the right to be represented by counsel. The applicant and the finance director shall each have the right to call and examine witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses, and to argue their respective position. The proceeding shall be informal and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply. All evidence shall be admissible which is of the kind that reasonably prudent persons rely on in making decisions.

        B.     The chair of the council shall determine the order of procedure and shall rule on all objections to admissibility of evidence. The applicant and finance director shall each be given a full and fair hearing. The council shall make its decision by majority vote, either at the end of the hearing, or at a date not more than fourteen (14) days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.580 Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his or her solicitor’s or canvasser’s license or identification card and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.22.590 Immediate suspension for creating a traffic hazard.
        A.    The finance director shall have the authority to immediately suspend a license when it is apparent that the solicitor, canvasser, or door-to-door salesperson is creating a safety hazard or is interfering with the free flow of pedestrians or traffic. The seizing of the license by written advisement will constitute the suspension.

        B.     The suspension shall remain in force until such time as the finance director deems the hazard no longer exists. The licensee shall have the right of appeal of such immediate suspension in conformity with the provisions of Section 5.22.550.

        C.     Solicitors, canvassers, door-to-door salespersons failing to comply with a finance director’s suspension of a license shall be in violation of Section 5.22.470. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 5.26 TAXICABS
Article I. In General
5.26.010 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        A.    Person. Person includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, business trust, corporation or company.

        B.     Taxicab. A motor vehicle, as that term is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, used for the transportation of passengers for hire, equipped with a taximeter, when driven by the owner or by an agent of the owner at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, or per other period of time, which such vehicle is routed under the direction of the passengers or other persons hiring such vehicle. The types of motor vehicles listed below shall not be considered a taxicab:

        1.     Employer-Sponsored Carpool Vehicle. A vehicle that is operated to transport employees to and from the employer’s business location or locations.

        2.     Limousine. A passenger-carrying motor vehicle for hire, as regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, not equipped with a taximeter, and used as transportation for hire in the city, along a route directed by persons hiring or passengers in the vehicle, the charge for use of which is based upon rates per hour (with a minimum one-hour charge), per day, per week, or per month.

        3.     Private Ambulance. Every vehicle equipped with a siren and specially constructed, modified, equipped or arranged for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm or otherwise incapacitated persons, used for the purpose of serving the public, and driven by any person other than a governmental agency.

        4.     Public Transportation Vehicle. Every vehicle used in the service of transporting passengers in the city and operated by or under contract with a governmental agency.

        C.     Taxicab Operator. A person engaged in the business of owning, controlling or operating one or more taxicabs which solicit or accept passengers in such taxicab, or taxicabs, anywhere within the city.

        D.    Taximeter. An instrument, or device, attached to a taxicab which mechanically, or electronically, calculates a fare on the basis of distance traveled or waiting time, or a combination thereof, and displays the fare in figures of dollars and cents. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.020 License required—Fees and term.
        A.    Fees. Every taxicab operator shall first apply for a license, and pay a license fee of forty dollars ($40.00). Upon approval of the license application the taxicab operator shall pay a fee of five dollars per taxicab, and the finance director shall issue a license sticker for each properly insured taxicab. The annual license renewal fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per year, and five dollars per taxicab for the license sticker. Each applicant shall present to the sheriff a money order or certified cashiers check for the prescribed amount set by the Department of Justice of the state of California for the processing of the applicant’s fingerprints. None of the above fees shall be prorated, or refunded.

        B.     Term. All licenses and stickers issued to taxicab operators shall be for the period of one calendar year, and shall expire at midnight on the thirty-first day of December. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.030 License required—Application.
        A.    Every application for a taxicab operator’s license shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain:

        1.     Name and address of the applicant.

        2.     If the applicant is a corporation, the names and addresses of its directors.

        3.     Area within which applicant proposes to operate.

        4.     Kind and amount of public liability and property damage insurance covering each vehicle to be used for the acceptance of passengers for hire within the city.

        5.     Taxicab color scheme and insignia.

        6.     Owner’s trade name and business address.

        7.     Number of vehicles to be used for accepting passengers for hire within the city, their make, model (year) and seating capacity.

        8.     Such further information as either the sheriff or the finance director may require.

        B.     Whenever an employee of a taxicab operator files an application for a taxicab driver’s license, or renewal hereof, with the finance director pursuant to Article II (Driver’s Licenses) Section 5.26.080 et seq. of this chapter, the employer taxicab operator shall within ten days after the filing of the application by the employee with the finance director, submit to the sheriff by first class U.S. mail copies of the results and other records pertaining to the testing of the employee for the use of alcohol and controlled substances conducted pursuant to mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program required by Section 5.26.210. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.040 License required—Investigation of application—Disapproval and notification.
        A.    The application shall be referred to the sheriff for approval. The sheriff shall obtain a copy of the applicant’s criminal record in the United States, if any, and may obtain the criminal record, if any, in any other country, if obtaining such foreign criminal record is feasible.

        B.     The sheriff in making his or her determination may also demand personal references from applicant and may make such further investigation of applicant as deemed appropriate.

        C.     If the sheriff disapproves the application, he or she shall notify the finance director in writing giving the reasons for the disapproval. The finance director shall thereupon notify the applicant in writing by mailing or delivering a copy of the sheriff’s disapproval, including the reasons therefor, to the applicant and advise him or her of his or her right to appeal the disapproval within fifteen (15) days of such notice. No license shall be issued unless a successful appeal of the sheriff’s disapproval is made. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.050 License required—Appeal of disapproval.
        Within fifteen (15) days after notification of disapproval, an applicant may appeal to the city council, in writing, from the disapproval of the sheriff, giving the reasons in full as to why the license should be issued in spite of the sheriff’s disapproval. A copy of the appeal shall be sent by applicant to the sheriff and the finance director at the same time the appeal is sent to the city council. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.060 License required—Setting hearing.
        The council shall set a hearing on the appeal of the applicant, and shall fix a time and a date certain, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of applicant’s appeal by the city clerk (or such longer time as applicant shall agree to) to hear and consider the appeal of applicant. The clerk shall notify the applicant, sheriff and finance director of the time and place of hearing. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.070 Conduct of hearing.
        A.    The council may issue subpoenas as provided in Government Code Section 25170 at the request of either the applicant or the sheriff, for witnesses to appear at the hearing, with or without specified documents. All testimony at the hearing shall be given under oath or affirmation. The applicant and sheriff shall have the right to be represented by counsel. Applicant and sheriff shall each have the right to call and examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses and argue their respective positions. The proceeding shall be informal, and the strict rules of evidence shall not apply, and all evidence shall be admissible which is of the kind that reasonably prudent persons rely on in making decisions.

        B.     The chair of the council shall determine the order of procedure and shall rule on all objections to admissibility of evidence. Applicant and sheriff shall each be given a full and fair hearing. The council shall make its decision by majority vote, either at the end of the hearing or at a date not more than ten days after the close of the hearing. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.080 Conduct of hearing—Grounds for denial, revocation or suspension.
        The granting of a license or a renewal thereof may be denied and an existing license may be revoked or suspended if the license holder or applicant:

        A.    Is a person unfit to be trusted with the privilege granted by such license.

        B.     Has knowingly made a false statement in a material matter either in his or her application or in any reports or other documents furnished by him or her to the city.

        C.     Does not maintain and operate his or her vehicle and other equipment in the manner and in the condition required by law and applicable regulations.

        D.    Is required to register as a sex offender under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

        E.     Habitually or excessively uses, or is addicted to the use of narcotics or dangerous drugs, or has been convicted of any offense relating to the use, sale, possession or transportation of narcotics or habit-forming drugs.

        F.     Is a habitual user of intoxicating beverages to excess.

        G.    Within the three-year period immediately preceding the application has been under suspension, revocation or probation by the Department of Motor Vehicles for a cause involving the safe operation of a motor vehicle, or has been convicted of any of the following offenses: driving while intoxicated; or reckless driving involving bodily injury.

        H.    Has been convicted of any offense punishable as a felony, or has been convicted within a ten-year period immediately preceding the crime of theft in either degree.

        I.      Has been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude.

        J.      Has been involved within the two years immediately preceding the application in any motor vehicle accident causing death or personal injury.

        K.    Has been involved in three or more motor vehicle accidents within the year immediately preceding the application.

        L.     Failed to pay required license fees.

        M.    Has violated any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.090 Insurance certificate prerequisite to issuance.
        No taxicab operator’s license shall be issued until the applicant first files with the finance director a certificate of insurance, on a form provided by the finance director. Said certificate shall provide evidence of insurance in amounts and with conditions acceptable to the city and shall be approved by the finance director. The taxicab operator’s insurance shall remain in force during the entire term of the license, and if such insurance is canceled or terminated, it shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license until a valid certificate is furnished to the finance director. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.100 City hold harmless agreement.
        Each taxicab operator shall, and by acceptance of the license, does agree to hereby indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any and all damages, claims, liabilities, costs including attorneys fees, suits or other expenses resulting from and arising out of said taxicab operator’s operations. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.110 Insurance requirements.
        The insurance required before a taxicab operator’s license can be issued shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of any taxicab used by the taxicab operator in its business as such. The amount of insurance should not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The city, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds on any policy. Insurance shall include contractual liability to cover liability assumed in contract, shall include a severability of interest or equivalent wording, and shall specify that insurance coverage afforded to the city shall be primary. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.120 Revocation.
        A.    The finance director may give notice to a taxicab operator of his or her intention to revoke an operator’s license. If he or she deems it will be a hazard to the health, safety or welfare, for the operator to continue operations pending a revocation hearing, the finance director may suspend the license and all rights and privileges thereunder until the hearing on revocation. The notice shall specify a time and place at which a hearing will be held by the finance director. The hearing shall be conducted not less than seven days after the date of the notice, unless the operator agrees to a shorter period of time. Unless the operator consents, a hearing must be held within ten days of a suspension. The notice shall specify the reasons for the proposed revocation in sufficient detail so as to fully inform the operator of the reasons which have caused the notice to be given, and if the license has been suspended the reasons for such suspension. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the sheriff.

        B.     The operator and sheriff shall each have the right to be represented by counsel, to call and examine witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and argue their respective positions. The proceedings shall be informal, and strict rules of evidence shall not apply. All evidence shall be admissible which is of the kind that reasonably prudent persons rely on in making decisions.

        C.     The finance director shall render his or her decision in writing, and include the reasons therefor. The decision shall notify the operator and sheriff of their rights to appeal as set forth in Section 5.26.130. An appeal does not stay the decision of the finance director. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.130 Appeal—Hearing date.
        A.    The operator or sheriff may appeal the finance director’s decision on revocation to the city council by filing an appeal in writing with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after such decision.

        B.     After receipt of an appeal, the council shall set a time, date and place within thirty (30) days after receipt of the appeal (or such longer period as to which the appellant consents) to hear the matter. The city clerk shall notify the operator, finance director and sheriff of the time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.140 Appeal hearing on revocation.
        The procedure for the revocation hearing before the city council shall be the same as for the hearing on disapproval of an application, as set out herein. The sheriff and the taxicab operator shall have all of the applicable prehearing and hearing rights of the sheriff and the applicant, respectively, set out in Section 5.26.070. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.150 Operator duties.
        A.    Taxicab operators shall not permit any person other than a taxicab driver, licensed in accordance with Article II of this chapter, to operate any of its taxicabs in which passengers are solicited or accepted for hire within the city.

        B.     Taxicab operators shall keep current the information furnished under Section 5.26.030. The information shall be furnished to the finance director. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article II. Driver’s Licenses
5.26.160 “Driver” defined.
        “Taxicab driver” means any individual who drives or operates a taxicab in which passengers are solicited or accepted for hire, either at a taxicab stand or elsewhere, within the city. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.170 License—Required.
        Every taxicab driver who drives a taxicab for which a taxicab operator’s license is required or has been issued shall obtain from the finance director a taxicab driver’s license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.180 License—Application.
        A.    Every taxicab driver, including taxicab drivers employed by taxicab operators and self-employed independent taxicab drivers, shall file an application for a taxicab driver’s license on a form supplied by the finance director.

        B.     For taxicab drivers employed by taxicab operators, employer taxicab operators shall comply with Section 5.26.030(B). An applicant shall immediately upon the filing of an application inform the employer of the requirements of subsection B of this section and of Section 5.26.030(B).

        C.     For self-employed independent taxicab drivers, the taxicab driver’s designated mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program required by Article IV of this chapter, Section 5.26.260 et seq., shall, within ten days after the filing of the application, submit to the police department by first class U.S. mail, the test results and other records pertaining to the testing of the applicant for the use of alcohol and controlled substances conducted pursuant to said mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program. The applicant shall, immediately upon the filing of the application, inform the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program of the requirements of subsection C of this section. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.190 License—Driver’s license fees and term.
        A.    Fees. Each applicant for a taxicab license shall pay to the finance director, upon making application, the yearly license fee of forty dollars ($40.00). The annual renewal license fee shall also be forty dollars ($40.00). Each applicant shall present to the sheriff a money order or certified cashiers check for the prescribed amount set by the Department of Justice of the state of California for the processing of the applicant’s fingerprints. None of the above fees shall be prorated, or refunded.

        B.     Term. All licenses, including renewals, shall be issued for the term of one year from the date and month of the original license approval. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.200 License—Referral of application to sheriff.
        The application shall be referred to the sheriff, who shall make the same type of investigation and approve or disapprove the application, as in the case of an application for a taxicab operator’s license, as specified in Sections 5.26.040 and 5.26.080. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.210 Procedure on disapproval.
        In the event of disapproval by the sheriff of an application for a taxicab driver’s license, the procedures to be followed by the sheriff, the finance director and the council, and the rights and duties of the applicant and of the sheriff shall be the same as provided in the case of disapproval of an applicant for a taxicab operator’s license, insofar as applicable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.220 Procedure on disapproval—Issuance—Term.
        Upon receipt of the approval of the sheriff, the finance director shall issue to the applicant a taxicab driver’s license, which shall be in the form of a card containing the price of the license and the licensee’s name, photograph and right index fingerprint. Such license shall be good for one year from the issuance date. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.230 Notice of revocation—Suspension—Procedures.
        The finance director may give a notice of intention to revoke a taxicab driver’s license, and may suspend such license pending a hearing, as in the case of a taxicab operator’s license, and the procedures for revocation, including an appeal to the city council, and the rights of the parties shall be the same, insofar as applicable as in the case of revocation of a taxicab operator’s license. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.240 Automatic suspension of a taxicab driver’s license.
        Any taxicab driver’s license issued hereunder shall be automatically suspended and be null and void during any period of time that the taxicab driver’s state motor vehicle operator’s license now or hereafter required in order to operate a taxicab is suspended, revoked, or for any other reason is invalid or inoperative. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article III. Violations
5.26.250 Misdemeanors.
        Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a taxicab operator or taxicab driver is a misdemeanor as defined in, and punishable as provided in, this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article IV. Mandatory Controlled Substance and Alcohol Testing Program
5.26.260 Employer and self-employed testing program.
        A.    Every taxicab operator, including a self-employed independent taxicab driver, as defined in and subject to Article I of this chapter and every self-employed independent taxicab driver subject to Article II of this chapter shall develop and adopt a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program in compliance with Government Code Section 53075.5 and in accord with the procedures set forth in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. A copy of the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program adopted pursuant to this subdivision shall be given to the sheriff and to the city finance director.

        B.     The employer taxicab operator’s mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program shall contain a provision that, while the employer taxicab operator’s license is in effect, the employer taxicab operator shall, upon request of the sheriff or the city finance director, make available for inspection copies of all results and other records pertaining to the testing for the use of alcohol and controlled substances conducted pursuant to the mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program required by this section.

        C.     The self-employed independent taxicab driver’s mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program shall contain a provision that the test results shall be reported directly to the sheriff and to the city finance director.

        D.    Failure to comply with the requirements of this section constitutes grounds for denial, revocation or suspension of a license pursuant to Sections 5.26.080 and 5.26.240. The procedures for denial, suspension or revocation shall be the same as those prescribed for said Sections 5.26.080 and 5.26.240. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.270 Additional conditions for taxicab driver’s licenses.
        In addition to the conditions and grounds for the issuance and retention of a taxicab diver’s license issued pursuant to Article II of this chapter, taxicab drivers’ licenses shall be issued and retained subject to the following conditions:

        A.    Employment, or an offer of employment, as a taxicab driver in the city shall be a condition of the issuance of a taxicab driver’s license.

        B.     The taxicab driver’s license shall become void upon termination of employment.

        C.     The employer shall notify the sheriff and the city finance director upon termination of employment.

        D.    The taxicab driver’s license shall state the name of the employer.

        E.     The taxicab driver shall return the taxicab license to the city finance director upon termination of employment. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

5.26.280 Fees.
        The city council may adopt by ordinance or resolution fees, service charges or assessments in an amount sufficient to pay for the costs of carrying out the provisions of this article. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL REGULATIONS

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL REGULATIONS
6.04.010 Adoption of county of Santa Barbara animal regulations.
        Chapter 7 of the Santa Barbara County Code is hereby ratified and adopted by reference as the animal regulations of the city. (Ord. 11-03 § 4, 2011; Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Title 7 (Reserved)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES—REAL PROPERTY
Chapter 8.08 SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER SKATING, ROLLER BLADES, BICYCLING AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
Chapter 8.12 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 8.16 UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION PERTAINING TO AIDS
Chapter 8.20 WATER WELLS

Chapter 8.04 PUBLIC NUISANCES—REAL PROPERTY
8.04.010 Purposes.
        A.    In order to protect residents of the city and their property from conditions which are hazardous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public, this chapter pertaining to nuisance abatement is necessary to effectively abate or prevent the development of such conditions in the city.

        B.     It is the intention of this chapter to set forth guidelines for determining the conditions which constitute a public nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and to provide an opportunity to correct them; and in the event a public nuisance is not abated or corrected by the responsible person, to provide a procedure for the city to cause the abatement of such nuisances and to recover its abatement costs.

        C.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable, and practical method, in addition to any other remedy available at law or equity, whereby lands, buildings or structures that are maintained in violation of this code may be required to be repaired, renovated, vacated, demolished, made safe, cleaned up, or otherwise brought into compliance with this code.

        D.    This chapter is not intended to enforce private conditions, covenants and restrictions (“CC&Rs”) on property. This chapter will be enforced uniformly within the city regardless of CC&Rs. Therefore, this chapter does not abrogate the right of any homeowner’s association or private citizen to take action, legal or as otherwise provided in the CC&Rs, to force compliance with the CC&Rs applicable to their tract or association even though the CC&R provisions may be the same or more restrictive, or not covered by this chapter. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, when used in the context of this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

        “Abandoned” means not legally occupied or in use for any legally permitted purpose.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s designee.

        “Enforcement officer” means any person authorized by the city manager to enforce certain provisions of this code.

        “Front yard area” means all of the property between the front property line and the face of the wall of the primary structure and garage.

        “Gravel surface” means: (1) gravel that is a crushed aggregate with a minimum diameter of three-quarters of an inch to a maximum diameter of one inch; (2) a depth of four to six inches; (3) providing positive drainage to the street and not to adjoining properties; and (4) installation of curb cuts with a concrete driveway apron per city standards. All gravel surfaces shall be properly maintained as to dust, weed, and erosion control. Crushed aggregate is defined as stone material where all faces of each aggregate have well-defined edges from a crushing operation.

        “Hearing officer” means any person authorized by the city manager to conduct a nuisance abatement hearing pursuant to this chapter and to make determinations, decisions, and orders with respect to public nuisances as provided in this chapter. The hearing officer shall not be a city employee. The employment, performance, evaluation, compensation of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be conditioned upon any particular conclusions reached at any nuisance abatement hearing.

        “Landscaping” means an area devoted to or developed and maintained predominantly with, native or exotic plant materials, including lawn, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements, such as pools, fountains, paved or decorated surfaces (excluding paved surfaces for the parking of vehicles), and sculptural elements.

        “Legal interest” means any interest that is represented by a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the county recorder.

        “Paved surface” means a surface paved with a minimum of two inches of asphalt, concrete, turf block, or pavers on a suitable base.

        “Responsible person” means any person whom an enforcement officer determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code. The term responsible person includes but is not limited to a property owner, tenant, a person with a legal interest in any real or personal property, or a person in possession or control of any real or personal property.

        “Street side yard area” means all of the property between the side property line adjoining a public street and the face of the wall of the primary structure and garage or fence line, whichever is closer. (Ord. 08-02 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.030 Public nuisances designated.
        It is declared to be a public nuisance, for any responsible person to maintain any of the following conditions on private property within the city that are either visible from a public right-of-way or private street or is otherwise injurious to the health, safety or welfare of neighboring properties or persons:

        A.    Substandard Buildings or Structures. Buildings or structures or portions of such buildings or structures having one or more of the following conditions:

        1.     Boarded Buildings. Buildings designed for human use or occupancy that are boarded by voluntary action of the owner or as a result of enforcement activity by the city, which are not rehabilitated within ninety (90) days after the building is boarded.

        2.     Unoccupied Buildings. Buildings designed for human use or occupancy that stand vacant for more than ninety (90) consecutive days, unless the city manager finds in writing that any of the following applies:

        a.     The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation;

        b.     The building meets all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, and is actively being offered for sale, lease, or rent;

        c.     The building does not contribute to and is not likely to contribute to blight because the owner is actively maintaining and monitoring the building so that it does not contribute to blight. Active maintenance and monitoring includes:

        i.      Maintenance of landscaping and plant materials in good condition,

        ii.     Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including, but not limited to, paint and finishes, in good condition,

        iii.    Regular removal of all exterior trash, debris and graffiti,

        iv.    Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable codes and regulations, and

        v.     Reasonable efforts to prevent and deter criminal activity on the property.

        3.     Unfinished Building. Buildings or structures that are partially destroyed, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction for an unreasonable period of time, but not less than three months; however, an extended time may be allowed by the city manager if orderly progress is demonstrated.

        4.     Broken Windows. Buildings or structures that have broken windows for more than three months.

        5.     Improperly Secured Structure. The failure to secure and continue to secure from public access all doorways, windows and other openings into vacant or abandoned buildings or structures.

        6.     Deteriorated Structures. Walls, retaining walls, fences, structures or buildings, upon which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation.

        7.     Graffiti. Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement or walkway upon which any graffiti, whether etched in or marked on a surface, is allowed to remain for an unreasonable period. For purposes of this subsection, “unreasonable” means the longer of the following periods: (a) five days from the placement of the graffiti on the premises; or (b) five days from notification to the property owner from the city to remove the graffiti, or any extensions of the removal period granted in writing by the city.

        8.     Substandard Exterior Screening. Temporary fencing and screening material including, but not limited to fencing consisting of garage doors, wood pallets, barbed wire, tarpaulins (plastic, vinyl, canvas, or other similar material), opaque or transparent plastic or Mylar, palm leaves, bamboo sheeting, ribbed or un-ribbed fiberglass or plastic, recycled metal whose previous use is still easily recognizable. Screening of property visible from a public street must be of durable materials permanently constructed for the purpose of screening and must be consistent with city standards and requirements.

        9.     Inadequate Sanitation. Includes any of the following:

        a.     Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or hotel;

        b.     Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by building and safety codes;

        c.     Room and space dimensions less than required by building and safety codes; and

        d.     Dampness of habitable rooms.

        10.   Structural Hazards. Includes any of the following:

        a.     Deteriorated or inadequate foundations;

        b.     Defective, deteriorated or inadequately sized flooring and/or floor supports;

        c.     Defective, deteriorated or inadequately sized members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports;

        d.     Defective, deteriorated or inadequately sized ceiling, roof or other horizontal supports; and

        e.     Defective, damaged or inadequately constructed fireplace or chimney.

        11.   Inadequate or Hazardous Wiring. Any wiring that does not conform to the applicable laws in effect at the time of installation, or which is not maintained in a good and safe condition, or is not working properly.

        12.   Inadequate Plumbing. Any plumbing that does not conform to all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation, or which has not been maintained in a good and safe condition.

        13.   Inadequate Heating or Ventilation. The lack of adequate heating facilities in a dwelling unit or hotel room; the lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment; and any mechanical equipment, including vents, that do not conform to all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation or which are not maintained in a good and safe condition.

        14.   Faulty Weather Protection. The lack of sound and effective roof covering or wall covering.

        15.   Fire Hazard. Any building, structure, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which is in such a condition as to potentially cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause.

        16.   Inadequate Fire Safety Measures or Fire Fighting Equipment. Any building or structure which is not provided with exit facilities or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment as required by law.

        17.   Any other condition constituting a substandard building under California Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3.

        B.     Substandard Property Conditions. Property or portions of property having one or more of the following conditions:

        1.     Substandard Exterior Surfaces. Walls, retaining and crib walls, fences, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks or walkways that are maintained in such condition so as to become defective, unsightly or no longer viable including those driveways, parking lots, sidewalks or walkways containing potholes, excessive cracks or weeds.

        2.     Substandard Landscaping. Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping, including, but not limited to, dead, debris laden, weed infested or overgrown vegetation, trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground cover; or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water; or the removal or failure to maintain in good condition any landscaping required as a condition to any permit or development approved or included in the project plans or application, without city approval. This condition also includes the lack of any landscaping in any front yard, or landscaped setback area which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or planted ground cover or covering, so as to cause excessive dust or allow the accumulation of debris.

        3.     Debris Accumulation. Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, lumber, junk, trash, garbage, salvage materials, rubbish, hazardous waste, refuse, rubble, broken asphalt or concrete, containers, broken or neglected machinery, furniture, appliances, sinks, fixtures or equipment, scrap metals, machinery parts, dilapidated or dismantled automobiles or other such material stored or deposited on property such that they are visible from a public street, alley, or neighboring property, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or which adversely affect the aesthetic or olfactory nature of the area. With respect to refuse or trash placed so as to be visible from neighboring properties or streets, this condition does not apply to those times when refuse or trash is scheduled for collection, in accordance with this code or other city regulation.

        4.     Exterior Storage.

        a.     The exterior storage or maintenance of parts or machinery of any type or description, where such items are visible from a private or public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, unless specifically authorized by a city permit pursuant to Title 19 (Zoning);

 

        b.     Building materials or merchandise for sale unless specifically authorized by a city permit pursuant to Title 19; or

        c.     Construction equipment or garbage bins except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit or other city permit are in progress on the subject or adjoining property.

        5.     Landslide and Water Hazards. Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties. The excavation of land that results in the accumulation of any pool or body of water in such a manner that it is, or may become, a breeding place for mosquitoes.

        6.     Improper Obstruction. Obstruction or encroachment upon any public property, including, but not limited to, any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, and park or building, without prior city consent. Such obstructions or encroachments include, but are not limited to overgrown trees and shrubs, building materials, merchandise or other personal property, free standing portable basketball hoop stands, buildings or portions of buildings or structures protruding onto public property.

        7.     Improper Vehicle Repair. Use of property in a residential district for the purpose of performing vehicle repair or maintenance where any of the following conditions exists:

        a.     The repair is conducted outside of a fully enclosed structure and results in a vehicle being inoperable for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or

        b.     For a profit, except where such use constitutes a legal non-conforming use pursuant to the city’s zoning ordinances.

        8.     Hazardous Substances. The improper maintenance of any substance which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either cause or substantially contribute to an increased risk of death or serious illness or otherwise pose a significant present or potential hazard to human health or the environment including any hazardous substance that is likely to or actually flows or seeps onto any public street or other public or private property.

        9.     Attractive Nuisances. Abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment and machinery, pools, ponds, excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements or other holes, abandoned refrigerators or other appliances, abandoned motor vehicles, any unsound structure, accumulated lumber, trash, garbage, debris or vegetation that attract, or may reasonably be expected to attract children.

        10.   Construction Debris Containers. Construction debris storage bins stored in excess of fifteen (15) days on a public street or any front or side yard setback area without the express approval of the city.

        11.   Animals and Livestock. Animals, livestock, poultry or bees kept, bred or maintained for any purpose in violation of any provision of this code.

        12.   Overcrowded Habitation. Any habitation that is overcrowded, as defined by the Uniform Housing Code.

        13.   Illegal Dumping. Except where construction is occurring under a valid permit, the dumping or depositing of waste matter, rocks or dirt in or upon any public or private street or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public property other than property designated or set aside for that purpose by the governing body having charge of that property.

        14.   Rodents and Predators. Any premises infested with rodents or predatory animals.

        15.   Parking of Vehicles. No landowner, tenant, vehicle owner, vehicle operator, or property manager shall park, or allow to be parked, any vehicle, as defined by the California Vehicle Code, in the front yard area or street side yard area of a property with a residential zoning designation except on a paved surface. A gravel surface approved by the planning director may also be permitted. No more than fifty (50) percent of the area of the existing front yard area or street side yard area shall be a paved surface. The remaining fifty (50) percent shall contain landscaping.

        C.     Improper Parking of Recreational Vehicles, Boats and Trailers. Improper parking of a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer, as set forth in this subsection, shall constitute a public nuisance. In all zones in the city, a recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 19.12.020, boat, or a trailer, as defined in Section 19.12.020, may be parked or stored only in the following manner:

        1.     A recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer may be parked or stored in any enclosed structure as long as the structure otherwise conforms to the zoning requirements of the particular zone where located.

        2.     Residential Property. No more than two recreational vehicles, boats, or trailers may be parked or stored outside of an enclosed structure on a residentially zoned lot. The following locational restrictions shall apply:

        a.     Two recreational vehicles, boats, or trailers may be parked or stored in the side or rear yard of the property provided that such recreational vehicles, boats, or trailers are screened behind a six-foot high wall or fence, no closer than three feet to any building or structure, and no closer than two and one-half feet to the property lines (see Figure 8A), and parked or stored on a pad composed of concrete, pavers, compacted base, or gravel.



        b.     One recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer may be parked or stored in the front setback area as follows:

        i.      On the driveway to the garage, provided the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer is set back two and one-half feet from the front property line; or

        ii.     An addition to the driveway to the garage may be used for parking or storage of a recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer on the short side of the property as shown in Figure 8A. The parking or storage area can be no closer than two and one-half feet to the side property line and two and one-half feet to the front property line (Figure 8A). The parking or storage pad shall be composed of concrete or pavers. Compacted base or gravel is not permitted.

        c.     The driveway may be used for temporary parking for loading and unloading for a period not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours.

        3.     Commercial/Industrial Property. No registered owner, legal owner, driver, renter, and/or lessee of any recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer shall park or store, or allow the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer to be parked or stored, on any unpaved surface within the yard or setback areas of any commercial, industrial or vacant lot. The surface upon which a recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer is parked or stored shall provide adequate vehicle support together with dust, weed, and erosion control for the driveway, parking area and area underneath the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer.

        4.     No part of the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer may extend over the public sidewalk or parkway.

        5.     A recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer shall not be parked or stored in a manner that constitutes a safety hazard or poses a danger to any person.

        6.     All storage of recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers shall conform to this subsection within six months of its adoption.

        D.    Living or Residing in Recreational Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person to park a recreational vehicle on any street, highway, or public or private property for purposes of living or residing therein, except as permitted by ordinance, resolution or other formal action of the city council. “Living” or “residing” as used herein shall include use of a recreational vehicle as living or sleeping quarters for more than four days in any twelve (12) month period. This section shall not apply to registered guests, campers or residents at mobile home or recreational vehicle parks validly existing pursuant to city zoning requirements.

        E.     Improper Occupancy and Storage in Recreational Vehicles. Improper occupancy or storage in recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 19.12.020 of the municipal code, boat or trailer, as defined in Section 19.12.020 of the municipal code, shall constitute a public nuisance. In all zones of the city, a recreational vehicle, boat or trailer shall not be:

        1.     Used for dwelling purposes except for limited overnight sleeping for a maximum of four days in any twelve (12) month period;

        2.     Permanently connected to sewer lines, water lines or electricity; the recreational vehicle may only be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries and other maintenance-related purposes;

        3.     Used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered to be part of the recreational vehicle, boat, or trailer or essential for its immediate use.

        F.     Other Illegal Conditions. Any other condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of this code, or any applicable federal, state, county or city law, which may constitute a public nuisance.

        G.    Noise Regulations. In order to secure and promote the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare, and to protect the rights of its citizens to privacy and freedom from nuisance, it is the purpose of this section to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises at levels which are detrimental to the health and welfare of the community. Emitting or causing the emission of such noises is a violation of this chapter.

        1.     Definitions. Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this section, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.

        a.     A-Weighted Sound Level. The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.

        b.     Ambient Noise Level. The composite noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes a normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location and time.

        c.     Average Sound Level. A sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in the American National Standard Specifications for sound level meters (see ANSI S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof). Average sound level is also called equivalent continuous sound level (Leq).

        d.     Construction Equipment. Any tools, machinery, or equipment used in conjunction with construction operations, including all types of “special construction” equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site be located on-highway or off-highway.

        e.     Decibel (dB). A unit of measure of sound (noise) level.

        f.      Disturbing, Excessive, or Offensive Noise.

        i.      Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance involving discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

        ii.     Any sound or noise conflicting with the criteria or levels set forth in this section.

        g.     Emergency Work. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger of damage, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service.

        h.     Motor Vehicles. Any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code, specifically including, but not limited to, “mini-bikes” and “go-carts.”

        i.      Noise Level. The same as “sound level.” The terms may be used interchangeably herein.

        j.      Person. A person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private.

        k.     Sound Level. In decibels, the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (see ANSI S1.4-1983, or the latest version thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting is implied.

        l.      Sound Level Meter. An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, a readout, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for Type S2A meters in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (see ANSI S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof).

        m.    Supplementary Definitions of Technical Terms. Definitions of technical terms not defined herein shall be obtained from American National Standard Acoustical Terminology (see ANSI S1.1-1960; R-1976).

        2.     Sound Level Measurement.

        a.     Any sound or noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting and meter response pursuant to applicable manufacturer’s instructions.

        b.     The sound level meter shall be appropriately calibrated and adjusted as necessary by means of an acoustical calibrator or the coupler-type to assure meter accuracy within the tolerances set forth by the American National Standards Institute (see ANSI S1.4-1983 or the latest revision thereof).

        c.     For outdoor measurements, the microphone shall be not less than four feet above the ground, at least four feet distant from walls or other large reflecting surfaces and shall be protected from the effects of wind noises by the use of appropriate wind screens and the location selected shall be at any point on the affected property. In cases where the microphone must be located within ten feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distances and orientation of the sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken within five feet of the noise source.

        d.     For indoor measurements, the microphone shall be at least three feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three microphone positions throughout the room shall be determined.

 

        3.     Sound Level Limits.

        a.     Unless otherwise specified, it is unlawful for any person(s) to cause noise by any means to the extent that the one-hour average sound level exceeds the applicable limit given in the following table at any location in the city of Buellton beyond the property line of the premises on which the noise is produced, as measured pursuant to the provisions of this section. The noise subject to these limits is that part of the total noise at the specified location that is due solely to the action of said person(s).

 

Table of Applicable Limits

Property Receiving Noise

Time of Day

1-Hour Average Sound Level (dB)

Zones – RS, RM, MHP, PRD, OS, REC, PQP

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

65

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

45

Zones – CR, CS, M

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

75

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

45

 

        b.     The noise limits in subsection (G)(3)(a) shall be adjusted as follows to account for the effects of time and duration on the impact of noise levels:

        i.      Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of fifteen (15) minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by three decibels.

        ii.     Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of ten minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by four decibels.

        iii.    Noise that is produced for no more than a cumulative period of five minutes in any hour may exceed the noise limit by five decibels.

        c.     For purposes of this section, the peak decibel reading for a noise with fluctuating noise level (such as live or recorded music) shall be considered as the noise level for the entire cumulative period of noise. Likewise, the time between repetitive intermittent noises (such as banging, pounding, or hammering) shall be included in the cumulative of the noise.

        d.     If the measured ambient level exceeds the applicable limit noted above, the allowable one-hour average sound level shall be the ambient noise level.

        e.     Fixed-location public utility distribution or transmission facilities located on or adjacent to a property line shall be subject to the noise level limits of this section, measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located.

        4.     Construction Noise. Any person who operates powered construction or landscape equipment and/or who erects, constructs, demolishes, excavates for, alters, or repairs any building or structure within the city of Buellton in such a manner as to cause noise to be received beyond the boundaries of the property on which construction work is occurring shall comply with the following:

        a.     No construction work shall be performed on Sunday or federally designated holidays;

        b.     No construction work shall be performed on Saturday without the written approval of the city of Buellton. In no cases shall work occur before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.;

        c.     No construction work shall be performed before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday;

        d.     Construction activity shall not cause an hourly average sound level of greater than seventy-five (75) decibels on property zoned or used for open space, recreation, or residential purposes;

        e.     Exception. Interior construction work that does not generate noise outside of the structure is not subjection to the noise restrictions of this subsection;

        f.      Exception. A person may perform construction work on the person’s own property on a Sunday or holiday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; provided such construction activity is not carried on for profit or livelihood.

        5.     Repair of Motor Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person within the city of Buellton to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise as defined in this section.

        6.     Public Nuisance Noise.

        a.     It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the city of Buellton, any disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise which causes the discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

        b.     In the absence of objective measurement by use of a sound level meter, the characteristics and conditions which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this subsection exists shall include any or all of the following:

        i.      The level of the noise;

        ii.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

        iii.    Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

        iv.    The level of the ambient noise;

        v.     The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;

        vi.    The nature and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and the area where it is received;

        vii.   The time of day or night the noise occurs;

        viii.  The duration of the noise; or

        ix.    Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

        c.     Identified Excessive Noises. The following activities, among others, are declared to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises in violation of this subsection, but said enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive, namely:

        i.      Radios, Televisions, Stereos, Surround Sound Systems, Amplifiers, Musical Instruments, and Similar Devices.

        (A)   The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, loud speakers, amplifiers, surround sound systems or other machine of device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any residential or public area is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any participant in a duly licensed parade, or any person who has been otherwise duly authorized by the city of Buellton to engage in such conduct.

        (B)   Prima Facie Violations. The operation of any such device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection;

        ii.     Animals.

        (A)   The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal or animals which by frequent or long continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity.

        (B)   The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that the violation of this subsection disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.

        7.     Exemptions.

        a.     Emergency Work. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any emergency work as defined herein.

        b.     Government Preempted Activities. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by federal, state, or local law.

        c.     Motor Vehicles. Sound produced by motor vehicles as regulated by sound-limiting provisions of the California Vehicle Code when such vehicle is located or operated on any public street, right-of-way, or highway.

        d.     Aircraft. Aircraft operated in conformity with federal law.

        e.     Utilities. Activities necessary to continue to provide utility service to the general public, whether this service is installing additional facilities, restoring worn or damaged facilities, and/or maintaining existing service.

        f.      Household Activities. The reasonable operation of normal household gardening or hobby shop equipment or home maintenance/repair work during the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday, and Holidays. (Ord. 18-01 § 2, 2018; Ord. 17-02 § 2, 2017; Ord. 12-03 § 3, 2012; Ord. 08-02 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-11 § 3, 2006; Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.040 Notice of violation.
        A.    Whenever the city manager reasonably believes that a public nuisance exists, the city manager may commence nuisance abatement proceedings under this chapter.

        B.     To initiate nuisance abatement proceedings, the city manager must first cause a written notice of violation to be issued. The notice of violation serves as a written warning to cease and abate the violation.

        C.     The notice of violation at a minimum must contain the following information:

        1.     Name of the responsible person for the violation;

        2.     Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the property location where the violation was observed;

        3.     The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation;

        4.     A description of the actions necessary to correct the violation;

        5.     An order to the responsible person to correct the violation within a prescribed and reasonable time period;

        6.     A statement of the consequences of the failure to correct the violation in terms of the city’s ability to charge the costs of abatement as a lien against the property and to foreclose on such lien.

        D.    The city manager is authorized to grant reasonable extensions on the time period for removal or correction of any condition specified in the notice of violation on a proper showing by the responsible person of extenuating circumstances, made before the date for compliance specified in the notice of violation. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.050 Service of notice.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever notice is required to be given under this chapter, it must be given in one of the following ways:

        1.     Personal service;

        2.     Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Concurrently, the same notice may be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service will be deemed effective by regular mail, provided that return receipt and notice is not returned. Service by mail will be effective on the date of mailing;

        3.     Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the affected property or any other real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the property owner or other responsible person has a legal interest.

        B.     The failure of any interested person to receive any notice served in accordance with this section will not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.060 Voluntary abatement.
        The responsible person of any building, structure or property alleged to be a public nuisance as set forth in a notice of violation, may abate the nuisance at any time within the abatement period by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition. The city manager shall be advised of the abatement and shall cause the premises to be inspected to ensure that the nuisance has in fact been abated. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.070 Notice of abatement hearing.
        A.    Upon the failure of a property owner or other responsible person to remove or correct the conditions described in the notice of violation by the date specified and the city’s election to pursue abatement administratively, the city manager may cause a notice of public nuisance abatement hearing to be issued and a hearing scheduled to determine whether such building, structure, or property is being maintained in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance.

        B.     The notice of a nuisance abatement hearing must be issued: (1) by sending the notice by certified mail to the owner of the affected property at the address shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll and to any other responsible persons holding permits or entitlements to the applicable property, building or structure at least ten days prior to the hearing; and (2) by conspicuously posting on the affected property, building, or structure a copy of the notice as provided in subsection C of this section. The notice may also be served on the holder of any legal interest of record in the building, structure or property.

        C.     The notice of a public nuisance abatement hearing shall be provided in substantially the following format:

 

NOTICE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

ABATEMENT HEARING

 

(Name and address of owner of the property and any other Responsible Person)

 

As owner of the property located at (address) based on the most recent Santa Barbara County equalized assessment roll or as a person responsible for the day-to-day management and maintenance of this property, you are hereby notified that the undersigned has determined that the following conditions exist on the property, the existence of which may constitute a public nuisance under the Buellton Municipal Code:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

A hearing will be held at    (place)    Buellton, on    (time)   before a City Hearing Officer to determine whether the conditions that exist on the property constitute a public nuisance.

 

A hearing may be avoided if the following corrections are made and verified at least 7 days before the date set for the hearing:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

Thereafter you must maintain the property free of any of the unlawful conditions described above. It is your responsibility to obtain all appropriate permits and to dispose of any material or materials involved in the public nuisance in a legal manner.

 

If corrective action is not taken prior to the hearing and the Hearing Officer determines that the conditions on the property constitute a public nuisance and such nuisance remains unabated by the date set forth in the Hearing Officer’s order, the following abatement action(s) may be taken by the City:

__________________________________________________________________________________

 

IF ABATEMENT ACTION IS TAKEN BY THE CITY, ALL COSTS OF THE ABATEMENT, INCLUDING THE TIME OF CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, HEARING OFFICERS, AGENTS,

 

 

CONTRACTORS AND ATTORNEYS WILL BE ASSESSED AGAINST THE PROPERTY AND WILL ATTACH AS A LIEN UNTIL PAID.

 

All persons having an interest in this matter may attend the hearing and give testimony and evidence, which will be given due consideration by the Hearing Officer. Call _______________ for questions regarding this notice.

 

Dated: ___________________

City of Buellton ___________________ Department

By: ___________________

 

        D.    If the property owner or other responsible person abates the nuisance prior to the time of the hearing, such person must immediately notify the city and schedule an inspection by a code enforcement officer so that the city can confirm that the nuisance has been abated and that the abatement hearing may be cancelled. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.080 Nuisance abatement hearing.
        The hearing to determine whether a public nuisance exists shall be conducted as follows:

        A.    The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and in the course of so doing, is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a).

        B.     At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider any relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports. The hearing officer shall give any interested person the reasonable opportunity to be heard.

        C.     The hearing officer, or designee, may inspect the premises involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing, provided that:

        1.     Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made;

        2.     The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection;

        3.     The hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and each conclusion drawn from such facts.

        D.    Each party shall have the right to rebut or explain the matters referenced by the hearing officer either during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record.

        E.     Based upon the evidence presented to or discovered by the hearing officer, the officer shall determine whether a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter exists. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.090 Order of abatement.
        A.    The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and cause a copy of the decision to be mailed by certified mail to the property owner, and by regular first-class mail to all other persons who received notice of the original hearing, and to any other person who has requested in writing notice of the decision.

        B.     If the hearing officer determines that a public nuisance exists, then the hearing officer shall issue an order requiring the abatement of the nuisance in a reasonable time and manner. In addition, the hearing officer shall, as part of the abatement order, direct the property owner to pay the city’s costs of the nuisance proceedings. Such costs will include any and all noticing costs, the time of city officers, employees, agents, contractors, the hearing officer’s costs, and the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city (if notice that the city would seek attorneys fees was provided at the commencement of the proceedings in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5). Any costs awarded will be deemed a debt owed to the city and must be paid within thirty (30) days of invoice from the city. Any debt remaining unpaid will, at the city’s option, be:

        1.     Collected through the use of civil process, including utilization of a collection agency; or

        2.     Placement of such debt as a lien upon the property to be collected in accordance with Section 8.04.120 of this chapter.

        C.     The decision of the hearing officer will be final and may be judicially reviewed under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.100 Abatement of nuisance by city.
        A.    If the nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified in the hearing officer’s order, the city manager may cause the nuisance to be abated by city personnel or under private contract.

        B.     The city manager is authorized to grant reasonable extensions on the time period for abatement based on a proper showing by the property owner or other responsible person of extenuating circumstances, made before the date of the ordered abatement.

        C.     The city attorney is authorized to take whatever action is necessary to gain entry upon the property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating the nuisance. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.110 Cost accounting—Notification.
        A.    City personnel, and any private contractor authorized to abate a nuisance, shall keep an account of the costs incurred in the abatement proceeding including all abatement work performed on each separate parcel of land where work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city manager. Such costs of abatement include all direct costs and expenses related to such things as personnel salaries and benefits, operation overhead, the actual expenses and costs of the city in preparation and service of notices, specifications, and contracts, fees for experts or consultants, inspection of work, legal costs or expenses including reasonable attorney fees, and procedures associated with collecting moneys owed.

        B.     The city manager will give notice by certified mail of the costs of abatement to the property owner at the address appearing on the latest equalized assessment roll and to any responsible person at the affected property. This cost notice will include a statement that the property owner and any responsible person has a right to a hearing before the city manager regarding the costs of abatement of the property if such hearing is requested in writing within ten days of the date of the notice.

        C.     If a hearing is requested, the city manager will set a date for the hearing and cause notice of the hearing to be sent by certified mail to the property owner and to any responsible person at least ten days before the date of the scheduled hearing. The city manager will either confirm or modify the costs of abatement at such hearing. The city manager shall give notice of the decision on the assessment of the costs of abatement by certified mail to the property owner and to any responsible person. The costs of abatement will be a personal obligation of the property owner and any responsible person and may be charged as a lien against the property involved. The decision of the city manager will be final. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.120 Collection of abatement costs.
        If the total cost of abatement of the nuisance, as confirmed by the city manager, remains unpaid within thirty (30) days of the notice provided under Section 8.04.110, the city manager may cause the abatement costs to be collected by any of the following or any other lawful means:

        A.    Recordation of a Lien That Will Become a Judgment Lien.

        1.     Prior to recordation, a notice of nuisance abatement lien must be served on the owner of record in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10. If the owner of record after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

        2.     The nuisance abatement lien must specify: (a) the amount of the lien; (b) that the lien is imposed on behalf of the city; (c) the date of the city’s abatement order; (d) street address, legal description and assessor parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and (e) the name and address of the recorded owner of the property.

        3.     The lien will be recorded in the county recorder’s office and from the date of recording will have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment.

        4.     The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the nuisance abatement lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

        5.     In the event the lien is satisfied, the city will cause a notice of release of the lien to be recorded in the county recorder’s office.

        6.     The notice of lien for recordation may be in a form substantially as follows:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

Claim of the City of Buellton

 

        Pursuant to the authority vested by Title 1, Chapter 8.04 of the Buellton Municipal Code and California Government Code section 38773.1, the City of Buellton on the ______ day of ______________, 20___, did cause the property hereinafter described to be declared a public nuisance and ordered it abated. The City Council of the City of Buellton, did on the ______ day of _____________, 20___, assess the cost of such abatement upon the property, but that assessment has not been paid. The City of Buellton does hereby claim a lien for such abatement in the amount of the assessment, $________, and this amount shall be a lien upon the real property until paid in full and discharged of record.

 

        The real property upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land lying and being entirely with the City of Buellton, County of Santa Barbara, State of California, particularly described as follows:

 

Street Address:_________________________

 

Legal Description: (see Attachment 1 attached hereto and incorporated by this reference.)

 

Assessors Parcel Number(s):

_______________________________________

 

Name and address of the owner of record of the Property: _________________________ ________________________________________________________________________

 

Dated: _____________________________

___________________________________

City Clerk, City of Buellton

 

        B.     Recordation of a Lien That Will Become a Special Assessment.

        1      Prior to recordation, a notice of nuisance abatement lien must be sent by certified mail to the property owner at the address appearing on the latest equalized assessment roll.

        2.     In addition to the matters set forth in subsection (A)(2) of this section, the notice of the nuisance abatement lien that will become a special assessment must specify that the lien will constitute a special assessment that will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and will be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. If payments are permitted to be made in annual installments, the rate of interest on the unpaid balance must be specified.

        3.     After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the notice of lien will be turned over to the finance director to add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective parcels of land. Any costs incurred by the city in connection with recording the lien may be added to the assessment.

        4.     The city manager may determine that in lieu of collecting the entire assessment at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes, the assessment may be paid in annual installments over a period not to exceed five years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof will be subject to the same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. Any assessments so deferred will bear interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of six percent per year.

        5.     In the event the lien is satisfied, the city will cause a notice of release of the lien to be recorded in the county recorder’s office.

        C.     Civil Action by the City. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.130 Alternate abatement actions.
        A.    Emergency Abatement. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the city manager determines that a public nuisance exists within the city and that nuisance constitutes an imminent hazard or danger to public health or safety, the city manager, without observing the provisions of this chapter with regard to abatement procedures, may cause the abatement of such nuisance in such manner as the city manager determines is reasonably required. If the city manager deems it feasible, the city manager may attempt to give the property owner or other responsible person informal notice of the nuisance and the proposed timing and method of abatement. The city manager shall promptly report any such emergency abatement action to the city council. The city manager shall cause an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city in abating the imminently dangerous condition. Such costs may be recovered by the city in the same manner that abatement costs are recovered pursuant to this chapter.

        B.     Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any other means or remedies available to it under this code or the provisions of any applicable ordinances, law, or in equity to correct nuisances arising from any building, structure or property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.140 Right of entry.
        A.    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any property any unlawful condition or prohibited activity which makes such building, structure or property unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the enforcement officer may enter such building, structure or property at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the enforcement officer by this chapter. If such building, structure or property is occupied, the enforcement officer must first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building, structure or property is unoccupied, the enforcement officer must first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other responsible person and request entry. If such entry is refused, the enforcement officer will have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person, including an owner or responsible person to refuse to allow an enforcement officer, or a contractor engaged by the city, to enter upon the property at any time during the hours of daylight for the purpose of the abatement of a public nuisance or to obstruct, impede or interfere in any manner with the enforcement officer, or a contractor engaged by the city, in any abatement work undertaken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

 

8.04.150 Attorney fees and treble costs.
        A.    Attorney Fees. Under Government Code Section 38773.5, in any action or proceeding brought to abate a public nuisance, the prevailing party will be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees, provided that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice at the commencement of such action or proceeding that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees.

        B.     Order for Treble Costs. Under Government Code Section 38773.7, in addition to any other costs of abatement permitted under this chapter, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that a property owner or other responsible person is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except for conditions abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980, the city may seek and the court may order the property owner or other responsible person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 06-04 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 8.08 SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER SKATING, ROLLER BLADES, BICYCLING AND SIMILAR ACTIVITIES
8.08.010 Skateboarding, roller skating, roller blades, bicycling and similar activities prohibited in certain designated areas.
        A.    It is unlawful and subject to punishment in accordance with subsection H of this section, for any person utilizing or riding on any skateboard, roller skates, bicycle, roller blades, or any similar device to ride or move about in or on a public or private property when the same property has been designated and posted as a no skateboard, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity area, provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed or deemed to negate any right granted to bicycle riders by the California Vehicle Code. This section shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict any person from walking a bicycle or carrying a skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, or similar device on said property.

        B.     No person shall use a skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, bicycle or similar device in a manner which creates a nuisance as defined in subsection (D)(5) of this section.

        C.     No person shall place a ramp or foreign matter, including, but not limited to, wax, grease or other lubricant, friction reducing agent or other physical aid which enhances or enables skateboarding, bicycling or roller skating performance, on any sidewalk, step, hand rail, bench, wall or other improvement on public property or other than their own property without the consent of the owner.

        D.    For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings ascribed:

        1.     “Private property” means any property held by private interests which is used primarily for business, commercial, office space, business park, religious, multifamily, or recreational purposes. This shall also include a parking facility for these “private property” areas.

        2.     “Public property” means any property owned or maintained by the city of Buellton, any public agency or public school district, and any public utility within the geographic boundaries of the city.

        3.     “Roller skates” or “roller blades” means any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached, including wheels that are “in-line” and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion.

        4.     “Skateboard” means a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which, if propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels.

        5.     “Nuisance” means any activity which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or the obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner of any public park, square, street, or highway.

        6.     “Bicycle” is defined in the California Vehicle Code under Section 231 as a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having one or more wheels.

        E.     Owners of “private property” may designate their property as a no skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling area. The owner may then post his or her property at his or her cost in conformance with subsection G of this section.

        F.     The city council or its designee may designate any public roadway, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public property as a no skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling area by the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with subsection G in this section.

        G.    Prior to the enforcement of prohibition on skateboarding, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity as listed in this section the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows:

 

        Skateboarding, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity is prohibited by Buellton Municipal Code Chapter 8.08. Any violation is punishable by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense. Buellton Police Department 686-8150.

 

        1.     The sign may contain only those items which the agency or property owner wishes to prohibit. For example, if there is no desire to limit bicycling, the posting would not contain the word “bicycling.”

        2.     Such prohibition shall apply to the property or areas so designated once the property or area has been posted with signs in plain view at all entrances to the property or area. Signs so posted at the entrances to the property or area, shall comply with California Vehicle Code Section 22658a(1). These signs will be a minimum of seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches with lettering not less than one inch in height and shall be approved by the city public works director or designated representative. Public sidewalks or other surfaced areas may be painted with this warning in lieu of the forgoing signage requirement. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant(s) to post and maintain all signs prohibiting skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling.

        H.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.32.020 of the Buellton Municipal Code, any conviction under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction punishable as follows:

        1.     A fine not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first violation;

        2.     A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second violation within one year; and

        3.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional violation within one year.

        I.      Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, handicapped, or incapacitated persons, devices designed, intended, and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes shall be exempted from this section. Police officers who are performing duties in their official capacity are exempt from this section. Furthermore, the city council may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement provisions of this section to accommodate special events when so requested by the organizer. (Ord. 98-01 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 8.12 FIRE PREVENTION
8.12.010 Definitions.
        Whenever any of the following terms or phrases are used in the California Fire Code (CFC), each such term or phrase shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this chapter:

        A.    “Jurisdiction” means the city of Buellton.

        B.     “Chief” or “fire chief” means the fire chief of the county of Santa Barbara.

        C.     “Building department” means the county of Santa Barbara building and safety division.

        D.    “California Building Code” and “building code” mean the building code as adopted by the city. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

8.12.020 Adoption of California Fire Code and Chapter 15 of the Santa Barbara County Code.
        The 2019 Edition of the California Fire Code as adopted and amended by the Santa Barbara County board of supervisors as Chapter 15 of the Santa Barbara County Code is hereby ratified and adopted by reference as the fire code of the city. (Ord. 20-01 § 3, 2020; Ord. 15-01 § 3, 2015; added during 2010 recodification)

Chapter 8.16 UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION PERTAINING TO AIDS
8.16.010 Legislative findings.
        The city council finds and declares that:

        A.    The medical condition known as Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, (commonly known as AIDS/HIV infection), is a deadly communicable disease and has the potential to affect every segment of our city’s population.

        B.     AIDS/HIV infection was first recognized in 1981 by the United States Public Health Services Center for Disease Control.

        C.     AIDS, in the opinion of the scientific and medical community, is caused by a virus, known as HIV infection (human immunodeficiency virus) (or in the past, HTLV-III or LAV), which attacks and cripples the body’s immune system and neurological system, thereby leaving the body vulnerable to opportunistic infections, certain cancers and neurological diseases.

        D.    A person afflicted with AIDS/HIV infection can suffer a variety of bacterial, viral and/or fungal caused illnesses, cancers, protozoan and neurological conditions which debilitate the body resulting in a high mortality rate within several years after diagnosis.

        E.     The transmission of the virus has occurred through transfer of body fluids, for example, blood, blood by-products, body organs and semen. Body fluids can be transferred through intimate sexual contact, through the sharing of hypodermic needles used in drug injections and to a fetus and/or newborn infant from the mother.

        F.     No evidence exists to indicate the spread of the virus through casual contact, such as contact at work or at school, through the air or water or through the handling of food by persons having the AIDS virus.

        G.    Medical studies of family groups in which one or more persons having been diagnosed with AIDS/HIV infection show no spread of the virus except through the exchange of body fluid such as through sexual intimacy, through mother’s milk, or through the exchange of blood, such as mother to fetus.

        H.    A public health danger represented by the HIV virus and its subsequent manifestation as AIDS is caused by the lengthy incubation period during which period an apparently healthy but infected individual may spread the disease to other persons through the transfer of body fluids such as blood, blood by-products, body organs, semen, or vaginal/cervical secretions, perinatally or through the sharing of hypodermic needles used in drug injections.

        I.      AIDS/HIV testing, in the opinion of the scientific and medical community, is a vital factor in protecting public health because individuals who test positive benefit from early diagnosis and treatment, and other members of the public benefit when persons who have tested positive for AIDS/HIV take affirmative measures to prevent the inadvertent spread of the disease to others.

        J.      AIDS has been recognized as a national public health emergency with a large proportion of the cases diagnosed in California.

        K.    AIDS, in the opinion of the scientific and medical community, will continue to be a problem within our city for the foreseeable future.

        L.     Persons with AIDS, including persons infected with the HIV virus who may not show AIDS symptoms, or those perceived to fall into one of the above-stated categories, are faced with potential discrimination, and such potential for discrimination is sufficient to justify a city ordinance to prohibit those discriminatory practices which are not currently adequately addressed by federal and state law. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.020 Purpose and public policy.
        It is declared as the public policy of the city that it is necessary to protect and safeguard both the rights and opportunities of persons with AIDS, or HIV infection, in respect to discrimination in housing, employment, business establishments, testing, access to medical services and in city facilities and services, and the public health by encouraging people to consent to AIDS/HIV testing by removing the barrier to such testing presented by the fear of discrimination if the test results were positive. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.030 Definitions.
        A.    “AIDS” means Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, a disease complex which occurs when an important part of the human immune system is destroyed by the action of a human immune deficiency virus known as HIV infection and previously referred to as HTLV-III or LAV and as it may be further defined by the United States Public Health Services Center for Disease Control. AIDS is manifested by infections, cancers or neurological diseases. (For purposes of this chapter, a person is regarded as having AIDS, or being infected with the virus (HIV infection) that causes AIDS if such person is perceived and treated as an alleged violator of the provisions of this chapter as having AIDS, or being infected with the virus that causes AIDS, whether such medical condition exists or not.)

        B.     “Business establishment” means and includes any entity, however organized, which furnishes goods or services, including educational services, or accommodations to the general public, including any entity which has a membership requirement if its membership requirement consists only of the payment of a membership fee and a substantial number if residents within the city could qualify.

        C.     “Employee” means and includes any person employed by an employer.

        D.    “Employer” means any person, including the city, regularly employing one or more persons, or any person acting as an agent of an employer, directly or indirectly.

        E.     “Employment agency” means any person regularly undertaking compensation to procure employees for an employer or to procure for employees opportunities to work for an employer and includes an agent of such a person.

        F.     “HIV infected” means a person infected with the human immune deficiency virus.

        G.    “Housing accommodation” means and includes any improved or unimproved real property, or portion thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.

        H.    “Housing services” means services otherwise provided by the owner of any housing accommodations to persons renting or leasing such housing accommodation including, but not limited to, utilities such as light, heat, water and telephone; ordinary repairs or replacement, and maintenance, including painting; elevator services, laundry facilities and privileges, the use of common recreational facilities, janitorial services, resident manager, refuse removal, furnishings, food service, parking and other benefits, privileges or facilities provided.

        I.      “Labor organization” means any organization which exists and is constituted for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or of other mutual aid or protection.

        J.      “Owner” includes the lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent, real estate broker or salesperson, or any person having any legal or equitable right of ownership or possession or the right to rent or lease housing accommodations.

        K.    “Person” means and includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, labor organizations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy and receivers or other fiduciaries.

        L.     “Medical services” means any public or private service provided by volunteers or paid professionals caring for the injured, or sick in relation to health, medicine, science or the treatment of disease. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.040 Housing accommodations and housing services.
        A.    It is unlawful for any owner of any housing accommodation or housing service to discriminate against any person because such person has AIDS or HIV infection.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall:

        1.     Apply to any housing accommodation in which the owner or any member of his or her family occupies the same housing accommodation in common with the prospective tenant. This exception shall not apply where the owner occupies a separate apartment, condominium or other housing unit in a multiple-unit complex;

        2.     Permit or require the rental or occupancy of any housing accommodation otherwise prohibited by law;

        3.     Otherwise interfere with any just cause for an owner to evict a person from any housing accommodation or permit the delay of any lawful detainer action;

        4.     Require the renting of any housing accommodation reserved for the housing of students to nonstudent persons with AIDS or HIV infection. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.050 Business establishments.
        It is unlawful for any person to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages and accommodations of any business establishment on the grounds that such person has AIDS or HIV infection. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.060 Medical services.
        It is unlawful for a health care provider, including but not limited to, any paid or unpaid professional, or medical establishment, or institution, public or private, to deny any person full and equal medical services, advantages or accommodations based upon the grounds that such person has AIDS or HIV infection. For the purposes of this section, a health care provider shall not be required to treat a person with AIDS or HIV infection whose condition is not within the health care provider’s current realm of competence. In the event the health care provider is not competent to provide the services required by a person with AIDS or HIV infection, the health care provider shall make referrals to those health care providers or facilities competent to provide such services. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.070 City facilities and services.
        A.    It is unlawful to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of, or to impose less advantageous terms, or restrict the availability of, the use of any city facility or participation in any city-funded or supported service or program on the grounds that such person has AIDS or HIV infection.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall:

        1.     Apply to any facility, service or program which does not receive any assistance from the city and which is not open to or provided to the public generally;

        2.     Restrict services or programs specifically designed for persons with AIDS or HIV infection. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.080 Employment.
        A.    It is unlawful:

        1.     For an employer:

        a.     To fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any person, or otherwise to discriminate against any person with respect to compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection, or

        b.     To limit, segregate or classify employees or applicants for employment in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any person of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect any person’s status as an employee, on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection;

        2.     For an employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or otherwise to discriminate against or to classify or refer for employment any person on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection;

        3.     For a labor organization:

        a.     To exclude or to expel from its membership or otherwise to discriminate against any person on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection,

        b.     To limit, segregate or classify its membership or applicants for membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any person, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any person of employment opportunities, or would limit such employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect a person’s status as an employee or as an applicant for employment, on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection,

        c.     To cause or attempt to cause an employer to discriminate against any person in violation of this section;

        4.     For any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any person on the basis of AIDS or HIV infection in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other training.

        B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall not be unlawful:

        1.     For an employer to hire, employ, discharge, retire and reassign employees, for an employment agency to classify, or to refer for employment any person, for a labor organization to classify its membership or to classify or refer for employment any person, or for any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit or employ any person in any such program, on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection in those certain instances where the employer can show that the absence of AIDS or HIV infection is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or enterprise;

        2.     For an employer to apply different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of employment pursuant to a bona fide seniority or merit system, or a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production or to employees who work in different locations, provided that such differences are not the result of an intention to discriminate against a person on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection;

        3.     For an employer to give and to act upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that such test, its administration or action upon the results of such tests is not designed, intended or used to discriminate against a person on the basis that such person has AIDS or HIV infection. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.090 Advertising.
        It is unlawful to make, print, publish, advertise or disseminate in any way, or cause to be made, printed, published, advertised or disseminated in any way, any notice, statement, sign, advertisement, application or contract which indicates an intent to engage in any practice made unlawful by this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.100 Testing.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to require another person to take any test or undergo any medical procedure that may be useful to determine that a person has AIDS or HIV infection.

        B.     Nothing in this section shall:

        1.     Prohibit any testing or medical procedure authorized by the laws of the United States, the state of California or the city of Buellton, or any testing or medical procedure required by the city department of health services to protect the public health; or

        2.     Apply to an employer who can show that the absence of AIDS or the HIV infection is a bona fide occupational qualification. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.110 Exceptions.
        A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any act specifically authorized by the laws of the United States, the state of California or the city, or any act required by the city department of health services to protect the public health.

        B.     Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any act which is necessary to protect the health or safety of the general public. If a party to any action brought under this chapter asserts that an otherwise discriminatory practice is justified as necessary to protect the health or safety of the general public, that party shall have the burden of proving:

        1.     That the discrimination is in fact a necessary result of a necessary course of conduct pursued to protect the health or safety of the general public; and

        2.     That there exists no less discriminatory means of satisfying the necessary protection of the health or safety of the general public. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

8.16.120 Liability and damages.
        Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who assists in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is liable for each and every such offense for the amount of actual damages, tort damages, plus punitive damages, as may be determined by a jury or a court sitting without a jury, and for costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees, as may be determined by the court. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.130 Enforcement.
        A.    Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of a civil action.

        B.     Any person who commits, or proposes to commit, an act in violation of this chapter may be enjoined therefrom by a court of competent jurisdiction.

        C.     An action for injunction under subsection B of this section may be brought by any aggrieved person or by any person or entity which will fairly and adequately represent the interests of the aggrieved person.

        D.    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any aggrieved person from seeking any other remedy provided by law.

        E.     An action arising under this chapter shall not be rendered moot because of the death or physical or mental incapacity of the person who was the subject of the claimed discrimination.

        F.     No criminal penalties shall attach for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.16.140 Severability.
        If any part or provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the article, including the application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 8.20 WATER WELLS
8.20.010 Purpose.
        It is the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter to regulate the: (1) construction, (2) modification or repair, (3) destruction, (4) inactivation of wells in such a manner that the groundwater of the city will not be contaminated or polluted, and that water obtained from wells will be suitable for beneficial use and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.020 Acts prohibited, permit required.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to construct, modify or repair, destroy or inactivate any well unless such person has:

        1.     Obtained a permit issued from the city for the specific work to be performed; or

        2.     In the case of an emergency, fully complied with the provisions of this chapter relating to emergencies.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to construct, modify or repair, destroy or inactivate any well unless such construction, modification or repair, destruction or inactivation is in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.030 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter:

        A.    Applicant. “Applicant” shall mean:

        1.     The legal owner(s) of the property on which the well is to be constructed, modified or repaired or destroyed;

        2.     That owner’s agent authorized in writing to make this application; or

        3.     A licensed well drilling contractor who shall perform the work on the well.

        B.     Contamination and Pollution. “Contamination and pollution” shall have the meanings ascribed to them by California Water Code Section 13050.

        C.     City. “City” shall mean the city of Buellton, acting through its city council or the city health officer, as the duly authorized representative of the city council.

        D.    Destruction. Destruction of wells shall consist of the complete filling of the well in accordance with the procedures outlined in Bulletin 74-81, “Water Well Standards: State of California,” of the California Department of Water Resources.

        E.     Emergency. “Emergency” shall mean a circumstance which is either:

        1.     An imminent threat of or is actually contaminating or polluting the groundwater of the city; or

        2.     Jeopardizes the health or safety of the people of the city; or

        3.     Will cause a substantial or immediate loss of property, crops or livestock.

        F.     Inactive Well or Inactivation. An “inactive well” is one not routinely operating but capable of being made operable with a minimum effort. It shall be considered abandoned and proper destruction required when it has not been used for a period of one year, unless the owner demonstrates his or her intention to use the well again. Inactivation of a well shall be accomplished by filing a permit stating the intention to reuse the well and properly maintaining the well as inactive per the requirements of Bulletin 74-81.

        G.    Modification or Repair. “Modification” or “repair” shall only mean the deepening of a well, reperforation, sealing or replacement of a well casing.

        H.    Nuisance. “Nuisance” shall mean a well which threatens to or which contaminates or pollutes the groundwater of this city in such a way that it jeopardizes the health and safety of the public. A nuisance also means anything which creates an unsanitary or unsafe condition resulting from water well drilling activity.

        I.      Person. “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, general corporation, association or governmental entity. Governmental entity, as used herein, shall not include any local agency exempt from the application of the ordinance codified in this chapter pursuant to state law.

        J.      Well or Water Well. The term “well” or “water well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from, or injecting water into the ground. It shall also include “cathodic protection wells,” as defined in California Water Code, Section 13711. This definition shall not include:

        1.     Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the California State Department of Conservation, except those wells converted to use as water wells; or

        2.     Wells used for the purpose of:

        a.     Dewatering excavation during construction, or

        b.     Stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.

        K.    Words not otherwise defined in the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter II of the California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81 (Water Well Standards) and Chapter II of 74-1 (Cathodic Protection Well Standards), as each may be amended. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.040 Permits.
        Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be:

        A.    Made in writing to the city on such forms as may be prescribed by the city;

        B.     Signed by the applicant; and,

        C.     Accompanied by a fee established by this chapter (no part of said fee shall be refundable); and,

        D.    Shall include but not be limited to the following:

        1.     Applicant’s name and address; a statement that the person drilling the well is licensed under the provisions of Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code as a well drilling contractor and such license is in full force and effect; the number of such license; or, in lieu of the two latter enumerated matters, a statement that the applicant is exempt from the provisions of Chapter 9 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code and the basis for the alleged exemption,

        2.     Estimated or proposed depth of the well, casing material, sealing material, sealing method, use of the well, and drilling method to be used,

        3.     Location of the property and well site including street address and/or assessor’s parcel number; and the legal owner of the property,

        4.     A plot plan indicating the location of the well with respect to the following items:

        a.     Property lines,

        b.     Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage or industrial wastes within a two hundred foot radius of the proposed well,

        c.     All perennial, seasonal, natural, or artificial water bodies or watercourses, including location of one hundred year floodplain, if applicable,

        d.     Drainage pattern of the property,

        e.     Existing wells within a one hundred foot radius of the proposed well,

        f.      Access roads and easements (water, sewer, utility, roadway),

        g.     Existing and/or proposed structures,

        h.     Animal or fowl enclosures, pens, paddocks, stockyards within a one hundred (100) foot radius of proposed well site,

        5.     Permits shall be issued subject to the terms, conditions and standards of this chapter and may be denied only if the specific work to be performed of construction, modification or repair, destruction or inactivation as proposed would violate the terms, conditions or standards of this chapter,

        6.     The issuance of a permit hereunder shall be deemed to be an administrative, ministerial, nondiscretionary act, and if an applicant complies with the terms, conditions, and standards of this chapter, said permit shall be issued within five working days,

        7.     A permit issued for construction of a well covers the construction of one completed well. If the well driller proposes to change the site of the well from that shown on the site plan of a permit, the change in site must be approved by the city prior to drilling. The city shall give approval or disapproval of the change in site within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the well driller,

        8.     Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire upon completion of the task authorized thereby; however, in any event such permit shall expire one year from date of issuance,

        9.     Guarantee of Performance. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the person drilling the well shall post with the city a cash deposit or bond to guarantee compliance with the terms of this chapter and the applicable permit. Such cash or bond to be in any amount deemed necessary by the health officer to include but not be limited to the remedy of improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated cost of such work. Licensed well drilling contractors shall not be required to post a bond or deposit guaranteeing performance. Eighty-five (85) percent of the deposit or bond shall be returned to the permittee when the work has been completed to the satisfaction of the health officer; the remaining fifteen (15) percent of the bond shall be returned after one year of satisfactory well operation as determined by the health officer. These percentages may vary to cover special conditions and circumstances in order to guarantee performance and compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.050 Standards.
        Standards for construction, repair or modification, destruction or inactivation are set forth in Chapter II of the California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-81, Water Well Standards, and Bulletin No. 74-1, Cathodic Protection Well Standards, and are hereby adopted as part of this chapter, with the following additional clarification and requirements for well construction.

        A.    Annular Space. Gravity installation of the sealant in an annular space of a well is acceptable if the interval to be sealed is dry and the interval depth is fifty (50) feet or less. Sealant shall be pumped into the space using a tremie or grout pipe when there is water in the annulus, or the annulus exceeds fifty (50) feet.

        B.     Disinfection Tube. Every well shall be equipped with an adequately sized opening by which disinfecting agents may be conveniently introduced directly into the well casing. This opening shall be protected against entrance of contaminants by installation of a watertight cap or plug.

        C.     Drilling Waste. Drilling waste must be controlled and may not be discharged so as to create conditions which violate Water Quality Control Board Regulations, other state laws, federal regulations or local ordinances.

        D.    Mud Pits. Mud pits created to confine drilling mud shall be maintained during the well drilling operation so as not to be a safety hazard. It shall be the well driller’s responsibility to properly earth fill the mud pit(s) upon completion of the job.

        E.     Setup Time. The minimum time that must be allowed for annular seals containing Type II and III (six-sack) cement to set shall be sixteen (16) hours before construction operations on the well may be resumed. When additives to shorten setting time are used with the cement, this setup time may be reduced to a minimum of twelve (12) hours before air jetting, bailing, swabbing, test pumping or further construction on the well may be resumed.

        F.     Log of Well. Any person who has drilled, dug, excavated or bored a well subject to this chapter, shall within thirty (30) days after completion of the work, furnish the city with a copy of the state driller’s report. The well driller shall notify the city if submission of the log is to be delayed.

        G.    Horizontal Wells. The location and design of horizontal or lateral wells shall be approved by the city on a case-by-case basis prior to approval to construct or reconstruct such wells.

        H.    Administrative Variance. The health officer may grant an administrative variance to the provisions of this chapter where written evidence is submitted that a modification of the standards will not endanger the health or safety of the public and strict compliance would be unreasonable in view of all the circumstances. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.060 Emergency.
        In the event of an emergency, a person may construct, modify or repair, destroy or inactivate a well without the permit required by this chapter; providing, that:

        A.    Such work is performed in conformance with the standards set forth herein;

        B.     The city is notified of such emergency work by the following city working day; and

        C.     An application for the required permit is made within three city working days after initiation of such emergency work. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.070 Enforcement.
        A.    The city may suspend or revoke a well permit issued under this chapter whenever the city determines that a condition resulting from any work performed under such a permit constitutes a nuisance as defined herein, or when the applicant, his or her agents, employees or the licensed well drilling contractor performing the work:

        1.     Violates any provision of this chapter or any terms and conditions of the permit; or

        2.     Misrepresents any material facts in the application for a permit.

        B.     Except in emergency situations, before the city suspends or revokes a well permit, the city shall make reasonable effort to notify the applicant and the licensed well driller performing work under the permit if he or she is not the applicant and to provide an opportunity for each to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked.

        C.     Upon notification by the city that the permit is suspended or revoked, or finding that no valid permit has been issued, no further work shall be performed until such violation has been abated.

        D.    Rules and Regulations. The health officer may adopt rules and regulations to implement and administer this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.080 Nuisance.
        Upon finding by the city that a well or well drilling activity constitutes a nuisance, as defined herein, the city may take the necessary action to abate such nuisance. The property owner where the well is located and/or the person causing the nuisance thereof shall be jointly liable for the reasonable costs incurred by or at the request of the city for abatement of the nuisance. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.090 Appeal.
        Any person whose application for a permit has been suspended, revoked or denied or whose request for an administrative variance has been denied may appeal to the city council in writing within ten days after the notice of such suspension, revocation or denial. Said appeal shall specify the reasons therefor and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, if any, as established by the council. The city clerk shall set the appeal for the hearing and shall give notice to the appellant and the appropriate city personnel of the time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.100 Inspection.
        A.    The city shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance to make an inspection of:

        1.     The sealing of the annular space on a well;

        2.     The destruction of wells; and

        3.     Any other operation which may be stipulated on the permit by the city to cope with special or unusual conditions.

        B.     The city shall have the right to enter upon any property at any reasonable time to make inspections and examinations for the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50 et seq. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.110 Application—Fees.
        A.    Each application for a well construction or modification permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of one hundred fifty-five dollars ($155.00).

        B.     Each application for a well destruction or inactivation permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee of ninety-five dollars ($95.00).

        C.     An additional fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour shall be charged to the permittee for any inspection service by the health officer which exceeds two hours on-site for witnessing annular seals, and the abatement of nuisances or hazards resulting from the well drilling operation. These application fees may be modified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

8.20.120 Penalties.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each offense shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such offense continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.10 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 9.12 SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
Chapter 9.16 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Chapter 9.20 CURFEWS
Chapter 9.24 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Chapter 9.28 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC STREETS
Chapter 9.32 ELECTRIC SCOOTERS

Chapter 9.04 FIREARMS
9.04.010 Discharge of firearms prohibited—Exceptions.
        A.    Discharge of Firearms. It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the limits of the city.

        B.     Exceptions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following:

        1.     Any peace officer acting in the official line of duty; or

        2.     Any person when necessary to protect human life or destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal while defending one’s self or another person against immediate threat of great bodily harm; or

        3.     The discharge of any target trap in the limits of a target range, skeet range, or shooting area which has been inspected by the sheriff and approved, in writing, by the sheriff and permitted by the city; or

        4.     The discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances or for sporting events; or

        5.     The firing of salutes by firing squads for ceremonial occasions or military funerals; or

        6.     Stud guns. (Ord. 92-22 § 2, 1992; prior code § 10.72.010)

 

9.04.020 Firearms defined.
        For the purpose of this chapter the term “firearm” means any gun, pistol, revolver, rifle and any other instrument which expels a metallic object such as, but not limited to, a bullet, through the force of gunpowder or explosive. (Ord. 92-22 § 2, 1992; prior code § 10.72.020)

 

9.04.030 Discharge by minors.
        Any discharge of a firearm by a minor is prohibited within the limits of the city, except as permitted by Section 9.04.010(B); provided that, no minor shall discharge a firearm under subsection (B)(3), (B)(4) or (B)(5) of Section 9.04.010 unless he or she is supervised by, and in the presence of, an adult. No adult need be present if the discharge is allowed under Section 9.04.010(B)(2). (Ord. 92-22 § 2, 1992; prior code § 10.72.030)

 

9.04.040 Violation—Penalty.
        Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 92-22 § 2, 1992; prior code § 10.72.040)

Chapter 9.10 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
9.10.010 Smoking and use of tobacco products in public places.
        In addition to the smoking prohibitions enacted pursuant to state law, smoking shall be prohibited in the following public places within the city of Buellton.

        A.    Smoking shall be prohibited within twenty (20) feet of any entrance to an area or building where smoking is prohibited. Ashtrays or any receptacle used to dispose of burning tobacco products shall also be prohibited within twenty (20) feet of any entrance to an area or building where smoking is prohibited. Exception: twenty-five (25) percent of the outdoor seating sections of restaurants and one hundred (100) percent of the outdoor seating sections of bars may allow smoking with the following conditions:

        1.     In the case of restaurants, smoking sections must be designated, the entire smoking section must be in the same area, and must be located the furthest distance from the restaurant entrance so as to minimize the chance of smoke entering the restaurant.

        2.     Smoking in the outdoor seating sections of restaurants or bars may only take place provided that smoke does not enter adjacent work sites or residences. The smoking section of these outdoor areas must be clearly marked with signs.

        B.     Buses or other means of public transit, enclosed or not, including ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit stops, enclosed or not.

        C.     Areas of the lobby in a motel, hotel, or other similar transient lodging establishment.

        D.    Meeting and banquet rooms in a hotel, motel, or other transient lodging establishment, restaurants, and public meeting halls, including the corridors and pre-function areas adjacent to and serving the meeting or banquet rooms.

        E.     Polling places, enclosed or not. (Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

 

9.10.020 Smoking and use of tobacco products in city parks.
        No person shall smoke or use tobacco products anywhere in the following city parks: Riverview Park, Oak Park, and Paws Park. (Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

 

9.10.030 Other provisions.
        A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit smoking or use of tobacco products in any area in which such smoking or use of tobacco products is already prohibited by state or federal law unless the applicable state or federal law does not preempt additional local regulation.

        B.     Other Requirements and Prohibitions.

        1.     No ash can, ashtray, or other smoking or tobacco product waste receptacle shall be placed in any area in which smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited by this chapter.

 

        2.     No person shall knowingly permit smoking or use of tobacco products in an area under the person’s legal or de facto control in which smoking and use of tobacco products are prohibited by this chapter.

        3.     The presence of smoking or tobacco product waste receptacles in violation of subsection (B)(1) and the absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.

        4.     No person shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter.

        5.     Each instance of smoking or use of tobacco products in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. Each day of a continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.

        C.     Definitions.

        1.     “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term “smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke.

        2.     “Smoking” means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, an operating electronic cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind.

        3.     “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into a human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. (Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

 

9.10.040 Posting of signs.
        A.    Signs. “Smoking” or “No Smoking” signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters not less than one inch in height, or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted at each entrance to every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this section, by the owner, operator, or manager or other person having control of such building or other location.

        B.     Signs—Hotels and Motels. Every hotel and motel located within the city shall have signs posted conspicuously in the registration and lobby areas which state that nonsmoking rooms are maintained and may be available; rooms designated as being nonsmoking shall have signs announcing such restriction conspicuously placed within the room. (Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

 

9.10.050 Enforcement.
        A.    The city manager or designee shall enforce and implement the ordinance codified in this chapter with the assistance of the county health officer.

        B.     Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may request the city manager to initiate enforcement.

        C.     Violations of this chapter will result in the penalties for an infraction as described in Chapter 1.28 of the municipal code. (Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

Chapter 9.12 SOCIAL HOST LIABILITY
9.12.010 Title.
        The title of this chapter shall be “Buellton Social Host Liability Ordinance.” (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.020 Definitions.
        The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meaning and be construed as defined in this section:

        A.    “Party, Gathering, or Event.” A group of five or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or a social activity, at least one of whom is a minor and not a blood relative.

        B.     “Person.” Any person(s) who owns, rents, or otherwise controls premises that knowingly hosts, permits, promotes, organizes, or allows a gathering at which they allow the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor on such premises or fails to take reasonable corrective action upon learning of the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor on such premises.

        C.     “Minor.” Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years.

        D.    “Knowingly.” Shall mean aware of, or having reason to be aware of a party, gathering or event.

        E.     “Private Premises.” Any home, yard, open areas adjacent thereto, and accessory structures; apartment, condominium; hotel or motel room; or a hall or meeting room, or any other dwelling unit whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, for a party, or for other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

        F.     “Control.” The actual or apparent authority and ability to regulate direct or dominate private premises, including, but not limited to, the control exercised by tenants, lessees, and owners who have notice of underage drinking on their property.

        G.    “Alcoholic Beverage or Alcohol.” Shall have the meaning given to that term under state law. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.030 Unlawful gatherings on private real property when alcohol is served to minors—Host presumption—Declaration of public nuisance.
        A.    Unlawful Gatherings. No person(s) shall permit, allow, or host a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence or on other private premises under the person(s) control where alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or consumed by, any minor or fail to take reasonable corrective action upon learn ing of the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a minor on such premises. Reasonable corrective action shall include, but is not limited to:

        1.     Verifying the age of the persons attending the social gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards;

        2.     Making a prompt demand that such minor either forfeit the alcoholic beverages and refrain from the consumption of such or depart from the premises;

        3.     If such minor does not comply with such request, either promptly reporting such underage consumption of alcohol to the local law enforcement agency or to any other person having a greater degree of authority over the conduct of such minor.

        B.     Public Nuisance. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person to permit, allow, or host a party, gathering, or event at his or her place of residence (or other private premises under his or her ownership or control) where alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by, any minor.

        C.     Exceptions. Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to prohibit the consumption or possession of alcohol by an underage person for legally-protected religious practices or legally protected family gatherings involving the use of alcohol beverages which occur exclusively between a minor and his or her parent or legal guardian, pursuant to Article 1, Section 4 of the California Constitution. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.040 Violation and penalty.
        A.    Violation. Any person(s) who knowingly permits, allows, or hosts a party, gathering, or event at their place of residence (or other private property under that person(s) control) where alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by, any minor on such premises, or fails to take reasonable corrective actions upon learning of the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any minor on such premises shall be liable and responsible for, and shall pay to the city, civil penalties in the amount specified in subsection B. Such penalties shall be imposed and collected in the manner specified in Sections 9.12.050 and 9.12.060. Any person who knowingly violates this section may appeal the violation pursuant to Section 9.12.050 and any civil penalty will be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal.

        B.     Civil Penalty.

        1.     A first violation of subsection A shall make the person responsible for the violation liable for a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00); and the successful completion of a city-recognized counseling, educational or other program, within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice of the violation.

        2.     A second violation of subsection A by the same responsible person shall make the person responsible for the violation liable for a civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

        3.     A third or subsequent violation of subsection A by the same responsible person shall be punishable by a civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.050 Administrative appeal.
        A.    Any person who violates Section 9.12.040(A) shall be subject to the civil penalties provided for in Section 9.12.040(B) and shall also be subject to the administrative appeal procedures set forth below.

        B.     Any person upon whom a civil penalty is imposed pursuant to Section 9.12.040(B) may appeal such civil penalty pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. The appellant must file a written appeal with the city within ten working days of service of the violation notice or any other date of mailing of a notice of determination of the civil penalty. The written appeal shall contain:

 

        1.     A brief statement setting forth the interest the appealing party has in the matter relating to the imposition of the civil penalty;

        2.     A brief statement of the material facts which the appellant claims supports his or her contention that no civil penalty should be imposed or that a civil penalty of a different amount is warranted.

        C.     An appeal of a civil penalty imposed for violations of Section 9.12.040(A) shall be heard by a person appointed by the city to act as the hearing examiner. The civil penalty appeal hearing shall be set no sooner than twenty (20) days and no later than forty-five (45) days following a request for an appeal hearing. Notice of the appeal hearing shall be mailed at least twelve (12) calendar days before the date set for the hearing. Failure to appear timely will cause the civil penalty to become a final order or decision.

        D.    In reviewing the penalty, the hearing examiner shall consider all facts relating to the issuance of the citation and the reasons therefor and shall uphold the penalty imposed, eliminate the penalty, or modify it. The decision of the hearing examiner shall constitute the final administrative order or decision of the local agency within the meaning of Government Code Section 53069.4(b)(1).

        E.     The hearing examiner shall serve a copy of his or her written decision on the appellant by first class mail to the address provided by appellant in the written notice of appeal. The hearing examiner’s decision shall be deemed served within two days after the date it was mailed to the address provided by the appellant.

        F.     The costs of the administrative hearing may be assessed to the responsible person in addition to any other fines and penalties in the event that the citation is upheld. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.060 Enforcement and collection of administrative fine.
        When a civil penalty becomes a final order under Section 9.12.050 or Government Code Section 53069.4, the city may proceed to collect the penalty as set forth in Chapter 1.30, Section 1.30.090 of this code. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.070 Judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by a final administrative order or decision imposing a civil penalty may seek review with the Superior Court in Santa Barbara County pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

 

9.12.080 Remedies cumulative—Actions—Relationship to other laws.
        The remedy provided under this chapter is cumulative, and shall not restrict the city to any other remedy to which it is entitled under law or equity. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the imposition of any criminal penalty under state law or the Buellton Municipal Code. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to conflict with any penalty or provision under state law, or to prohibit any conduct authorized by the state or federal Constitution. (Ord. 10-06 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 9.16 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Article I. Findings; Definitions
9.16.010 Findings.
        The city council has become aware of and is concerned over the general proliferation of “head shops” and other establishments engaged in the sale of paraphernalia associated with drug use. The council finds that such establishments serve only to entice young people and others to abuse substances which are known to be harmful and unsafe for human consumption. The council further finds that this situation has created a problem of such large proportions as to require further legislation on the subject. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.16.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        A.    “Controlled substance” means marijuana, hashish, PCP, and any controlled substances as defined in the Controlled Substances Act.

        B.     “Controlled Substances Act” means the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (commencing with Section 11000 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California).

        C.     The term “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. It includes, but is not limited to:

        1.     Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.

        2.     Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances.

        3.     Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.

        4.     Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances.

        5.     Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances.

        6.     Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.

        7.     Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana.

        8.     Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.

        9.     Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.

        10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.

        11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.

        12.   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

        a.     Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

        b.     Water pipes;

        c.     Carburetion tubes and devices;

        d.     Smoking and carburetion masks;

        e.     Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

        f.      Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;

        g.     Chamber pipes;

        h.     Carburetor pipes;

        i.      Electric pipes;

        j.      Air-driven pipes;

        k.     Chillums;

        l.      Bongs;

        m.    Ice pipes or chillers.

        D.    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

        1.     Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use.

        2.     Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance.

        3.     The proximity of the object, in time and space to a direct violation of the Controlled Substances Act.

        4.     The proximity of the object to controlled substances.

        5.     The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.

        6.     Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Controlled Substances Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Controlled Substances Act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.

        7.     Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.

        8.     Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use.

        9.     National and local advertising concerning its use.

        10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.

        11.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.

        12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise.

        13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community.

        14.   Expert testimony concerning its use.

        E.     Except as otherwise provided in this section or unless the context otherwise requires, in interpreting or applying the provisions of this chapter, words which are used in this chapter and which are defined in Chapter 1 of the Controlled Substances Act shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter 1 of the Controlled Substances Act. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article II. Offenses and Penalties
9.16.030 Possession of drug paraphernalia.
        It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction, pursuant to Chapter 1.30 of this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.16.040 Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia.
        It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

9.16.050 Advertisement of drug paraphernalia.
        It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

Article III. Civil Forfeiture
9.16.060 Civil forfeiture.
        A.    All drug paraphernalia as defined by Section 9.16.020 of this chapter are subject to forfeiture.

        B.     Drug paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this chapter or the Controlled Substances Act may be seized by any peace officer and in aid of such seizure a search warrant may be issued as prescribed by law. Drug paraphernalia seized as provided in this section shall be disposed of as provided in Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 11470) of the Controlled Substances Act. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)


Article IV. Interpretation
9.16.070 Interpretation.
        In determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred, the court or other authority shall apply the following criterion: Each defendant charged with violating this chapter must have general criminal intent with respect to the offense alleged before violation may be deemed to have occurred. With respect to Section 9.16.040, the necessary criminal intent will exist if the defendant charged with a violation thereof actually knew or reasonably should have known that such defendant was aiding or facilitating an act prescribed by Section 9.16.040. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Article V. Special Provisions
9.16.080 Special provisions.
        A.    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9.16.030, 9.16.040 or 9.16.050, if any drug paraphernalia is used, intended for use, possessed with intent to use, delivered for use, possessed with intent to deliver for use, or manufactured with intent to deliver for use, in connection with a violation of subdivision (b) of Section 11357, or subdivision (b) of Section 11360, of the Controlled Substances Act, the punishment which may be imposed for conviction of a violation of Section 9.16.030, 9.16.040 or 9.16.050 shall not be greater than the punishment which may lawfully be imposed for conviction of a violation of subdivision (b) of Section 11357, or subdivision (b) of Section 11360, of the Controlled Substances Act.

        B.     To the extent permitted by law, the provisions of Section 11361.5 and Section 11361.7 of the Controlled Substances Act shall apply to any arrest or conviction for which a special penalty is provided pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.16.090(A) of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)


Article VI. Severability
9.16.090 Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 9.20 CURFEWS
9.20.010 Definitions.
        For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section.

        “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes but is not limited to the following: a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

        “Guardian” means (1) a person who under court order is the guardian of minor, or (2) a public or private agency with whom the minor has been placed by a court order, or (3) a person at least eighteen (18) years of age exercising care and custody of a minor.

        “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.

        “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or a stepparent of another person.

        “Public place” means any place to which the public or any substantial group of the public has access including but not limited to, streets, highways, parks, playgrounds, and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, game room, shops, shopping malls, or any other public place of business.

        “Street” means a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term “street” includes the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalk whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of way of a street. The term “street” applies irrespective of what the legal right of way is formally called, whether alley, avenue, court, road, or otherwise. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.020 Nighttime curfew—Established.
        No minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be present in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time or 11:00 p.m. Pacific Daylight Saving Time, and sunrise of the following day. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.030 Exceptions.
        The provisions of Section 9.20.020 shall not apply where:

        A.    The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or is accompanied by an adult person who is authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody of the minor or other adult person to whom he or she has been temporarily entrusted by his or her parent or guardian;

        B.     The minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business authorized or directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or other adult person to whom he or she has been temporarily entrusted by his or her parent or guardian;

        C.     The minor is engaged in a legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation;

        D.    The minor is traveling to or from a place of employment, or involved in employment-related activities;

        E.     The minor is attending school, religious, recreational or civic functions, or the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly;

        F.     The minor is going to or returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational or other activity directed, sponsored or supervised by local educational authorities, religious or civic organizations;

        G.    The minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

        H.    The minor is married, has been previously married or has been declared emancipated pursuant to California law;

        I.      The minor is on the property or sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence with the permission of the minor’s parent or guardian. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.040 Nighttime curfew—Responsibility of parents.
        No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall knowingly permit such minor to be present in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time or 11:00 p.m. Pacific Daylight Saving Time, and sunrise of the following day. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.050 Responsibility of parents—Exceptions.
        The provisions of Section 9.20.040 shall not apply where the minor is engaged in any activity authorized pursuant to Section 9.20.030. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.060 Nighttime curfew—Enforcement.
        Before taking any action to enforce the provisions of Section 9.20.020, law enforcement officers shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being out in a public place after curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest for a violation of this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense provided in Section 9.20.030 applies. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

9.20.070 Daytime curfew—Established.
        It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education pursuant to Education Code Sections 48200 and 48400 to be present in or upon the public streets, avenues, highways, roads, alleys, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks, public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, places of entertainment, eating places, parking lots, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in the county during the minor’s regular school hours on days when the minor’s school is in session. This provision shall also apply to minors whose enrollment status is that of suspension, expulsion or transfer in progress. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.080 Lawful excuse to daytime curfew.
        The minor is lawfully excused from Section 9.20.070 when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person (having written authorization, custody or care of the minor) and they are conducting activities which are “excused” within the meaning of Education Code Section 48205. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.090 Exceptions to daytime curfew.
        Section 9.20.070 shall not apply when:

        A.    The minor is under the direct supervision of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor as described in Section 9.20.080.

        B.     The minor is exempt from compulsory education as enumerated in Education Code Sections 48220 et seq.; including, but not limited to, a minor receiving instruction at home pursuant to Education Code Sections 48222, 48224, 51745 or other applicable provisions of state law, or is otherwise exempt from attendance at a public or private full-time day school as set forth in the Education Code.

        C.     The minor is exempt from compulsory continuation education as enumerated in Education Section 48410.

        D.    The minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor.

        E.     The minor is going directly to or coming directly from a medical appointment and can show proof of that appointment.

        F.     The minor has permission to leave the school campus for lunch and has in his or her possession a valid off-campus permit or pass issued by the school (if one is required by that school) and the minor has conformed with the conditions and restrictions, if any, of the off-campus permit or pass.

        G.    The minor is going directly to or from an event or activity sponsored, sanctioned, or arranged by the school.

        H.    The minor has permission to leave campus and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit.

        I.      The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly.

        J.      The minor is not a resident of the city and possesses a valid passport, visitors visa or other form of identification to establish the minor is temporarily visiting the city, or the minor is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.100 Responsibility of parent or guardian.
        No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall knowingly permit or allow such person to violate the provisions of Section 9.20.070 or refused to take custody of said minor. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.110 Violations of Section 9.20.070.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, when a person under the age of eighteen (18) is charged with a violation of Section 9.20.070 and a peace officer issues a notice to appear to that minor pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 256, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless the minor requests that a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Each violation of the provision set forth in this chapter shall constitute a separate infraction. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.120 Penalties for violations—Minors.
        A.    Any minor violating Section 9.20.070 is guilty of an infraction punishable by (a) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) and/or ten hours of community service for the first violation; (b) a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or twenty (20) hours of community service for the second violation; (c) a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or twenty-five (25) hours of community service for the third or subsequent violation of this section. Community service shall be served during a time other than the minor’s hours of school attendance or employment.

        B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a minor is charged with a violation of this article, and a peace officer issues a notice to appear, the charge shall be deemed an infraction unless another disposition is elected under Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 601 or 602 or other applicable state laws. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.130 Penalties for violations—Parents.
        Any parent or guardian violating Section 9.20.070 is guilty of an infraction punishable by (a) a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) and/or ten hours of community service for the first violation; (b) a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or twenty-five (25) hours of community service for the second violation; (c) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or fifty (50) hours of community service for the third or subsequent violation of this section. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.20.140 Loitering, trespassing, etc., on or near juvenile institutions—Prohibited without permission.
        No person shall enter in or upon, or loiter about the grounds or premises of any institutions of the city where minors are committed by court order or are detained, including, but not limited to, Los Prietos Boys Camp, the Santa Barbara County Juvenile Halls and County Probation Department Day Care Centers, or attempt to enter in or trespass upon the grounds or premises of such institutions or to communicate or attempt to communicate with any ward or inmate of such institutions unless such person is an authorized visitor or has the consent of the director or person in charge of the institution so to do or unless such person is a ward or inmate of the institutions or is a member of the staff or other authorized personnel thereof or other authorized public official or authorized representative. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

9.20.150 Loitering, trespassing, etc., on or near juvenile institutions—Signs to be posted.
        The chief probation officer shall post and maintain signs prohibiting trespassing or loitering at such entrance to each of the institutions enumerated in the preceding section and at such other places deemed necessary by the chief probation officer. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 9.24 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
9.24.010 Sleeping or camping in certain areas prohibited—Purpose.
        The public roads and public property within the city should be readily accessible to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes interferes with the rights of others to use these areas for the purposes for which they were intended. The purpose of this section is to maintain public roads and public property within the city in a clean and accessible condition for the benefit of the public at large. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.020 Definitions.
        Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this section.

        A.    “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.

        B.     “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters.

        C.     “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

        D.    “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the city.

        E.     “Road” means any highway, street, alley or way owned, controlled or maintained by the city for the purpose of travel.

        F.     “Sleep” means the natural, regularly recurring rest for the body, during which there is little or no conscious thought.

        G.    “Temporary shelter” means any shelter not authorized by, or approved by, the city building department for permanent occupancy.

        H.    “Vehicle” means the same as defined in Chapter 10.04 of this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.030 Sleeping or camping in certain areas prohibited—Generally—Exceptions.
        It is unlawful for any person to sleep or camp between the hours of one half hour after sunset of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the next day, whether inside or outside of a vehicle in or on any:

        A.    Public road; or

        B.     Public property, except that vehicles may be parked in and used for overnight sleeping in parking lots on city-owned property if the following conditions are met:

        1.     The city has entered into a management agreement under which the contracting party agrees to assume administration and management of a program to oversee such use of city-owned property.

        2.     The management agreement referenced above satisfies all city concerns regarding liability, due process, evictions, fair housing notice and employee safety, and specifically states the location and number of vehicles permitted at that location.

        3.     All vehicle occupants enter into a written agreement with the contracting party in a form approved by the city and comply with all terms and conditions of that agreement. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.040 Sleeping in certain areas—Exceptions.
        Notwithstanding the prohibition against sleeping on a public road as set forth in Section 9.24.030(A), it is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit persons, when necessary for their safety or the safety of others, to pull off the public road and sleep, whether inside or outside their vehicles. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.050 Sleeping in certain areas—Enforcement.
        The terms and provisions of this section shall be enforced by the sheriff. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.060 Watercourses—Erecting buildings, etc., which obstruct flow prohibited.
        A.    The term “watercourses” means and includes streams, creeks, arroyos, gulches, washes and the beds thereof, whether containing water or dry.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or to permit to be constructed or maintained, in any watercourse, any building or structure which obstructs, prevents or diverts, or tends to obstruct, prevent or divert the normal, natural and ordinary flow of water in such watercourse, or which at any time may be therein, in such manner as to endanger, or tending to endanger public property, including bridges, roads, buildings, structures or facilities, or the lands, crops, buildings or structures of other persons. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.070 Watercourses—Dumping garbage, debris, etc., prohibited.
        It is unlawful for any person to dump or place, or to permit to be dumped or placed, deposited or accumulated in any watercourse, on private property, any debris, garbage, rubbish, trash, brush, timber, waste products or any combustible or incombustible material or commodities whatsoever, which obstructs, prevents, diverts, or tends to obstruct, prevent or divert the normal, natural or ordinary flow of water in such watercourse, or which at any time may be in such watercourse. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.080 Weapons—Discharge near schools.
        It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer acting in his or her official line of duty, to shoot, fire or discharge, or for any person to cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged in the city lying within one-half mile of the boundaries of any school, college or university, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm, except when it may be necessary to do so to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal, and except at any established shooting range. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

9.24.090 Public nudity—Findings and intent of city council.
        The city council hereby finds and determines as follows:

        A.    It is the policy of the city that the public parks and places hereof shall be available for the use and enjoyment of the public to the maximum extent possible.

        B.     It is further the policy of the city that members of the public are entitled to use the public parks and places hereof without being subjected to offensive conduct by other members of the public.

        C.     The presence of persons in a state of nudity in public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view whether such places are publicly or privately owned, tends to discourage the use and enjoyment of the parks and places of this city, creates a nuisance, and is offensive to members of the public who wish to use and enjoy such public parks and places.

        D.    The presence of persons in a state of nudity in public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view whether such places are publicly or privately owned, is offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of such places and interferes with such residents’ comfortable enjoyment of their property.

        E.     The presence of persons in a state of nudity in public places, places open to the public and places open to public view whether such places are publicly or privately owned, creates a nuisance and is offensive as set forth hereinabove even when such nudity is not sexually motivated and is not otherwise lewd.

        F.     The prohibition of nude persons from public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view whether such places are publicly or privately owned is necessary to preserve and maintain the public order and the general welfare of the citizens of this city.

        G.    It is the intent of the city council to prohibit nudity in public places, places open to the public, and places open to public view whether such places are publicly or privately owned, even when such nudity is not sexually motivated or otherwise lewd. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.100 Public nudity—Offenses numerated—Penalties.
        A.    It is hereby declared a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to appear on any park, street or in any other public place or place open to the public or exposed to public view, including specifically a view from any private residence or any portion of the real property in the immediate vicinity of such private residence, whether such place is publicly or privately owned, unclothed or in such a state of undress as to expose, in the case of a female, any portion of her breasts below the areolas thereof or in the case of any male or female, any part of his or her pubic or anal region or genitalia.

        B.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to any acts which take place wholly within a fully enclosed building or any portion thereof; and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit any act or acts which are expressly authorized or prohibited by the Penal Code of the state.

        C.     Violations of this section shall be an infraction punishable by a fine in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; a fine in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this section within one year after the first violation; and a fine in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation within one year after a second violation and within one year after any subsequent violation of this section thereafter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.110 Public nudity—Severability.
        If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or place, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter or its application to other persons or places. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions, or the application thereof to any person or place be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.120 Motor vehicle nuisance on unimproved property—Findings and intent.
        The city council hereby finds and determines as follows:

        A.    In several locations in the city unimproved areas of land exist in close proximity to lands developed to residential uses.

        B.     Persons lawfully occupying lands for residential purpose have the right to quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their homes and grounds. Persons lawfully on unimproved lands have the right not to have their lives, limbs and properties endangered by operation of motor vehicles on such lands.

        C.     Many persons drive motor vehicles of many kinds, including passenger cars, vans, trucks, dune buggies, motorcycles and off-road vehicles onto such unimproved lands and operate such motor vehicles on such lands so as to create substantial nuisances to nearby residents including, but not limited to large amounts of dust and excessive exhaust noise. Such persons, furthermore, often operate such motor vehicles so that they endanger the lives, limbs and property of other persons on such lands.

        D.    The climatic and geographic conditions in the city tend to increase the secondary effects of such motor vehicles operated in and around unimproved property and near sensitive habitats. These climatic and geographic conditions and sensitive habitats in the city include dry inland areas, pristine forests, wildlife refuges, critical chaparral areas with long recovery times following surface damage, sensitive watersheds, watercourses, wetlands and coastal environments.

        E.     Local, state and federal agencies have designated and set-aside specific areas, trails and routes for the express purpose of allowing the safe and non-offensive recreational use of off-road vehicles.

        F.     State laws making trespassing on private property breaches of the peace, and other activities which occur on such lands misdemeanors, have not proved effective in controlling and terminating such motor vehicle activities on unimproved lands, whether public or privately owned.

        G.    It is the intent of the city council to prohibit activities of motor vehicles on unimproved lands, whether public or privately owned, which create dust and noise nuisances to nearby residents, which endanger lives, limbs and property of persons lawfully on such unimproved lands, and which endanger sensitive habitats located on such unimproved lands, in order to protect and preserve the public peace, safety and welfare. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.130 Use of motor vehicles on unimproved real property.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person willfully to drive any motor vehicle as that term is defined in the Vehicle Code upon unimproved portions of real property in the city, whether public property, or property belonging to or lawfully occupied by another, without the express permission of the owner, the owner’s agent or the person in lawful possession of said real property.

        B.     “Unimproved” for the purposes of this section means real property upon which there exists no structures occupied by any public agency, the owner of the real property, the owner’s agent, persons in lawful possession of said real property or persons who have the permission of the owner, the owner’s agent or the person in lawful possession of said real property.

        C.     These provisions affecting motor vehicle use on unimproved portions of real property shall not apply to any areas in the city which are directly authorized by a conditional use permit, or otherwise, under city zoning ordinances to permit motorcycle, off-road vehicle or motor vehicle racing use or uses.

        D.    These provisions affecting motor vehicle use on unimproved portions of real property shall not apply to the use of motor vehicles for agricultural purposes, as defined by Civil Code Section 3482.5, vehicles being used for governmental purposes, or the direct crossing of unimproved property from a roadway or trail designated for motor vehicle use in order to remain on said roadway or trail. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.140 Violations—Penalties.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.

        B.     Any person so convicted shall be:

        1.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

        2.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year;

        3.     The third and any additional violations within one year shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six months in jail, or both. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.150 Display of materials harmful to minors.
        No material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Section 313 of the Penal Code of the state, shall be displayed in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, unless blinder racks are placed in front of the material so that the lower two-third of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.24.160 Urinating or defecating in public prohibited.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building or public maintained facility, or any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the use for urination or defecation the lawfully constructed restroom facilities designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 9.28 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC STREETS
9.28.010 Intoxicating liquor.
        For the purpose of this chapter, “intoxicating liquor” includes any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and all kinds of spirituous, vinous, and malt liquors. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.020 Consumption of intoxicating liquors on public streets.
        It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume any intoxicating liquor in the city upon any public street, public sidewalk, public highway, public parking lot or public alley. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.030 Display of open containers.
        No person shall have in his or her possession on any public street or other area described in Section 9.28.020 any bottle, can, or other receptacle containing any intoxicating liquor which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. This section shall not be construed to apply under any circumstances governed or regulated by the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.040 Exceptions.
        Nothing in Section 9.28.020 or 9.28.030 shall limit the consumption of alcohol or display of open containers in or on:

        A.    The property of an establishment, business place, or other location properly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the state; or

        B.     The property of any public park, except for the access pathways described in Section 9.28.020(B). (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.050 Penalty.
        Any violation of this chapter is an infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.30 of this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.060 Nuisance party participation prohibited.
        All persons attending a party or social gathering declared to be a public nuisance by a police officer or other peace officer shall immediately disperse upon the order of a peace officer, and all persons not domiciled at the site of such party or social gathering shall immediately leave the premises. No person shall fail or refuse to obey and abide by such an order. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

9.28.070 Violation—Penalty.
        Any person violating Section 9.28.060 is guilty of an infraction pursuant to Chapter 1.30 of this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Chapter 9.32 ELECTRIC SCOOTERS
9.32.010 Findings.
        The city council finds that the prohibition of shared on-demand personal mobility devices within the city will help to ensure that the use of the public right-of-way, at all times, promotes the public health, safety and welfare and allows for adequate vehicle and pedestrian circulation. (Ord. 20-02 § 2, 2020)

 

9.32.020 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

        A.    “Electric scooter” means any wheeled device that has handlebars and is designed to be either powered by an electric motor or other power source, or to be powered by human propulsion, that is accessed via an on-demand portal, whether through a smart-phone, access code, I.D. card, or similar method, and is operated by a private entity that owns, manages, maintains and insures devices for shared use by members, which are available to members in unstaffed, self-service locations.

        B.     “Electric scooter operator” means an individual or a public, private, or nonprofit entity that manages electric scooters. (Ord. 20-02 § 2, 2020)

 

9.32.030 Prohibition.
        It shall be unlawful to provide, place or offer for use or to use an electric scooter, or to operate as an electric scooter operator in any street or public right-of-way, or other public place within the city in which the public has the right of travel.

        A.    The Santa Barbara County Sheriff’s Department and any persons authorized by the city and having the duty to enforce this code are hereby authorized to impound the electric scooters of any person or electric scooter operator violating the provisions of this chapter. The impound shall be subject to an impound fee established by city council resolution.

        B.     The city manager may promulgate regulations for the notification to the operator and return of the electric scooters to the operator and as may otherwise be necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter. Any device not retrieved within ninety (90) days of notice shall be subject to disposal.

        The foregoing shall not be deemed to make unlawful the retail sale of electric scooters intended for ownership by individuals by retail businesses located in the city. It shall not be deemed to make unlawful the retail purchase, whether from retail businesses with physical locations or from on-line retailers, or the use of individually-owned electric scooters. Only electric scooters and electric scooter operators, as specifically defined above, are prohibited within the city. (Ord. 20-02 § 2, 2020)

 

9.32.040 Violations.
        A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as hereinafter specified.

        B.     Any person so convicted shall be:

        1.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

        2.     Guilty of an infraction offense and punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year;

        3.     The third and any additional violations within one year shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six months in jail, or both. (Ord. 20-02 § 2, 2020)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.01 SANTA BARBARA COUNTY MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC SUPPLEMENTARY LOCAL PROVISIONS

Chapter 10.01 SANTA BARBARA COUNTY MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC SUPPLEMENTARY LOCAL PROVISIONS
10.01.010 Introduction.
        Upon incorporation, the city of Buellton adopted the Santa Barbara County Code, including Chapter 23 pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 97-04 § 2(B), 1997)

 

10.01.020 Parking for more than seventy-two consecutive hours prohibited.
        A.    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any highway, street or alley for more than a period of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours.

        B.     This section shall be considered violated if:

        1.     At the end of the seventy-two (72) hour period the vehicle is parked or left standing in the same place as it was in the beginning of such period and physical markings or other facts which indicate that the vehicle has not been moved; or

        2.     If at the end of the seventy-two (72) hour period the vehicle has not been moved more than two-tenths of a mile. The determination of whether the vehicle has been moved more than two-tenths of a mile shall be based on physical markings, odometer readings or other facts. (Ord. 97-04 § 2(B), 1997)

 

10.01.030 Parking of trailers, boats, dumpsters and other vehicles without self-propelled power—Parking restrictions.
        No person shall park a trailer, boat, dumpster or other vehicle without any means of self-propulsion for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours in any seventy-two (72) consecutive hour period, in any location on any residential highway, street or alley. (Ord. 97-04 § 2(B), 1997)

 

10.01.040 Removal of chalk marks.
        A.    The owner or operator of any motor vehicle exercising the privilege of parking a vehicle on any highway, street or alley, or portion thereof where regulations are in effect restricting the length of time vehicles may be parked on a street or portion thereof does so on the condition that the police officers of the city may place chalk or other removable marks on the tire of the vehicle for the purpose of enforcing such parking regulations.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to erase, rub out, conceal or otherwise remove, any chalk or other mark so placed by a police officer while the marked vehicle remains parked on the street or portion thereof. For the purpose of this section, the movement of a previously marked vehicle in such a manner as to cause the tire marking to be concealed or removed, and without leaving the parking space where such vehicle was parked when its tires were previously marked shall be deemed to be an erasure or removal of such chalk or other marking. (Ord. 97-04 § 2(B), 1997)

 

10.01.050 Speed limits—Certain streets.
        A.    It is hereby determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the speeds permitted by state law upon the streets hereafter designated in this section are greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such street and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits shall be as designated in this section, effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be an infraction as provided in Chapter 1.28 of this code.

        B.     Avenue of Flags, between the northernmost point to Highway 246, thirty-five (35) miles per hour.

        C.     Second Street, between Avenue of Flags and Riverview Drive, twenty-five (25) miles per hour, except in those areas with a reduced speed adjacent to school pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 09-04 § 3, 2009)

Title 11 (Reserved)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 STREET CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION
Chapter 12.08 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
Chapter 12.12 VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.20 HISTORICAL LANDMARKS
Chapter 12.24 MEDIAN STRIPS ON THE AVENUE OF FLAGS
Chapter 12.28 PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITY USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 12.32 NATIVE TREE PROTECTION

Chapter 12.04 STREET CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION
12.04.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known and referred to as the street construction and excavation code of the city. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.010)

 

12.04.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control all secondary uses of city streets in order to protect and preserve the primary purpose and use of such streets, which is declared to be traveled by the public. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.020)

 

12.04.030 Definitions.
        For the purposes of this title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given in this chapter:

        “Applicant” means any person making written application to the public works director for a permit under this chapter.

        “Department” means the public works department of the city.

        “Director” means the public works director and shall include, where appropriate, assistants, deputies, and designees.

        “Excavation” means any opening in the surface of a street right-of-way made in any manner whatsoever except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a street, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the street.

        “Facility” means pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable, junction box, transformer, or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or any kind or character, whether enumerated in this chapter or not, which is or may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along, across, under or over any street right-of-way.

        “Permittee” means any person who has received a street construction or excavation permit pursuant to this chapter.

        “Person” means and includes any and all persons and entities, natural or artificial, including, but not limited to, the United States, the state of California and all other states, Santa Barbara County and all other counties, all cities, cities and counties, and all other public bodies, agencies, utilities, districts or subdivisions, and all the officers, employees, departments and bureaus of the foregoing, and any other individuals, groups or combinations, whether acting along, jointly or in combination; provided, however, that the above enumeration shall not include the director nor the engineering department of this city.

        “Public agency” means the United States, or any department or agency thereof, the state of California or any department or agency thereof, any county, city, city and county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, public district or any other public officer or public body.

        “Substructure” means any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or wire, or other similar structure location below the surface of any street right-of-way. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.030)

 

12.04.040 Permit—Required when—Exception.
        A.    It is expressly declared unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any of the following enumerated things without first obtaining a permit therefor and complying with all conditions thereof and all provisions of this chapter:

        1.     Excavate or fill in an excavation within a street right-of-way; or

        2.     Install, maintain, cut into, repair or remove any sidewalks, curbs, gutters or street surfacing, or install, repair or remove any facilities or substructures in, on, over, or under any street right-of-way.

        B.     This section shall not apply to telephone and power poles, associated anchors and guy wires located behind existing curbs, in alleys or where no curb is provided. Any present right which exists prior to the date upon which the portion of the street affected becomes a public city street, shall not be impaired, diminished or affected in any way by the permit requirements of this and other sections of this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.040)

 

12.04.050 Permit—Application—Information required.
        A.    Applications for a permit for performance of any of the acts described in Section 12.04.040 shall be made in writing, upon forms furnished by the department and approved by the director. The forms shall be filed with the department and shall set out the following in detail, where applicable:

        1.     Name and residence or business address of applicant;

        2.     Location, dimensions, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed improvement, excavation, fill or obstruction and the facilities or substructures to be installed, repaired or removed;

        3.     Such other information as may be required by the director.

        B.     Where one particular project will combine two or more of the acts described in Section 12.04.040 a single application may, in the discretion of the director, be made by the owner or by his or her agent duly authorized in writing, who shall set out the owner’s names above his or her own. This application, when approved and signed by the director, shall constitute the permit required under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.050)

 

12.04.060 Permit—Subject to changes—Notice.
        Any permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitation as are from time to time deemed necessary by the director for the protection of the streets or to prevent undue interference with traffic or to protect both persons and property within, upon or adjacent to such streets from damage or danger. In the case of changes or limitations or conditions to be made or imposed by the director after a permit is issued under this chapter, the director shall notify the permittee thereof, in writing, either by mail to the address set forth in the application or by personal service upon the permittee. Such change or new limitation or condition shall be effective twenty-four (24) hours after deposit in the United States mail or immediately upon personal service. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.060)

 

12.04.070 Permit—Special annual issuance—When.
        The director may issue annual permits for service connections or for other routine minor work performed by utility companies, owners or employees and not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) cost for any separate project. The permit shall become effective and be exercised by written notice given to the director not less than twenty-four (24) hours before work is to be commenced thereunder. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.070)

 

12.04.080 Permit—Refusal and revocation—Deposit return conditions.
        A.    The director may refuse to issue permits and may revoke any outstanding permits issued or any portion thereof, where the work has not been started, when the work authorized by the permit or any portion thereof is included in the proposed work to be done by any existing assessment district or by any proposed assessment district for which information proceedings have been instituted by the council. Upon such partial or complete revocation of a permit, all or a pro rata portion, as the case may be, of the cash deposit or other security of applicant, shall be returned or all or a pro rata portion, as the case may be, of any bond posted shall be exonerated, provided all fees and charges due have been first paid in full. The director shall revoke any outstanding permit when the permittee is in material default of the terms and conditions of the permit or this chapter.

        B.     The director shall not issue any permit under this chapter while the applicant is in default of any terms or conditions of any prior street construction or excavation permit issued by the director. If there is a question of fact as to the applicant’s compliance with any permit issued prior to the permit in question, the applicant may apply to the council for a review of the director’s denial of the permit. If the council shall find as a matter of fact that the applicant is not in default under any prior permits, it may order the issuance of a permit to the applicant. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.080)

 

12.04.090 Permit—Application—Plans required—When.
        A.    With each application for a permit under this chapter, the director may, in his or her discretion, require applicant to file a plan in triplicate, showing and designating by name, the street or streets which are to be constructed or will be affected by a proposed excavation, fill or obstruction, etc., together with the exact proposed location or locations and dimensions thereof as well as any other details required by the director.

        B.     This section shall not apply to excavations solely for making or maintaining service connections or for locating troubles or breaks in conduits, lines or pipes and repairing same. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.090)

 

12.04.100 Permit—Application—Engineer required—When.
        If, in the opinion of the director, the work proposed to be done by any applicant requires the making of plans, the director may require the application to be accompanied by such plans, and may require that such plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.100)

12.04.110 Permit—Application—Bond and security requirements.
        A.    With each application for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall deposit cash, certified check, cashier’s check, negotiable securities of the kind approved to secure public moneys, or post a bond in an amount that the director deems adequate as calculated by the director to be sufficient to cover all fees required under this chapter, and to insure complete restoration of the surface of the street or streets to a condition as good as it was in prior to commencing acts permitted under this chapter. If a bond is posted it shall be filed pursuant to Title 2 of this code and shall inure to the benefit of the city and be conditioned upon payment of all fees and other charges required by this chapter and full and complete repair and restoration of the street or streets affected to a condition equal to or better than they were in prior to commencement of the acts permitted under this chapter. Such bond shall further be subject to the approval of the director and city attorney as to form and sufficiency.

        B.     In the event that a portion of any project, for which a permit is required under this chapter, shall have been permitted under any other portion of this code or any other ordinance, and any of the securities enumerated in the subsection A of this section have been given therefor, and which under its terms may be applied to the proposed project, the director may in his or her discretion, accept such security as complying in full or in part with the requirements of this chapter in full or in part.

        C.     In lieu of giving of such security with each application for a permit under this chapter the director may, in his or her discretion, permit an applicant to make and maintain a continuing deposit of security in the amount of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). If, in the opinion of the director, the amount of work being performed or to be performed by an applicant shall require a greater amount of security, the director may require an appropriate increase in such amount. In the case of applicants defined as a public utility by the public utility engineer of the state of California, or if not so defined as a public utility, but performing services of a public utility or quasi-public utility nature, and in the case of applicants which are public agencies, and which in such cases have assets in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), no security shall be required to be deposited under this chapter, unless the director shall, for good cause, make a written demand for deposit of security by such applicant. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.110)

 

12.04.120 Permit—Application—Statement to hold city harmless required.
        Applicant shall sign a statement on each applicant agreeing to protect, defend, indemnify, save and hold harmless the city and each and every officer, employee, and agent thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property arising out of or connected in any way with any work done by applicant under any permit granted under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.120)

 

12.04.130 Permit—Nontransferable.
        Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.130)

 

12.04.140 Permit—Display required.
        The permit or a true copy thereof signed by the director shall be available at the job site at all times while the work is in process and until accepted by the director as fully completed. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.140)

 

12.04.150 Permit—Issuance fee.
        The applicant shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the council to cover the cost of processing the application and issuing a permit under this chapter. This section shall not apply to the United States, the state of California, or the county of Santa Barbara. Permit fees may be waived by the director where a permit is required under this chapter for work to be done in connection with or as a result of a city project. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.150)

 

12.04.160 Charges—Plan checking inspection and testing.
        All plan checking, inspection and testing fees shall be charged in accordance with the current rate schedule adopted by the council. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.160)

 

12.04.170 Charges—Restoration costs for bonds.
        Restoration costs for bonds shall be calculated using the procedures outlined in the Engineering Design Manual, county of Santa Barbara, latest edition. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.170)

 

12.04.180 Charges—Additional.
        If in the course of the work being done under the permit or permits, additional inspections or additional replacement charges over and above the amount of the initial security become necessary, or in the case of continuing security, the amount becomes insufficient to cover fees and charges for work in progress, the director may require that additional fees or security be furnished by the permittee. Failure to promptly furnish the same upon request shall be grounds to revoke or suspend the permit or permits as provided in Section 12.04.240 and order all work being done thereunder to be stopped as provided in Section 12.04.270. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.180)

 

12.04.190 Charges—Restoration cost borne by permittee.
        Where work has been done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the actual cost of restoring the area to the condition that it was in before the work was commenced shall be borne by the permittee. This section shall be applicable to all persons and public agencies as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.190)

 

12.04.200 Charges and fees—Collection.
        All unpaid fees and charges made under this chapter may be deducted from cash deposits (where deposits are required) and the balance, if any, returned to permittee, except in the case of continuing cash deposits, upon completion of the work permitted under this chapter and approval thereof by the director. In all cases where cash deposits are not made, all unpaid fees and charges shall be billed to permittee. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.200)

 

12.04.210 Charges and fees—Remedies for failure to pay.
        In the event any applicant shall fail to pay any fees or charges due under this chapter, when charged for same, the director may in his or her discretion proceed against the surety for applicant or any bond or bonds or any other security provided for in Section 12.04.110 posted by applicant, to collect such fees or charges, or may elect to bring an action at law in any court of appropriate jurisdiction to collect such charges or fees from applicant without the necessity of bringing action against such surety. The director may in addition refuse to issue any new permits to an applicant with unpaid fees or charges due on any job. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.210)

12.04.220 Fees and charges—Deposit of funds.
        Fees for applications for and issuance of permits, for inspection costs, and other charges may be deposited in a single fund from which disbursements are made. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.220)

 

12.04.230 Work in subdivisions—Applicability of chapter.
        The terms of this chapter shall apply to work on, in or in connection with streets in any subdivision or subdivided lands, as the same are defined by law, provided that the requirements of Title 18 (upon adoption) of this code and any regulations, resolutions and orders of the council relating to subdivisions shall govern all bonds and inspection fees on work done in or in connection with a subdivision. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.230)

 

12.04.240 Work commencement and completion—Time limits—Permit revocation—When.
        Except in the case of annual permits, every permittee shall commence the proposed work within thirty (30) days after the granting of the permit or within such other time from thirty (30) days minimum to sixty (60) days maximum as the director shall specify. And thereafter shall prosecute the work to completion in a diligent and workmanlike manner and restore streets to their original or better condition or as near as may be possible thereto. The director may, for good cause, excuse delay in commencement or completion of such work. In the event of unexcused delay or failure to commence, carry out or complete such work in the manner provided in this chapter, the director may, in addition to any other remedies he or she may have, terminate or suspend such permit by notice in writing effective immediately upon personal delivery to permittee or his or her agent, or twenty-four (24) hours after being deposited in the United States mail, addressed to permittee at the address shown on the application for permit, except that the director may elect to have the work completed and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. Thereafter, no work shall be done under such permit unless and until it is reinstated by the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.240)

 

12.04.250 Proof of right to use street— Required—When.
        The director may require each applicant to file proof of applicant’s right to use the street for the purposes set forth in the application. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.250)

 

12.04.260 Changes in work—Notice, postponement and consent required.
        Permittee shall notify director in writing of any proposed deviations or changes in the work to be done under any permit and shall not proceed therewith until he or she has obtained both the written consent of the director to any such deviation or change and the written signed and acknowledged consent to such deviation or change of any surety company whose bond or bonds are posted in connection with such work. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.260)

 

12.04.270 Stop order—Authorized when—Issuance.
        In addition to any other remedies or rights the director may have, he or she may issue a stop order upon violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or revocation or suspension of any permit granted under this chapter. Such stop order shall be in writing and shall be effective immediately upon personal delivery to the person in charge of the work at the project sites. Upon such delivery of such stop order, all further work shall be immediately stopped, other than such work as is immediately necessary for the preservation of life or property, and shall not be recommenced until written permission therefor is granted by the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.270)

12.04.280 Inspections—Notice of stage of completion requirements.
        The director may require, in any permit issued by him or her under this chapter, that permittee give written or oral notice of the accomplishment of specified stages in the completion of the work to be done in order to permit inspection thereof by the department. In the event the director makes such requirements in the permit, permittee shall do no further work which would hinder or prevent a complete inspection of such completed stage of the work to be done, until such inspection has been made and the stage completed, approved by the department, and if such work shall have been done prior to such inspection, permittee shall take all steps and do all work necessary to permit a full and complete inspection upon demand of the person charged by the director with the duty of making such inspection. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.280)

 

12.04.290 Inspections—Interference prohibited.
        No person shall prevent or obstruct any officer or employee of the department in making any inspection pursuant to this chapter, nor in taking any sample or making any test. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.290)

 

12.04.300 Stake setting requirements.
        If, in the opinion of the director, the work proposed to be done by applicant requires the setting of stakes, the director may require applicant to set, or cause to be set, such stakes as in the opinion of the director are necessary or expedient under the circumstances. Where the director deems that drainage or other factors are critical, the director may have such stakes set by the department and may make a reasonable charge to applicant to cover the costs of setting such stakes. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.300)

 

12.04.310 Disturbance of monuments and benchmarks—Requirements.
        Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a permanent survey benchmark within the city shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in writing from the director to do so. Before monuments, reference points and benchmarks are disturbed, or removed, they shall be tied out by a licensed surveyor or registered civil engineer or under the directions of same. After completion of the work, the monuments, reference points and benchmarks shall be accurately reset at the expense of permittee. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.310)

 

12.04.320 Work performance—Compliance with plans and specifications required.
        The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with plans, if plans are made, and specifications referred to in the permit to the satisfaction of the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.320)

 

12.04.330 Minimum impact on traffic required—Closure of streets permitted—When—Notice to parties in interest.
        A.    The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the work, traffic conditions as near normal as practicable, shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public; provided, that the director may permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him or her if, in his or her opinion, it is necessary.

        B.     The director may require that the permittee give notification to specified interested persons before commencement of the work. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.330)

 

12.04.340 Clearance for vital facilities required—Exceptions permitted—When.
        The street construction or excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to unreasonably interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital facilities. The director may prescribe specific conditions or exceptions in writing relating to such vital facilities. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.340)

 

12.04.350 Maintenance of traffic and pedestrian crossings—Required.
        The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. If any excavation is made across any street right-of-way, at least one safe crossing shall be maintained when possible for vehicles and pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.350)

 

12.04.360 Property protection measures required—Removal of parking strip vegetation prohibited.
        A.    The permittee shall at all times and at his or her or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose.

        B.     The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to any streets or other public or private property, real and personal, resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and shall be replaced or the area shall be reseeded where cutting and replacing sod is impractical, after ditches have been backfilled as required in this chapter. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as close as possible to that, which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the director or other city official having control of such property. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.360)

 

12.04.370 Protective measures and device requirements.
        A.    It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any street right-of-way to place and maintain such barriers and warning devices necessary for safety as specified by the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH) as published by BNI Books, a division of Building News, Inc., latest edition, and any revisions, supplements or replacements thereof.

        B.     Barriers shall meet the requirements of the WATCH Handbook. Warning lights shall be flares, torches, lanterns, electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Torches shall be open wick or flame flares or bombs generally used in connection with roadway repairs or construction and operating on kerosene or similar fluid. Lanterns shall be kerosene or similar fluid. Burning lanterns shall have clear red or ruby globes. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.370)

 

12.04.380 Protection and relocation of facilities—Measures—Liability.
        The permittee shall not move, alter temporarily, relocate, change, or interfere with any existing facility without the consent of the owner of the facility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner (unless the owner shall otherwise specify in writing). No facility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The permittee (or any other person specified by the owner in writing) shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other facilities which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across such work to the satisfaction of the owner of such facilities. In case any of such pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other facilities should be damaged, (and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a facility) they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them (or other person specified by the owner in writing) and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to and paid by the permittee. The permittee by acceptance of the permit agrees to assume all liability for damage to facilities and any resulting damage or injury to anyone. The city shall not be made a party to any action because of the issuance of any permit or the work or supervision done thereunder. By the acceptance of the permit, the permittee agrees to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from any and all claims for any and all things done or omitted to be done under the permit or under color of the permit or any and all work contemplated thereby. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.380)

 

12.04.390 Permit on agreement to relocate.
        A.    Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the permittee, that if any facilities placed in the excavation or obstruction for which the application is granted and approved as a permit, shall become incompatible with future travel by the general public, or any other use by the city, then the permittee or its assigns or successors will, at its own expense, either remove such facilities in cases where such removal is necessary, or in cases where the use thereof has been or is to be abandoned, or in other cases, permittee or its successors or assigns, will at its own expense relocate such facilities at a location designated by the director. Unless directed otherwise by the director, permittee shall, after either such removal, or such relocation, fill in all excavations and restore the surface of the street right-of-way to a condition equal to or better than it was in before such removal or relocation.

        B.     Permittee, its successors or assigns must complete such removal or relocation within a reasonable time specified by the director. If permittee, its successors or assigns, fails to comply with the demand, the director may perform, or cause to be performed, the removal or relocation work and recover the cost thereof (together with all costs and expenses of such action, including reasonable attorney’s fee) from the permittee, its successors or assigns by action in a court of competent jurisdiction. Permittee may, by agreement in writing with the director (and at the sole discretion of the director), arrange for necessary removal or relocation of facilities by the city, reimbursement of the cost thereof to be made to the city upon completion of such removal or relocation. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.390)

 

12.04.400 Special agreements with public agencies.
        Section 12.04.390, insofar as it applies to the cost of removal or relocation of facilities and the statement on the application concerning such removal or relocation of facilities, shall not apply to a public agency as permittee or otherwise which shall have entered into an agreement in writing with the city governing payment of the cost of removal or relocation of facilities and equipment but instead the provisions of such agreement shall regulate and control payment of the cost of such removal or relocations. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.400)

 

12.04.410 Noise, dust and debris requirements.
        Each permittee shall conduct and carry out work permitted under this chapter in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the work, noise, dust and unsightly debris. During the hours of seven p.m. to seven a.m. weekdays, and during Saturdays or Sundays, the permittee shall not use, except with the express written permission of the director, or in case of an emergency as otherwise provided in this chapter, any tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.410)

 

12.04.420 Drainage maintenance.
        The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.420)

 

12.04.430 Regulations for cutting through pavement.
        A.    Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the director when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.

        B.     Saw cutting of asphalt or Portland cement concrete may be required by the director. The depths of the cut shall be not less than one inch in depth, and greater depth of the cut may be required by the director. Sawcutting may be required by the director outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small floating sections.

        C.     Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations may be required by the director to confine pavement damage to the limits of the trench.

        D.    Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score or expansion joint.

        E.     Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.

        F.     Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the centerline of the trench.

        G.    Cut outs outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line. Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of pavement may be required by the director.

        H.    Permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior to excavation unless his or her cut results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in which case permittee shall remove and pave the area. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.430)

 

12.04.440 Care of excavated material.
        A.    All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench in any street shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the street and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets, and adjoining property. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate the dirt or dust nuisance, toeboards or bins may be required by the director to prevent spreading of dirt into traffic lanes. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the director shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to secure the necessary permission and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.

        B.     All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform with the safety requirements for shoring bracing, and ladders in trenches in accordance with Trench and Tunnel Construction Safety Orders of the state of California, as they now or may hereafter exist. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.440)

 

12.04.450 Trenches in pipe laying—Maximum length.
        The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be as may be specified by the director and no greater length shall be open for pavement removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all other operations without first obtaining the written permission of the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.450)

 

12.04.460 Clean up requirements—Liability.
        As the street construction and excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All clean up operations at the location of such street construction and excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director. From time to time, as may be ordered by the director and, in any event, immediately after completion of such work, the permittee shall, at his or her or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from work, and upon failure to do so within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the director, such work may be done by the director and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the cash deposit or surety bond provided under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.460)

 

12.04.470 Depth of structures.
        No person shall, without written permission of the director, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts, and catch basins at a distance less than the following distances:

        A.    In Paved Streets.

        1.     Twenty-four (24) inches below the established flow line of the gutter. If the flow line is not established, then the depths shall be at a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches below the surface of the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street.

        B.     In Parkway.

        1.     The minimum depth of any substructure shall be sixteen (16) inches below established gutter grade when such substructure parallels the parkway.

        2.     The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve (12) inches below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right angles to the parkway.

        C.     In Other Streets. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve (12) inches below the surface; provided, however, that the director may permit a lesser depth. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.04.470)

12.04.480 Backfilling—Standards and specifications—Inspections and tests.
        Fine material, free from lumps and stone, shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement section in lifts consistent with the type of soil involved and the method of consolidation being used. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. Each lift shall be mechanically compacted, flooded, jetted or ponded, or a combination of these methods shall be used, depending upon the type of soil involved, to compact the backfill material. Backfill material having a sand equivalent of less than ten percent shall not be flooded, jetted or ponded. Such backfill shall be placed in lifts not to exceed eight inches in thickness when compacted with pneumatic tampers or placed in lifts not to exceed four feet when compacted with a hydro hammer. Backfill material having a sand equivalent greater than ten may be flooded, jetted or ponded except that no flooding, jetting or ponding shall be allowed within thirty (30) inches of finish grade, unless specific approval for such is received from the director. All backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a condition equal or superior to that which existed at the time of excavation. The director may require soft tests to be taken by the city’s soil testing laboratory, when, in his or her opinion, backfill or any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted such tests must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the director. All expense of such tests shall be borne by the permittee. The permittee may also provide soils tests if done under the supervision of a registered civil engineer. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.480)

 

12.04.490 Surface restoration requirements.
        A.    Permanent resurfacing of excavations may be required where the type of consolidation used in replacing the backfill is adequate, in the opinion of the director, to prevent settling and when the moisture content of the backfill is not excessive. In the event the type of consolidation used in replacing the backfill is not adequate to prevent further settling or the moisture content is excessive, temporary resurfacing shall be provided prior to placement by permittee of permanent resurfacing. If temporary surfacing is provided, the top surface of the backfill shall be covered with a minimum of one inch of bituminous material. Such temporary paving material shall be cool mix, except that the permittee may use, or the director may require, hot mix. All temporary paving material shall conform closely enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days after all backfilling is completed, unless additional time is required by the director, and shall keep same safe for pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with permanent paving, except that if it is impracticable to maintain the surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required herein. The temporary paving shall be replaced at the sole cost and expense of the permittee by permanent paving pursuant to Section 12.04.500, equal to or better than the original paving at the time required by the director.

        B.     Acceptance or approval of any street construction or excavation work by the director shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and his or her or its surety under the surety bond required under this chapter for incompetence or defective work if discovered within twelve (12) months from and after the completion of the street construction or excavation work. The director’s presence during the performance of any street construction or excavation work shall not relieve the permittee of its responsibilities under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.490)

 

12.04.500 Final surface restoration requirements.
        Upon completion of the backfill, (including temporary resurfacing when required) of an excavation within a right-of-way for the installation or removal of substructures, the director at his or her option, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the street surface damaged by the permittee’s excavation, in which event resurfacing shall be done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by this chapter, subject to the director’s inspection, and shall be completed within a period of ninety (90) days after such authorization to complete final resurfacing. Where required in the interest of public safety, the director may elect to do such resurfacing with city forces, in which event, the cost of such resurfacing shall be borne solely by the permittee.

        A.    Subgrades shall be restored to that existing prior to the excavation or in accordance with standards for the construction of new paved streets used by the city.

        B.     Portland cement concrete used in the repair of trenches shall not have slump in excess of two inches.

        C.     Portland cement concrete used in the repair of trenches in streets shall be replaced with a thickness equivalent to that removed, but in no case less than five inches. Bituminous pavement shall be replaced at the same thickness as the existing pavement, unless otherwise required by the director. All bituminous pavement replaced shall be given a fog-seal coat.

        D.    Portland cement sidewalks shall be replaced with the thickness of that removed; but in no case less than four inches and shall match the color and texture of the adjoining sidewalk.

        E.     Expansion joints in Portland cement concrete patches shall be matched with saw-cut lines.

        F.     Portland cement concrete shall be finished to match the texture of that of the adjoining pavement.

        G.    Concrete shall be compacted by tamping, rodding, or mechanical vibration.

        H.    Repairs in rock and oil streets shall be made in accordance with the existing specifications for bituminous-type pavement.

        I.      Chip-seal coats may be required by the director when the street has been chip-sealed or when it is general practice to chip-seal bituminous-type pavement. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.500)

 

12.04.510 Urgent work.
        If in his or her judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public, or the public interest require that work permitted under this chapter be performed as emergency work, the director shall have full power to order that a crew of men and adequate facilities be employed by the permittee twenty-four (24) hours a day to the end that such street construction or excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.510)

 

12.04.520 Emergency action.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the director for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.520)

 

12.04.530 Notice of completion.
        Upon completion of any work or act for which a permit has been granted, the permittee shall notify the director in writing on a form prescribed by the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.530)

 

12.04.540 Certificate of acceptance.
        After acceptance of the work by the director as fully completed in accordance with the conditions of the permit and all of the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws, permittee may request that the director issue a certificate of acceptance. Upon such request, the director shall issue the certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature and extent of such work so completed under the permit. Such certificate of acceptance shall not release permittee from the unpaid fees and the twelve (12) months requirements of Sections 12.04.200 and 12.04.490 (respectively). (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.540)

 

12.04.550 Liability of city.
        This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any work for which permit is issued under this chapter, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this chapter, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any work permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.550)

 

12.04.560 Violation deemed unlawful.
        Per Section 1.32.010 it is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or any condition of any permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.560)

 

12.04.570 Appeal—Hearing and notice.
        In the event that an applicant is not satisfied with the action of the director under this chapter, he or she may, within ten days, appeal in writing to the council and the council shall set a date for a hearing and cause five days written notice thereof by mail to be given the applicant. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.05.570)

Chapter 12.08 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS
12.08.010 Building materials and apparatus on streets and sidewalks—Permit requirements, fees and default.
        A.    Permit Required. No person shall place or cause to be placed on any street, sidewalk, or public place any material, machinery or apparatus for building, paving or other purposes and allow the same to remain there for twenty-four (24) hours without an encroachment or other permit from the director or such other officer as may be designated by the council. If the use of the street or sidewalk is in connection with a street construction or excavation permit, then the provisions of the permit shall apply. If the use of the street, sidewalk or public place is not in connection with these permits then an encroachment permit shall be obtained.

        B.     Permit Provisions. The encroachment permit shall specify the portion of the street or sidewalk as approved by the city attorney, which period shall not be longer than may be reasonably necessary and may be extended only in case of necessity.

        C.     Permit Fee. The encroachment permit shall be granted to the owner of the lot, or the builder or contractor, who wishes to use the space, upon depositing with the director a bond as approved by the city engineer, as a guarantee to the city that the permittee will remove or cause to be removed all dirt, debris and materials of any kind from the street to the satisfaction of the director immediately upon the completion of the proposed work, or at such time prior thereto when, in the judgment of the director, the public interest and convenience will be subserved by the removal of the same, or any portion thereof, and that he or she will repair all damage done to street, gutter, curb or sidewalk.

        D.    Default—Forfeiture of Deposit. Upon the failure or negligence of the permittee to remove or cause to be removed, to the satisfaction of the director, such dirt, debris or materials as aforesaid within two days after being notified so to do by the director, the money so deposited as a guarantee, or so much thereof as may be necessary, shall be used by the director in removing such dirt, debris or materials and the balance, if any, returned to the permittee. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.010)

 

12.08.020 Building materials and apparatus on streets and sidewalks—Regulations.
        Every permittee referred to in Section 12.08.010 shall obey every lawful direction of the director, as to such building material, whether contained in such permit or made after issuance thereof, and shall comply with the following rules:

        A.    Area for Occupation. Such permits shall not authorize the occupation of any sidewalk or street, or part thereof, other than that immediately in front of the premises of the building for the construction of which the permit is issued. During the progress of building operations at least six feet of the sidewalk pavement covered by such permit shall be at all times kept clear of rubbish and dirt for the free and unobstructed use of pedestrians.

        B.     Temporary Walkways. Whenever the sidewalk must be occupied or removed, a temporary plank walk not less than three feet in width, with substantial railings shall be constructed around the outside of the obstruction and maintained during the obstruction of the sidewalk. All walkways adjacent to a construction zone shall be covered in such a manner as to protect the public from falling objects in a manner approved by the director, unless the director shall waive the requirement as necessary.

        C.     Protective Railing. If there are excavations on either side of the sidewalk, such sidewalk must be protected by substantial railings not less than two and one-half feet high from the floor of the walk. The railings are to be maintained so long as such excavations and depressions must be barricaded.

        D.    Barricades Required. All approaches to excavations and depressions must be barricaded.

        E.     Director to Regulate. In all cases such temporary sidewalks, railings and approaches shall be made as regards ease of approach, strength and safety to the satisfaction of the director.

        F.     Waterways and Gutters to be Kept Clear. All gutters and waterways must be bridged over and kept clear of obstructions to the free passage of water.

        G.    Fire Hydrants to be Kept Clear. Material or other obstructions must not be placed within twelve (12) feet of any hydrant used for fire purposes.

        H.    Warning Lights. Warning lights of a type approved by the director must be displayed and maintained at each end of every pile of material or other obstructions in the street, and at each and every excavation from six p.m. to six a.m.

        I.      Removal of Excavated Earth. Earth taken from excavations and rubbish taken from buildings must not be stored either upon sidewalks or roadways or streets, and must be removed from day to day as rapidly as produced. When dry rubbish, apt to produce dust, is being handled, it must be wetted down so as to prevent its being blown about by the wind.

        J.      Temporary Fencing. Whenever it becomes necessary for the safety of pedestrians to erect a fence in front of a building under construction, the fence, if built upon the street or sidewalk, shall not exceed six feet in height and shall contain no advertising matter.

        K.    Street Occupation Limited. The occupation of the street for the storage of building materials shall never exceed, in front of any one building, one-third of the roadway of the same. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.020)

 

12.08.030 Architectural encroachments—Permit requirements and conditions.
        A.    Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section to allow for building eaves and/or roof encroachments in commercially zoned property to provide for trellised and/or covered walkways in the public right-of-way. Such improvements may be desirable in order to make Buellton a more attractive, better functioning and more effective civic center and is for the public health, safety and welfare. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to permit any advantage by the permit which would allow any increased opportunities to display advertising devices, signs, etc.

        B.     Permit—Conditions. Subject to the issuance of an encroachment permit, the planning commission may approve an eaves or roof overhang into a public right-of-way over sidewalks for the purpose of providing trellised and/or covered walkways, subject to the following conditions, all of which shall be part of the permit:

        1.     Encroaching structures shall be attached to a main building. Such structures may extend over a public right-of-way utilized or intended for use by pedestrians.

        2.     In order to insure pedestrian clearance and safety, the minimum distance between any portion of such structure, or any object attached to it and the finished grade of the pedestrian walkway shall be eight feet.

        3.     The planning commission shall approve, disapprove or modify the proposed architectural design of the structure intended to encroach into the public right-of-way. The planning commission shall approve, disapprove or modify any sign arrangement made possible by the encroaching structure. The planning commission shall approve, disapprove or modify any lighting arrangement.

        4.     The planning commission may require such other conditions as it deems appropriate which may be more restrictive than provided elsewhere within this title.

        5.     The permittee shall agree to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from any and all actions and causes of action arising out of or caused by the encroachment, and the permittee agrees that the license shall create no rights in conflict with the public interest.

        6.     The planning commission shall require provision for insurance with the city as a named beneficiary for the granting and continuance of all encroachment permits. Such insurance shall be in accordance with the form and amount specified by the city attorney.

        7.     The encroachment permit and its conditions shall be in accordance with an overall plan or design adopted for the commercial area or district by the planning commission. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.030)

 

12.08.040 Wooden awnings—Projection over street or sidewalk prohibited—Notice to remove.
        No person shall erect or repair any wooden awnings which shall project over any sidewalk or portion of a sidewalk or street. Every person owning, occupying or controlling any building in front of which a wooden awning which is unsafe or in a dangerous condition or an obstruction to the street or portion thereof projects over the sidewalk or portion of the street, shall cause the same to be removed within five days after being notified so to do by the director. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.040)

 

12.08.050 Projections over street and sidewalk—Minimum height.
        No person shall construct an awning, street sign, or any other projection or suffer the same to remain at an altitude of less than seven feet over any sidewalk in front of premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or her. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.050)

 

12.08.060 Banners and similar advertising devices over public place—Permit requirements, denial and appeal.
        No person shall hang or display in front of any premises, owned, occupied or controlled by him or her, over or across any public street, place or sidewalk, any banner or other similar device used for advertising unless a permit has been obtained per Title 19 of this code. In the event that the city staff shall deny the permit, or the applicant for the permit disagrees with the regulations prescribed by the city staff, the applicant may appeal to the council within ten days after action by the city staff by filing a written notice with the city clerk. The council also may, on its own motion, after action by the city staff, set the matter before itself, in which event, the action of the city staff shall be suspended, pending action by the council. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.060)

 

12.08.070 Branches over streets and sidewalks—Minimum height.
        No persons shall permit branches of trees or shrubs to extend within seven feet from the ground over any portion of the street or sidewalk next to or in front of premises owned or occupied by him or her except that portion within four feet from the curb line or edge of traveled way (if no curb exists) thereof. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.070)

 

12.08.080 Placing material upon streets or sidewalks prohibited—Exception.
        No persons shall place or cause to be placed anywhere upon any public street, way or sidewalk, and no person owning and occupying or having the control of any premises in the city shall suffer to remain in front thereof upon the sidewalk or portion of the street or way next to such premises any boxes, bales, barrels, wood, lumber, goods, wares and merchandise, or any other thing. Provided, however, that goods, wares and merchandise in transit may be allowed on the outer three feet of the sidewalk for a period not to exceed six hours, where at least five feet of unobstructed sidewalk remains. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.080)

 

12.08.090 Barbed-wire and similar fences contiguous to public place prohibited.
        No person shall, upon any property owned or leased by him or her, and contiguous to or along any public street, place or sidewalk, construct, set up or maintain any barbed wire, razor ribbon wire or other similar wire fence intended to deter passing over, under or through such fence or enclosure. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.090)

 

12.08.100 Trenches in street—Warning light requirements.
        All contractors and other persons making any trench on any street shall at night keep signal lights of a type approved by the director at every thirty (30) feet along the trench throughout the entire night and must take all other necessary precautions to guard against all accidents and dangers. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.100)

 

12.08.110 Removal of obstructions—Authorized—Sale of items—Notice.
        The director, or such other officer as may be designated by the council is authorized and empowered to remove, or cause to be removed to any place selected by him or her, all materials and things of whatever nature, which obstruct the free use of any street, lane, park or sidewalk or portion thereof in the city or which render the same dangerous to the public, and sell the same, after notice. The owner of the materials or things so removed may recover the same before the same are sold by the director on payment of the actual costs and charges of such removal and other incurred expenses. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.110)

 

12.08.120 Crowd dispersal authorized.
        Whenever the free passage of a public street or sidewalk or any part of such street or sidewalk shall be obstructed by a crowd of people, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed so to do by the sheriff or any police officer. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.10.120)

Chapter 12.12 VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
12.12.010 Permit—Required.
        A permit shall be required pursuant to this chapter by any person, firm or corporation prior to doing any of the following acts:

        A.    To operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or special mobile equipment of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in the State Vehicle Code on or across any city street or road.

        B.     Under emergency conditions, to operate or move a type of vehicle otherwise prohibited by the State Vehicle Code on or across any city street or road.

        C.     To operate or move on an annual or seasonal basis a vehicle or combination of vehicles or special mobile equipment with loads of a size and weight exceeding the maximums specified in the State Vehicle Code on or across any city street or road except those that may be set forth in the permit and subject to the following conditions:

        1.     Transportation of overwidth and overweight vehicles and equipment shall be restricted to the normal five-day week during daylight hours except in cases of emergency;

        2.     Only one unit or group of similar units may be included in an annual permit which shall describe the special equipment, maximum size and maximum weights, including the vehicle license number or other identifying number.

        D.    To operate or move any vehicle, mobile equipment, load, or machinery, on or across any city street or road where the director finds that such vehicle, mobile equipment, load, or machinery is likely to cause severe and rapid deterioration of the pavement of the street or base of the street, or otherwise materially damage property belong to the city. For purposes of this subsection, the frequency and intensity should be considered by the director or authorized representative. In the event that vehicles, mobile equipment, load or machinery are determined by the director in any construction project are likely to fall within this subsection, the director shall require a permit under this chapter prior to granting any other type of permit or, if no other type of permit shall be required, then the director shall give notice to anyone coming within this subsection that a permit is required.

        E.     Notwithstanding these provisions subsections (A), (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section shall not apply to federal, state, and local government emergency vehicles operating in an emergency situation.

        F.     Whenever the weight or load exceeds the amount set forth for certain streets as established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.010)

 

12.12.020 Permit—Application—Fees.
        For the permit required by this chapter, the applicant shall apply to the director on the form provided by the city and pay the fee for the permit as required by resolution of the council. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.020)

 

12.12.030 Permit—Application—Information required.
        The application for any such permit shall be in writing and shall:

        A.    Specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved;

        B.     Set forth the particular streets and roads over which the permit to operate is requested;

        C.     Specify the date or dates of the move and whether such permit is requested for a single trip, round trip, annual or seasonal basis or continuous operation;

        D.    Specify any other information the director may deem necessary in accordance with Section 12.12.060. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.030)

 

12.12.040 Permit—Application—City indemnity.
        The application for any permit and the permit to be issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain a provision that the permittee agrees to hold the city harmless from the activities contemplated by the permit and to repair and replace any and all damage to city property, including without limitation, city streets, roads, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, and street signs and signals. Permittee shall also post a bond as a guarantee for work, in a form to be approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.040)

 

12.12.050 Permit—Authority to specify conditions.
        If a permit is issued, the director is authorized to limit the number of trips or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle or vehicles, mobile equipment, loads or machinery described may be operated on the streets indicated or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation thereof when necessary to prevent interference with the orderly flow of traffic and to assure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures and may require special measures, insurance or security as may be deemed necessary to protect the streets, bridges and public property from injury or to provide indemnity for any injuries or damages resulting thereto. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.050)

 

12.12.060 Permit for continuous operation.
        Upon application to the director for permission to use and operate private or contract vehicles on city streets for the purpose of continuous operations that including hauling loads which exceed the size and weight limitations otherwise prohibited by the State Vehicle Code, and upon recommendation of the director, the council in its discretion and if good cause appears may authorize the director to issue a written permit for such continuous operations and specified protective restrictions as authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.060)

 

12.12.070 Permit waiver authorized—When.
        The director for good cause and when permitted by law may waive the permit required by this chapter. No permit is required to move or operate a vehicle defined as an “implement of husbandry” in Section 36100 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.070)

12.12.080 Permit amendment or revocation.
        Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for good cause may be amended or revoked by the director by giving the permittee twenty-four (24) hours written notice setting forth the grounds therefor. Notice by mail shall be deemed adequate notice under this section. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.080)

 

12.12.090 Appeal hearing and notice.
        In the event that an applicant is not satisfied with the action of the director under this chapter, he or she may, within ten days, appeal in writing to the council and the council shall set a date for a hearing and cause five days written notice thereof by mail to be given the applicant. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.090)

 

12.12.100 Liability for damage to city property and streets.
        Any person operating a vehicle, mobile equipment, load or machinery on public property or doing any other act which otherwise damages any public street, sign, curb, gutter, sidewalk or other public property, shall be liable to the city for the cost of repairing or replacing the same, whether or not a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.15.100)

Chapter 12.16 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.16.010 Definitions.
        Whenever in Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.080 of this chapter, the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

        “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

        “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

        “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means and includes poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

        “Underground utility district” or “district” shall mean that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.16.050 of this chapter.

        “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.010)

 

12.16.020 Public hearing—Notice to owners—Council decision final.
        The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail at the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.020)

 

12.16.030 Compliance with Streets and Highways Code.
        In order to initiate proceedings under Chapter 28, Part 3, Division 7 of the Streets and Highways Code, the council shall comply with Streets and Highways Code Section 5896.5. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.030)

 

12.16.040 Report prior to hearing by director—Contents.
        Prior to holding such public hearing pursuant to Section 12.16.020, the director shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for such hearing by the council containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.040)

 

12.16.050 Designation of underground utility districts by resolution.
        If, after any public hearing pursuant to Section 12.16.020, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.050)

 

12.16.060 Unlawful acts pursuant to underground utility district.
        Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.16.050, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.16.110, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.140. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.060)

 

12.16.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies pursuant to underground utility district.
        A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.050, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. Such city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

        B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.050, together with a copy of Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.140 of this chapter, to the affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.070)

 

12.16.080 Exceptions for emergency or unusual circumstances—Permission required—When.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.140 of this chapter, facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without authority of the city manager in order to provide emergency service. The city manager may grant special permission, on such terms as the city manager may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.080)

 

12.16.090 Other exceptions.
        This ordinance and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.050 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

        A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director;

        B.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

        C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

        D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;

        E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

        F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

        G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

        H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.090)

 

12.16.100 Utility companies to furnish conductors, conduits and other equipment when.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.050, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.100)

12.16.110 Owners responsible for portion of service connection—Noncompliance—Disconnection, removal authorized.
        A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.16.060 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility to utilities on file with the commission.

        B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.050, the director shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.110)

 
12.16.120 Owner noncompliance—Performance by city—Lien against property—Collection.
        If a property owner within an underground utility district, after due notice, refuses to comply within a reasonable time to effect removal of overhead lines or prepare their property to accept underground utility lines within the underground utility district in accordance with the applicable rules of the utility involved, the city may cause such work to be done and assess the cost thereof against the property, and such assessment shall become a lien against the property. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary city ad valorem taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure and sale, in the case of delinquency, as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of the city ad valorem taxes shall be applicable to such assessment, levy and collection. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.120)
 

12.16.130 City to remove equipment from poles prior to removal of poles by owner.
        City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.140 in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.16.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.130)


12.16.140 Extension of time for actions authorized when.
        In the event that any act required by Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.050 or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.16.050 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.140)


12.16.150 Appeal—Hearing and notice.
        In the event that an applicant is not satisfied with the action of the director under this chapter, he or she may, within ten days, appeal in writing to the council and the council shall set a date for a hearing and cause five days written notice thereof by mail to be given the applicant. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.20.150)

Chapter 12.20 HISTORICAL LANDMARKS
12.20.010 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote the economic welfare and prosperity of the city by preserving and protecting those places, sites, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects having a special historical or esthetic character or interest, for the use, education and view of the general public and to remind the citizens of this county and visitors from elsewhere of the historical background of the city. (Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.010)

 

12.20.020 Designation of landmarks.
        The city council is authorized to receive and act upon applications to investigate and designate places, sites, buildings, structures, works of art and other objects within the city as having historic, esthetic or other special character or interest and being worthy of consideration for protection, enhancement or perpetuation as such. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.020)

 

12.20.030 Designation of landmarks—Criteria for determination.
        In designating any place, site, building, structure, work of art or other object as being of historical, esthetic or other special character or interest and worthy of protection under this chapter, the city council shall be subject to the following express standards:

        A.    The landmark designated shall have historical, esthetic or special character or interest for the general public and not be limited in interest to a special group of persons.

        B.     The designation of such landmark shall not require the expenditure of any unreasonable amount of money to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

        C.     The designation of such landmark shall not infringe upon the right of a private owner thereof to make any and all reasonable uses of such landmark which are not in conflict with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.030)

 

12.20.040 Designation of landmarks—Recommendation for permanency—Conditions authorized.
        A.    The city council shall impose for permanent adoption any or all of the following conditions it deems best suited to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The council shall set a public hearing to be advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. At such hearing, the council may approve, modify or disapprove the designation of a property for historic designation and the conditions to be imposed. The action of the council shall be final and shall take effect immediately.

        B.     Conditions that may be imposed under this section are as follows:

        1.     Demolition, removal or destruction, partially or entirely, may be prohibited unless express con-sent in writing is first had and obtained from the city council. Such consent may impose all reasonable conditions deemed appropriate by the council to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.

        2.     No alterations, repairs, additions or changes (other than normal maintenance and repair work) shall be made unless and until all plans therefor have first been reviewed by the city council and approved or modified, and reasonable conditions imposed as deemed necessary, and that all such work shall be done under the direction and control of the city council or other qualified persons designated by it.

        3.     That only certain specified uses may be made, or that certain specified uses shall be prohibited.

        4.     That no buildings or structures exposed to public view within a specified distance may be placed, erected, moved in, altered, enlarged or removed (other than normal maintenance and repair work) without approval, with reasonable conditions imposed where deemed necessary by the city council, first had and ob-tained.

        5.     Other reasonable requirements, restrictions or conditions to meet special or unique circumstances. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.040)

 

12.20.050 Enforcement.
        The city manager is charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of the provision of this chapter and all conditions imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.050)

 
12.20.060 Violation deemed unlawful—Penalty.
        It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Each separate day or any portion thereof on which any violation occurs shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense punishable as provided in this code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011; Ord. 94-6 § 3, 1994; prior code § 11.25.080)

Chapter 12.24 MEDIAN STRIPS ON THE AVENUE OF FLAGS
12.24.010 General.
        This chapter is enacted to regulate the use of the real property owned by the city comprised of eight median strips located on the Avenue of Flags, Buellton, California. (Ord. 10-01 § 3, 2010; Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.01)

 

12.24.020 Prohibited uses.
        It is unlawful to engage in any of the following acts on the property described in Section 12.24.010:

        A.    Sports Activities. No person shall engage in any sports activity which may create a safety hazard to those on the property or upon the public streets, highways or road rights-of-way in the vicinity or that adjoin such property, which activities shall include, but not be limited to, baseball, softball, t-ball, soccer, football, rugby, frisbee, volleyball, golf or batting practice.

        B.     Dumping, Littering. No person shall dump, deposit or leave any trash, refuse, rubbish, litter, object, equipment or any kind of waste materials, except in approved containers specifically placed and designated to receive such materials.

        C.     Fires. No person shall start or maintain any fire, except in such areas as are specifically designated by the city manager or designee for such fires, including stoves, barbecue pits, fire rings, and the like.

        D.    Fireworks. No person shall discharge or set off any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks.

        E.     Camping. No person shall camp or use any portion of the property for living or sleeping quarters, erect a tent or shelter or arrange bedding for the purpose of or to permit any overnight stay, or park a travel trailer, camper or motor home within the property.

        F.     Overnight Sleeping. No person shall sleep on any portion of the property during the period of time commencing one-half hour after sunset and continuing to eight a.m.

        G.    Vandalism. No person shall commit any act of vandalism, defacement or malicious mischief on any portion of the property nor shall any person damage or destroy vegetation, equipment, signs, buildings, landscape features, or any other public or private property.

        H.    Firearms. No person shall bring onto or use on the property any firearms, air, gas or spring propelled guns, ammunition, any explosive, or incendiary device, sling shots, bows and arrows or other projectile-throwing devices.

        I.      Offensive Noises, Disorderly Conduct. No person shall use any loud, boisterous, abusive, insulting, threatening or indecent language or gesture, engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to be a breach of the public peace.

        J.      Uncontrolled Animals. No person shall hitch, fasten, lead, drive, ride or let loose any animal or fowl of any kind, provided that this shall not apply to a domestic animal on a leash. Persons with animals on leashes using the medians shall be responsible for the removal of any animal waste.

        K.    Throwing Objects. No person shall throw any rock, can, bottle or other missile in or on the property when said activity causes an unreasonable burden of maintenance, or causes any unreasonable risk of harm or danger to any person, or damage to any personal or public property.

        L.     Bicycling on Landscaping. No person shall use or operate a bicycle on any landscaped portion of the property.

        M.    Kite Flying. No person shall hold, fly or operate a kite from any area of the property.

        N.    Interference with Employee’s Duties. No person shall threaten, resist, intimidate, or interfere with a city employee in the performance of the employee’s official duties.

        O.    Discharges. No person shall permit or cause to be placed any waste water, sewage effluent, discharge from sinks or toilets or other plumbing fixtures, oil fuel or other hazardous, obnoxious or offensive substance upon or into the ground or water on the property.

        P.     Removal of Prohibited Uses. The city manager or designee may prohibit, remove or require to be removed from the property any animal, vehicle, equipment, activity, thing or material, the use or presence of which therein is likely to (1) cause an unreasonable risk of harm or danger to any person or damage to any real or personal property; or (2) cause any unreasonable burden of maintenance or cleanup; or (3) cause any unreasonable annoyance to any person. (Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.02)

 

12.24.030 Permitted uses.
        A.    The following uses may be permitted, subject to the approval of a permit as required in Section 12.24.040 of this chapter:

        1.     City-sponsored event;

        2.     Special events.

        B.     The city council by resolution shall establish guidelines for the use of the medians. (Ord. 10-01 § 3, 2010; Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.03)

 

12.24.040 Permit requirements.
        A.    Permit for Use. Persons or organizations interested in using the medians for special events shall complete a special event permit application in a form approved by the city prior to approval of any permit. The special event permit application will be reviewed by city staff and conditionally approved or denied within ten business days. City staff will provide written determination to the applicant. The decision of city staff may be appealed to the city council within ten business days of receipt of city staff’s determination.

        B.     Time and Frequency. Use of the medians shall be limited to not more than six hours a day, not more than two days in a row and not more than two days a month. The following exceptions, however, may be permitted:

        1.     A certified farmers’ market which may be held once a week for not more than four hours each week;

        2.     The city manager may increase the allowed duration and frequency from May through September, if in his or her judgment, such exceptions would not significantly damage the grass or other features of the medians and the increase in number of special activities does not impose significant impacts on nearby businesses or residents.

        C.     Plan Required. When applying for use of the medians, persons or organizations must supply the following information:

        1.     Name, address and phone number of sponsor and representative(s);

        2.     A description of the proposed use, its purpose, and an estimate of the number of participants;

        3.     The proposed location and type of booth, exhibits, displays and temporary structures;

        4.     The location of all electrical lines and sources of power;

        5.     A description of any proposed lane closures, restrictions on curbside parking, use of crossing guards or any other proposed safety features;

        6.     The location of proposed pedestrian walkways;

        7.     The size, location and text of any proposed signs;

        8.     The location of any lighting;

        9.     Nature and location of any loudspeaker, sound equipment, band or other noise generating uses;

        10.   The requested days for the event and specific hours of operation;

        11.   The name of a representative that will be on-site throughout the event in case of emergencies.

        The land shall be subject to the review and approval by the city manager or designee who may apply any conditions he or she deems necessary. The city manager or designee may deny the application for any reasonable cause; decisions of the city manager or designee may be appealed to the city council.

        D.    Specific Requirements for Events. In order to use the medians for any purpose, the following requirements shall be provided:

        1.     Sponsors shall provide a security officer (such as an off-duty policeman or private security guard) subject to the approval of the police chief;

        2.     Sponsors shall barricade the pavement between medians to prevent U-turns, in a manner approved by the police chief;

        3.     Repealed by Ord. 97-02;

        4.     At least four portable toilets shall be provided; additional toilets may be required by the city manager or designee if the volume of patrons is expected to be larger;

        5.     Garbage receptacles shall be placed throughout the event grounds; specially designated receptacles for recyclables (glass and aluminum) shall also be provided;

        6.     Evidence of approvals from the county health department and the alcoholic beverages commission if food and drink is to be served;

        7.     One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) liability coverage in a form approved by the city attorney. The insurance policy shall name the city as additional insured.

        8.     An indemnification agreement in a form approved by the city attorney to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by it in repairing damage to the city property and restoring the property to the condition which existed prior to the event. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee shall defend the city against, and indemnify and hold the city harmless, from any claims, damages and liability to any persons or property resulting from any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted activity or event.

        E.     Clean-up. All clean-up shall be the responsibility of the sponsor. Clean-up commence immediately after the event; all clean-up must be completed on the day of the event and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city.

        F.     Location. Use of the medians shall be limited to the two islands located immediately north of First Street (the second and third islands north of Highway 246).

        G.    Fees and Deadlines.

        1.     Applications must be submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance of the date of the event, except as provided in Section 12.24.050 of this chapter. If an exception to these standards is requested it shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council. The application for such an exception must be submitted at least forty-five (45) days in advance.

        2.     A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid at the time of submission of the application to cover the costs of reviewing the application. Sponsors shall deposit a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover the costs of any damages or inadequate clean-up; provided, however, that the city manager or designee may require a larger deposit if in his or her judgment the risk of damage is especially high for a particular event.

        3.     If city staff are needed for traffic direction, crowd control, or other reasons, the sponsor shall reimburse the city for the full cost of such services, as determined by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 10-01 § 3, 2010; Ord. 97-02 § 1, 1997; Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.04)

 

12.24.050 Waiver of requirements for certain events.
        City staff may waive any of the requirements in the special event permit application, if staff finds that given the nature of the activity, the waiver will not result in any unreasonable risk to the property or to the public. (Ord. 10-01 § 3, 2010; Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.05)

 

12.24.060 Enforcement.
        A.    Ejection for Violation. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to eject from the property any person who is in violation of this ordinance or in violation of the terms of a permit for use of the property.

        B.     Impoundment of Property Found in Violation. The city manager or designee shall have the authority to seize and confiscate or impound any property, vehicle, animal, thing or device on the property used or maintained in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.06)


12.24.070 Violation—Penalty.
        Any entry onto or use of this property which is in violation of the chapter or in violation of the terms of a permit for use of the property shall be considered a misdemeanor. (Ord. 94-11 § II, 1994: Ord. 92-26 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.05.07)

Chapter 12.28 PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITY USE REGULATIONS
Article I. Operational Policies
12.28.010 Equal opportunity.
        Any and all individuals shall be provided equal opportunity for use of any recreational facility and any recreational program without regard to physical limitation, age, race, color, national origin, religion, political beliefs, or sex. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.010)

 

12.28.020 Reserved use.
        Reserved use (defined as exclusive, permitted use for one or more occasions) of community, neighborhood, and other recreational facilities shall require obtaining a use permit in a form established by the city. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to use. Other uses may also require a use permit as determined by the city, which shall have the authority to issue and/or revoke, based on cause, all such permits. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.012)

 

12.28.030 Neighborhood park (unreserved) use.
        Use of all neighborhood park facilities (defined as a site that serves immediate residential areas) will be based on a first come, first served basis. No use permit is required for this purpose. If a user group wishes to reserve the use of a neighborhood park facility, a use permit shall be required, with all applicable fees, rules, regulations, terms, and conditions enforced. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.014)

 

12.28.040 Multiple facility reservations.
        If more than one recreational facility is reserved (e.g., two sportfields) applicable fees and deposits shall be charged for each facility reserved. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.016)

 

12.28.050 City-sponsored uses.
        Any use of recreational facilities scheduled for city-sponsored or co-sponsored uses shall be deemed a use for city purposes, and shall be exempt from fees, deposits, and permit requirements listed in this chapter. Such determination shall be made by the city council. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.018)

 

12.28.060 User groups.
        User groups are established and defined as follows:

        A.    Group I — City-sponsored or co-sponsored leisure and recreational activities.

        B.     Group II — Youth groups conducting nonprofit youth oriented sports activities.

        C.     Group III — Nonprofit athletic organizations conducting community oriented leisure or sports activities.

        D.    Group IV — Private parties and groups conducting noncommercial oriented activities that are closed to the public.

        E.     Group V — Profit making, commercial businesses, or organizations conducting activities that are profit or nonprofit making and are either open or closed to the public. User group designations form the basis of variable fee schedules for certain recreational facilities. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.020)

 

12.28.070 Recurring use.
        Recurring use is generally defined as repeated use of recreational facilities on a regularly scheduled basis (i.e., leagues, etc.). (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.022)

 

12.28.080 Nonrecurring use.
        Nonrecurring use is generally defined as a use of recreational facilities on a one time only or special event basis (i.e., annual picnics, parties or company sponsored events). Applicable fees and permits are required only when reserved use by an organization is requested. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.024)

 

12.28.090 Exemption.
        Due to special or unusual circumstances, the city council or designee may exempt user Groups II, III, and IV from applicable fee requirements for the use of recreational facilities. It is the responsibility of the specific user group to formally request exemption from the city council. The request should specify the special or unusual circumstances that necessitate exemption. (Ord. 05-08 § 2, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.026)

 

12.28.100 Scheduling priorities.
        Scheduling priorities shall be on a first come, first served basis, unless in event of conflict where priority will be determined by user groups as defined in Section 12.28.060, with Group I having priority over Group II, Group II over Group III, etc. In the event of conflict, the city reserves the right to reschedule any group. Scheduling of reserved uses will be carried out by the city or designee in a fair and equitable manner, to serve the leisure and recreation needs of the citizens of Buellton. (Ord. 05-08 § 3, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.028)

 

12.28.110 Sportfields and facilities.
        It is recognized that recreational facilities and sportfields vary in type, location, and ancillary improvements. However, applicable fee schedules shall generally apply equally to all sportfields and facilities depending on the level of service required for an individual facility. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.030)

 

12.28.120 Fee payments.
        The fees applicable to the use of a facility are due and payable prior to the use of that facility. Charges assessed for actual costs are due and payable upon demand to the user. When fees are due and payable at the time a permit is issued, refunds are permitted if sufficient notice is given to city upon cancellation, i.e., seven days notice for nonrecurring groups. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.032)

 

12.28.130 Sales and uses.
        Authorized user groups which desire to use facilities for fundraising purposes shall be allowed to do so subject to policies and fees requirements contained in this chapter. Proposed uses which are determined by the city to be solely a commercial undertaking, and without educational, recreational, or cultural benefit to the community, shall be allowed only upon approval of the city council. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.034)

 

12.28.140 Inclement weather.
        A.    Inclement weather is generally defined as weather which, in the judgment of the city council or its designated representative, has left recreational facilities in a condition such that use of the facilities would present a risk of damage to the facilities or injury to the users.

        B.     The city shall have the authority to deny use of all or any portion of a facility to a user based on inclement weather. The city reserves the exclusive right to determine that a use of city facilities is precluded by inclement weather, and no refund of fees paid shall be made on the grounds of bad weather or field condition unless the city so determines. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.036)

 

12.28.150 Denial of facility use.
        The city shall have the authority, based on cause, to deny use of all or any portion of a facility to any group or individual who has abused the privilege of facility use, including failure to comply with the general policies and rules governing the use of community and neighborhood parks. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.038)

 

12.28.160 Fees for use.
        The city council may by resolution set the amount of any fee referenced in this chapter and the same is authorized. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992; prior code § 13.02.040)

 

Article II. Park and Recreational Facility Regulations—Generally
12.28.170 Definitions.
         The following words shall have the meaning indicated when used in these regulations:

        “Amplified sound” means music, sound wave, vibration, or speech projected or transmitted by electronic equipment, including amplifiers.

        “Council” means the city council of the city, or any person authorized by the council, pursuant to law, to act in its stead.

        “Knife or dagger” means any knife, dirk, or dagger having a blade of three inches or more in length; any ice pick or similar sharp stabbing tool; any straight-edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a handle.

        “Park” means any community park, neighborhood park, or any other recreational facility maintained by the city.

        “Vehicle” means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn, excepting a device moved by human power.

        “Vehicular travel” means travel by a vehicle. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.010)

 

12.28.180 Duty to comply.
        No person shall enter, be, or remain in any city park unless he/she complies at all times with all of the city regulations applicable to such park and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.012)

 

12.28.190 Operations of vehicles.
        A.    Roads for Public Use. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code are applicable in the city parks with respect to any way or place of whatever nature, which is publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. All violations of the Vehicle Code shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof.

        B.     Surfaces Other than Roads for Public Use. No person shall drive or otherwise operate a vehicle in a park upon surfaces other than those maintained and open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel, except upon temporary parking areas as may be designated from time to time by the council, and further excepting vehicles in the service of the city, animal control vehicles, law enforcement vehicles, and motorized wheelchairs. (Ord. 05-08 § 4, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.014)

 

12.28.195 Skateboards.
        No person shall ride or operate a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades in any park except as authorized by council. (Ord. 05-08 § 5, 2005)

 

12.28.200 Solicitation prohibited.
        No person shall practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for any occupation, business, or profession in any park, or sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, merchandise, article, or anything whatsoever in any park. This section shall not apply to any person acting pursuant to a contract with the city, or under a permit granted by the council. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.016)

 

12.28.210 Prohibition of animals in park.
        A.    No person shall cause, permit, or allow any animal owned or possessed by him/her, or any animal in his or her care, custody, or control to be present in any park except:

        1.     Equine animals being led or ridden under reasonable control upon any bridle path or trail provided for such purpose.

        2.     Equine or other animals which are hitched or fastened at a place expressly designated for such purpose.

        3.     Dogs or cats when led by a cord or chain not more than six feet long, or when confined within the interior of a vehicle.

        4.     Dogs which have been specially trained and are being used by blind or disabled persons to aid and guide them in their movements.

        5.     Small pets which are kept on the person of the possessor at all times.

        6.     In connection with activities authorized in writing by the council.

        7.     Fowls or animals turned loose at the direction of the council.

        B.     It shall be the mandatory duty of all persons owning, possessing, in control of, or otherwise responsible for a dog, cat, or an equine animal in a park to promptly collect, pick up, and removal all fecal matter left behind by said animal in or upon any park; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to guide dogs for blind or disabled persons or to equine animals on bridle paths. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.018)

 

12.28.220 Amplified sound in parks.
        A.    Purpose. The council enacts this chapter for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that certain uses of sound amplifying equipment are protected by constitutional rights of free speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate the use of sound amplifying equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from the public nuisance of loud and unnecessary sound.

        B.     Permit Required for Amplifiers. It is unlawful for any person to install, use, and operate within a park a loudspeaker or any sound amplifying equipment for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, or lectures, or of transmitting music to any persons or groups of persons in any park, or in the vicinity thereof, except when installed, used, or operated in compliance with one of the following provisions:

        1.     By authorized law enforcement or park and recreational personnel; or

        2.     Under a reservation or permit issued by the council, and when operated in accordance with terms of the reservation or permit.

        C.     Granting or Denial of Permit. In determining whether to grant or deny a permit, the council shall be guided by the following considerations:

        1.     The constitutional free speech and assembly rights of all persons, including the applicant;

        2.     The possible effects upon the peaceable passage or presence of persons in the park;

        3.     The potential for disorder or unlawful injury to persons or property;

        4.     The potential invasion of other persons’ rights of privacy;

        5.     The possible unlawful breach or disturbance of the peace;

        6.     Any actual conflict with other scheduled park uses or events.

        The council shall not deny a permit on the basis of any dislike for or disagreement with the content of any proposed talks, addresses, lectures, or musical presentations. The council may, however, deny a permit for any such events which are designed for the purpose of advocating imminent lawless conduct.

        D.    Power Source for Amplifiers. Amplifiers permitted in parks shall be operated only through a power source provided by the city or with a battery. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.020)

 

12.28.230 Prohibition of firearms, fireworks, and toy weapons.
        No person shall carry or discharge firearms, or carry or discharge any gun, or pistol, or any sling shot or similar device, or any bows and arrows, or carry or use any other object capable of propelling a projectile, or carry or use any object calculated to make a noise sufficient to disturb the peace or quiet of the park, or bring into any park any of the above objects or articles or discharge fireworks, rockets, torpedoes or other types of explosives unless expressly approved by the city council. (Ord. 05-08 § 6, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.022)

 

12.28.240 Prohibition of dangerous weapons.
        A.    The provisions of the California Dangerous Weapons’ Control Law are applicable in city parks and shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof. No person shall carry on his or her person, in plain view, any knife or dagger.

        B.     Exceptions to Applicability. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of ordinary tools or equipment for use in a lawful occupation or for the purpose of lawful recreation. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.024)

 

12.28.250 Damaging property.
        No person shall cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench, or other structure, apparatus, or property, or pluck, pull up, cut, take, or remove any shrub, bush, plant, or flower, or mark or write upon, paint, or deface in any manner any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.025)

 

12.28.260 Damaging land.
        No person shall cut, dig, or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel, or fertilizer, except park maintenance personnel. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.028)

12.28.270 Golf.
        No person shall play or practice the game of golf, including chipping, putting, driving or any other type of play or practice which includes the hitting of a golf or similar type ball with a golf or similar type club, except in areas designated for the same. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.030)

 

12.28.280 Water.
        No person shall swim, fish, bathe, wade, release pet animals in, or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or reservoir except by permission of the council. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.032)

 

12.28.290 Fires and fireplaces.
        No person shall kindle a fire except in fireplaces provided for that purpose or in barbecues approved by the council, except by permission of the council. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.034)

 

12.28.300 Waste liquids and refuse.
        No person shall wash dishes, or empty salt water or other waste liquids, or leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, cigarette butts, cigar ends, smoking waste or other refuse elsewhere than in the receptacles provided therefor. (Ord. 05-08 § 7, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.036)

 

12.28.310 Loitering at night.
        No person shall be or remain in any park between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise of the following day without permission of the council. The provisions of Section 12.28.220(c) shall govern the granting or denial of such permission. (Ord. 05-08 § 8, 2005: Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.038)

 

12.28.320 Meetings.
        No person shall hold any meeting, service, concert, exercise, parade, or exhibition in any public park without first obtaining a permit from the council. The provisions of Section 12.28.220(c) shall govern the issuance or denial of a permit under this section. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.040)

 

12.28.340 Controlled substances.
        The provisions of the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act are applicable in city parks and shall be enforced and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.044)

 

12.28.350 Glass containers.
        No person shall possess any glass container in city parks. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.046)

 

12.28.360 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter is a misdemeanor punished in accordance with Section 1.32.010 et seq. of this code.

        B.     Every act prohibited by Section 12.28.230 or 12.28.240 of this code shall subject the possessor of the prohibited item(s) to confiscation of that/those item(s). (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992; prior code § 13.04.048)

Article III. User Fees
12.28.370 Fees established/authorized.
        The city council by resolution shall set the amount of any fee referenced in this title. (Ord. 92-11 § 5, 1992; prior code § 13.06.010)

Chapter 12.32 NATIVE TREE PROTECTION
12.32.010 Title and purpose.
        A.    The regulations contained in this chapter shall be known as and referred to as “The Native Tree Protection Ordinance.”

        B.     The purpose of this chapter is to implement those goals and policies of the city of Buellton general plan that promote the preservation of native trees to maintain the character of the city, preserve the city’s beauty and identity, and protect native habitat. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.020 Applicability.
        The regulations contained in this chapter apply to native oak, cottonwood, and sycamore trees as defined in Section 12.32.050. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.030 Exemptions.
        A.    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to removal of native trees by the federal government on leased or federally-owned property, by the city of Buellton, by the county of Santa Barbara or any district of which the board of supervisors is the governing body, by the state of California or an agency of the state acting in its sovereign (governmental) capacity, on any state university or college, and on certain facilities of local agencies as defined in Government Code Section 53090 et seq.

        B.     The removal of protected trees (as defined in Section 12.32.050) that are naturally dead or uprooted, or that are within fifty (50) feet of an existing residential structure, or that pose an immediate threat to safety, as determined by a qualified arborist, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.040 Fees.
        The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for processing the applications required by this chapter. All required fees shall be paid at the time of filing the applications with the planning department and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.050 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as follows:

        “Acorn” shall mean the fruit and viable seed of an oak tree.

        “Blue Oak Tree (Quercus douglasii)” shall mean a very slow growing deciduous oak tree that inhabits the inland mountains and higher elevations of Santa Barbara County.

        “California Sycamore (Plantanus racemosa)” shall mean a broad-leaved, open crowned, deciduous tree ranging from thirty (30) feet to one hundred (100) feet tall with a similar width. Bark is mottled gray/brown and is smooth and peels off producing a camouflaged appearance. Main trunk often divides into spreading or leaning secondary trunks with contorted branches. Sycamores are often associated with creeks and rivers.

        “Canopy” shall mean the foliar cover of a tree or trees (including twigs, branches, and leaves). Where more than one tree’s branches touch or overlap, they form one continuous cover or canopy.

        “Coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia)” shall mean an evergreen tree with a broad round shape and large limbs growing thirty (30) feet to seventy (70) feet high and thirty-five (35) feet to eighty (80) feet wide. Leaves are deep glossy green, one inch to three inches long, spiney and holly-like with distinctly cupped or curled leaf edges. This is the most common species of oak in the Buellton and northern Santa Barbara County areas.

        “Cottonwood (Populus balsamifera ssp. trichocarpa and Populus fremontii)” shall mean a deciduous tree growing from thirty (30) feet to one hundred (100) feet high. The leaves are heart-shaped and turn color in fall prior to dropping off the tree. The bark is smooth on young specimens and becomes deeply fissured with a white cracked bark as the tree ages. It is associated with riparian habitat along the Santa Ynez River and its tributary drainages.

        “Deadwood” includes any limbs or branches on a tree that contain no green leaves or live tissue, as determined by a qualified arborist or biologist. A limb or branch may be considered deadwood if it does not show evidence of any green leaves or live branches over the span of one full year.

        “Deciduous oak tree” shall mean an oak tree with leaves that fall seasonally. For the purposes of this chapter deciduous oaks include but not be limited to valley oaks (Quercus lobata) and blue oaks (Quercus douglasii).

        “Diameter at breast height (DBH)” shall mean the total cross-sectional diameter between the outside bark of an oak tree measured in inches at a height four and one-half feet above the ground on the uphill side of the tree. In the case of trees with multiple stems (trunks), the diameter of all stems at breast height shall be combined to calculate the diameter at breast height of the tree.

        “Dripline” shall mean a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree’s natural canopy to the ground.

        “Forest” shall mean a community of trees characterized by a more or less dense, contiguous and extensive canopy cover.

        “Native” shall mean indigenous; of a species occurring naturally in an area.

        “Native tree removal” shall mean causing a native tree to die, be uprooted or removed from the ground by any means, including, but not limited to, cutting, uprooting, poisoning, or burning (unrelated to controlled burns). Excessive pruning or topping, or severing a tree’s roots enough to lead to the death of the tree, would also be considered native tree removal. Death by natural causes (e.g., sudden oak death syndrome) or removals required due to disease or regulatory requirements shall not be considered a removal.

        “Native tree removal permit” shall mean a discretionary permit required as prescribed by this chapter prior to removal of a specified number of protected trees.

        “Native tree removal thresholds” shall mean an amount of tree removal that requires a permit.

        “Nursery stock” shall mean plants grown in a nursery.

        “Nurture” shall mean to promote the growth of a tree through means such as watering, weeding, protecting (i.e., fencing) and fertilizing.

        “Planning director” shall mean the planning director of the city of Buellton.

        “Protected tree” shall mean a native tree eight inches or greater in trunk diameter at breast height for a single trunk tree. For a tree with multiple stems, a tree is considered protected when the cumulative total of the stem diameters at breast height is twelve (12) inches or greater.

        “Protection zone” shall mean that area within the dripline of a protected tree and extending out to a point at least five feet outside the dripline, or fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of a tree, whichever distance is greater.

        “Uprooted” shall mean where a tree is no longer supported in an upright position by its roots anchored in the soil; its trunk or main limbs are now resting on the ground and the roots are partially or wholly out of the soil.

        “Valley Oak (Quercus lobata)” shall mean a species of deciduous oak tree that inhabits inland valleys and hills at lower elevations in central California. In Santa Barbara County, valley oaks are found north of the Santa Ynez Mountain Range. Quercus lobata is the largest oak tree found in California.

        “Watershed” shall mean a region or land area drained by a single stream, river or drainage network.

        “Woodland” shall mean a community of native trees with an open canopy and with the intervening area occupied by lower vegetation, commonly grass. Woodland includes riparian areas. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.060 Protected native tree preservation and removal standards.
        A.    All protected trees shall be protected from existing and future development activities to the maximum extent possible. Development activities shall be located outside of the dripline of the trees.

        B.     Protected trees shall not be removed without prior authorized consent from the planning director. Prior to the removal of any protected tree, the property owner or their agent shall submit an application, on a form authorized by the city, along with the applicable fee, to the planning department of the city for determination by the planning director. Within ten business days from the submittal of the complete application, the planning director shall issue a written determination on which protected tree or trees may be removed and the conditions of replacement as set forth in Section 12.32.070. Any authorized or unauthorized protected trees removed shall be replaced pursuant to Section 12.32.080. Any decision of the planning director may be appealed to the planning commission.

        C.     The planning director may authorize the removal of protected trees under one or more of the following conditions:

        1.     To protect public safety;

        2.     To protect the integrity of an existing structure or roadway;

        3.     To avoid or minimize the spread of disease, or if another native tree’s health is at risk;

        4.     To avoid or minimize the spread of non-native invasive species;

        5.     To reduce fuel loads in fire management zones;

        6.     If the tree is dead;

        7.     To protect or maintain electric power or communication line or other property of a public utility during emergency or routine maintenance.

        D.    Unauthorized removal of protected trees is an infraction and punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.30 of this code. (Added during 2010 recodification)

 

12.32.070 Protected native tree replacement standards.
        A.    All oak trees shall be replaced at a ratio of three oak trees planted for every oak tree removed. All cottonwood and sycamore trees shall be replaced at a ratio of two cottonwood or sycamore trees for every cottonwood or sycamore tree removed. The replacement trees shall be the same species that are removed.

        B.     On-site replacement is given priority over off-site replacement except where no suitable on-site locations exist, or reasonable use of the lot would be precluded as determined by the planning director along with a qualified arborist. In such cases the replacement trees may be planted in an off-site location acceptable to the applicant, the landowner and the city. For off-site replacement planting locations priority shall be given to nearby sites and to sites adjoining existing woodlands or providing links between woodlands.

        C.     Prior to removal of any trees, a tree replanting schedule, site plan, and long term maintenance plan shall be submitted and approved.

        D.    Replacement oak trees that are planted must come from nursery stock grown from locally-sourced acorns, or use acorns gathered locally, preferably from the same watershed in which they are planted.

        E.     Replacement oak trees shall be established in a location suitable for their growth and survival as determined by an arborist, no closer than twenty (20) feet from each other or from existing oak trees and no farther than one hundred sixty-five (165) to one hundred eighty (180) feet from each other or existing oak trees unless otherwise approved by the arborist.

        F.     The replacement trees shall be nurtured for five years, the last two without supplemental watering. At the end of the five years, all replacement trees must be alive, in good health as determined by the arborist, and capable of surviving without nurturing and protection.

        G.    Each replacement tree must be protected against damaging ground disturbance, soil compaction, or over-irrigation within the dripline. It must be fenced to protect it from grazing or browsing by animals both below and above ground until it has reached a minimum of eight feet in height. (Added during 2010 recodification)

Title 13 WATER
Chapter 13.04 APPLICATION AND SEVERABILITY
Chapter 13.08 ADMINISTRATIVE DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATION, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
Chapter 13.12 SYSTEM DEFINITIONS
Chapter 13.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 13.20 NOTICES
Chapter 13.24 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
Chapter 13.28 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 13.32 GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 13.36 TEMPORARY SERVICE
Chapter 13.40 METERS
Chapter 13.44 RELIEF IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
Chapter 13.48 BILLING
Chapter 13.52 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
Chapter 13.56 WATER SALES FEES AND MONTHLY METER FEES
Chapter 13.60 WATER CONNECTION FEES
Chapter 13.64 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 13.68 WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS
Chapter 13.72 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING

Chapter 13.04 APPLICATION AND SEVERABILITY
13.04.010 Application of general provision to the title.
        This chapter shall apply to this entire title. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.10.001)

 

13.04.020 Severability.
        If any title, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The council declares that it would have adopted this code and each title, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof regardless of the fact that any one or more of the titles, chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to the entire title as enacted on the date that this section first became effective, and as subsequently amended. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.10.002)

Chapter 13.08 ADMINISTRATIVE DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATION, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
13.08.010 Tense, gender, and number.
        Words used in this title in the present tense include the future as well as the present; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.15.001)

 
13.08.020 Conflicts between titles.
        If the provisions of this title conflict with or contravene the provisions of another title, the provisions of this title shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this title. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.15.002)

 
13.08.030 Conflicts between chapters.
        If the provisions of this chapter conflict with or contravene the provisions of another chapter of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.15.003)

 
13.08.040 Conflicts between sections.
        If the provisions of this section conflict with or contravene the provisions of another chapter in this title, the provision of this section shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this section. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.15.004)

 
13.08.050 Violation of this title.
        It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this title. Penalties for violations are addressed in Title 1 of this code. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.15.005)

Chapter 13.12 SYSTEM DEFINITIONS
13.12.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

        “Cost” means the cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering, and all other necessary overhead expenses.

        “Cross-connection” means any physical connection between the piping system from the city service and that of any other water supply that is not, or cannot be, approved as safe and potable for human consumption, whereby water from unapproved source may be forced or drawn into the city distribution mains.

        “Customer” means the person(s) or entity that has applied for and established service account(s) for water service with the city.

        “Distribution mains” means water transmission lines in streets, highways, alleys, and easements used for public and private fire protection and for general distribution of water.

        “Owner” means the person owning fee title or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears by deed duly recorded in the county recorder’s office, or the person in possession of the property of buildings under claim of, or exercising acts of ownership over the property for him or herself or, as executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee for another.

        “Premises” means a parcel of real property, or portion thereof, including any improvements thereon, which is determined by the city to be a single unit for purposes of receiving, using, and paying for water service. In making this determination, the city shall take into consideration such factors as whether the unit could reasonably be subdivided.

        “Private fire protection service” means water service and facilities for building sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection and the water available therefor.

        “Public fire protection service” means the service and facilities of the entire water supply, storage and distribution system of the city, including the fire hydrants affixed thereto, and the water available for fire protection, excepting house service connections and appurtenances thereto.

        “Regular water service” means water service and facilities rendered for normal domestic, commercial and industrial purposes on a permanent basis, and the water available therefor.

        “Service” or “service connection” means the pipe line and appurtenant facilities such as the corporation stop, meter stop, meter, and meter box, if any, used to extend water service from a distribution main to premises. Where services are divided at the curb or property line to serve several customers, each such branch service shall be deemed a separate service.

        “Temporary water service” means water service and facilities rendered for construction work and other uses of limited duration, and the water available therefor. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code §§ 14.20.001 — 14.20.011)

Chapter 13.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS
13.16.010 Water system—Generally.
        The city will furnish a system, plant, works, and undertaking used for and useful in obtaining, conserving and distributing water for public and private uses, including all parts of the system, all appurtenances to it, and lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, and other water supply, storage and distribution facilities and equipment. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.001)

 

13.16.020 Pressure conditions.
        All applications for service connections or water service shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at the location of the proposed service connection, and to hold the city harmless with respect to any damages arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions in service. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.002)

 

13.16.030 Unusual quantities—Arrangements must be made with city.
        When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool or for other purposes, arrangements must be made with the city prior to taking such water. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.003)

 

13.16.040 Responsibility for equipment.
        The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water, and the city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such equipment, or the negligence or wrongful act of the customer or of any of his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees in installing, maintaining, operating or interfering with such equipment. The city shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by faucets, valves, and other equipment that are open when water is turned on at the meter, either originally or when turned on after a temporary shutdown. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.004)

 

13.16.050 Tampering with city property.
        No one except an employee or representative of the city shall at any time in any manner operate the corporation stops, meter valves, meters, and meter boxes of the city water system, or interfere with meters or their connection, street mains or other parts of the water system. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.005)

 

13.16.060 Exclusive provider.
        The city shall be the exclusive provider of water and related services to the city. This section shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the city from contracting for the provision of any part or all of the water and water-related service requirements of the city or its inhabitants. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.25.006)

Chapter 13.20 NOTICES
13.20.010 Notices to customers.
        Notices from the city to a customer will normally be given in writing, and either delivered or mailed to him or her at his or her last known address. Where conditions warrant, and in emergencies, the city may resort to notification either by telephone or messenger. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.30.001)

 

13.20.020 Notices from customers.
        Notices from customers to the city may be given by him or her or his or her authorized representative in writing (1) at the principal offices of the city, (2) to the public works director, or (3) to an officer or agent duly authorized by the council to receive notices. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.30.002)

Chapter 13.24 WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS
13.24.010 Main extensions—Rules.
        The following rules are established:

        A.    Determination. Upon receipt of any application for water service or request for an application form, the public works director shall determine whether, in his or her judgment, a main extension is necessary to provide service. A main extension shall be installed in the manner provided in this title whenever, in the judgment of the public works director, such main extension is necessary to provide regular water service to property described in such application or request.

        B.     Application. Any owner of one or more lots or parcels, or the subdivider of a tract of land where, in the opinion of the public works director, one or more main extensions are required, desiring regular water service to serve such property, shall make a written application therefor to the city, the application to contain the legal description of the property to be served and tract number thereof, any additional information which may be required by the city, and be accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed points of connection to the city water system.

        C.     Investigation. Upon receipt of the application, the public works director shall make an investigation of the proposed extension and submit his or her opinion and the estimated cost thereof to the council.

        D.    Ruling. The council shall thereupon consider such application and report and, after such consideration, reject, amend, or approve the application.

        E.     City Lines. All extensions thus provided for, in accordance with this code, shall be and remain the property of the city.

        F.     Dead-end Lines. No dead-end lines shall be permitted, except as approved by the public works director.

        G.    Extent and Design. All main extensions shall extend to the far property line of the developed property. If additional property is developed on the same lot after installation of a main extension, the main extension shall be extended to the far property line of the additionally developed property. All main extensions shall be subject to design approval by the public works director and the council. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.001)

 

13.24.020 Extensions—Generally.
        The applicant will provide all main extensions upon approval of service application by the council. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.002)

 

13.24.030 Determination of cost to city.
        If the application for service is approved, the public works director shall determine the cost to the city of such extension including all engineering, inspection and other expenses attributable to the line. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.003)

 

13.24.040 Advance cost.
        When the council so determines, the applicant shall advance the amount of such estimate, and the line shall thereupon be installed by the applicant. If the amount of the advance deposit exceeds the actual cost of engineering, legal, inspection and other charges attributable to the extension, the balance shall be refunded to the property owner. If the amount of the deposit is insufficient to pay all costs of engineering, legal, inspection and other charges attributable to the extension, the property owner shall pay all such costs to the city prior to the acceptance of the extension by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.004)

 

13.24.050 Service connections.
        Service connections will be installed in accordance with applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.005)

 

13.24.060 Reimbursement agreements.
        A.    When in the orderly development of the streets and roads within the city, or in the orderly development of water main facilities of the city, it becomes advisable and expedient for service connections to be installed to individual properties or lots within the city, or main extensions to be made, prior to a request for service from each property or lot owner benefited, the council may direct the extension of water mains and the installation of service lines from the city water mains to the property or lot lines. Unless the council specifically provides otherwise, the expenses of such main extensions or service connections shall be borne directly by the property owners benefited; provided, however, should any property owner directly benefited not pay his or her proportionate share of such expenses at the time such extension or service connection is installed, the council may advance the expenses of the nonparticipating property owner from city funds.

        B.     The cost to the city of any such installations shall be paid by the council from Water Enterprise funds, and records of the cost of each such service installation, and each property owner’s share of main extension expenses advanced by the city, shall be kept by the city clerk in city records and accounts.

        C.     When the owner of any property or lot for which applicable share of any such installation or extension has not been paid, shall request water service from the city, such owner shall pay to the city, in addition to other charges provided, his or her share of the cost of installation theretofore made or paid for by the city plus ten percent per annum interest thereon computed from the date of the city’s advance of funds on behalf of the owner to the date of the city’s reimbursement by the property owner. The sum shall be so paid in full at the time of any such request and prior to the commencement of service to such property or lots. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.006)

 

13.24.070 Plans and specifications—Required.
        A.    All applications for a permit for connection to the city water system shall be accompanied by complete plans and specifications complying with all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city prepared by a registered civil engineer, showing all details of the proposed work. The application, together with the plans and specifications, shall be examined by the public works director who shall jointly approve them as filed or require them to be modified as they deem necessary and their joint approval of such facilities shall be required prior to such facilities actually being connected to the city water system.

        B.     Upon any new water mains being connected to the city water system, the person making the connection shall furnish to the city an additional set of complete plans and specifications showing such connection as actually constructed. No final approval by the city of such connections shall be given until such final plans and specifications have been provided in compliance herewith. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.007)

 
13.24.080 Fees for plan checking and inspection.
        A.    In addition to all other charges specified in other ordinances of the city, there shall be collected the following fees with respect to the plan checking, inspection and related services performed by the city with regard to permit applications for water connections to city’s systems:

        1.     Plan Checking. A deposit in the amount determined by resolution of the council shall be submitted at the same time the application, plans and specifications are filed with the city.

        2.     Inspection. A deposit in the amount determined by resolution of the council shall be submitted prior to commencement of construction of the water system.

        B.     No checking of plans or specifications shall be commenced, no inspection undertaken until the respective deposit has been made. Upon completion of the plan checking, or upon completion of the inspection, the fee for such plan checking or such inspection shall be set by the city in the amount necessary to reimburse the city of the engineering fees and other costs incurred plus reimbursement for the time the public works director or designee who are devoted to such checking or inspection. Upon computation of the plan checking or inspection fee on the basis specified in this chapter, such fee shall be charged against the respective deposit required above. If the deposit exceeds the fee, a refund shall be made to the applicant. If the fee exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall pay the balance to the city within ten days after notice of such deficiency. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.35.008)

Chapter 13.28 SUBDIVISIONS
13.28.010 Application—Requirements.
        A person desiring to provide a water system within a tract of land which he or she proposes to subdivide, shall make written application therefor. The application shall state the number of the tract, the name of the subdivision and its location. It shall be accompanied by a copy of the tentative map, and of the plans, profiles and specifications for the street work, sanitary sewers, storm drains and other underground utilities. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.001)

 

13.28.020 Investigation.
        Upon receiving the application, the public works director shall make an investigation and survey of the proposed subdivision and shall report his or her findings to the council, including a recommendation as to the facilities required and the estimated cost of the proposed water system therefor. To assist the public works director in making the investigation and report, the council may engage the services of a consulting engineer. The size, type and quality of materials shall be in accordance with the city’s standards and specifications in effect at the time of application. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.002)

 

13.28.030 Specifications and construction.
        Location of the lines shall be specified by the city. The actual construction will be done at the expense of and by the subdivider and inspected by the public works director or authorized representative. Plans and engineering costs will be the responsibility of the property owner. Fire hydrants shall be located at locations designated by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.003)

 

13.28.040 Property of city.
        All water main, water service, and fire hydrant facilities installed by a subdivider shall become the property of the city and shall be conveyed to the city by a property instrument in writing at the time the facilities are completed and accepted by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.004)

 

13.28.050 Service connections.
        The subdivider shall, at his or her cost, provide and install the service connection to each house or proposed house in the tract, including the corporation stop, meter valve, and meter box but not including the meter. No deposit will be required. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.005)

 

13.28.060 Costs and expenses.
        All costs and expenses incurred by the city under this chapter, including the cost of investigation, inspection, legal and consulting engineer’s services, shall be paid to the city by the subdivider prior to final approval and acceptance of the facilities by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.006)

 

13.28.070 Further requirements.
        In granting an application, the council may make whatever further requirements as may appear to it to be necessary. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.40.007)

Chapter 13.32 GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
13.32.010 Number of services per premises.
        The applicant may apply for as many services as may be reasonably required for his or her premises provided that the pipe line system from each service be independent of the others and that they not be interconnected. The cost of all services shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.001)

 

13.32.020 Supply to separate structures.
        A.    Each structure which fronts on a public street or private road shall have a separate service connection, including a separate meter. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, for purposes of this section, each individual condominium unit in a residential, commercial or industrial condominium development shall be deemed to be a separate structure requiring a separate service connection and separate meter.

        B.     Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, and subject to all other applicable provisions of law, common fire protection systems in condominium developments shall be served by a separate service.

        C.     Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, all water furnished for use within the interior portion of commercial or industrial structures shall be metered separately from water furnished for use on the exterior portions of such premises.

        D.    Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, water furnished to any swimming pool located on property devoted to commercial or industrial use shall be deemed to be furnished for interior use if such pool is designed so that water therefrom is wholly or partially drained or discharged into the city sewage system.

        E.     The provisions of this section dealing with interior-exterior metering shall apply to all new commercial, industrial or motel construction. In addition any commercial or industrial structure in existence on the effective date of this code, the interior area of which is increased by twenty-five (25) percent or more and any motel increasing by twenty-five (25) percent or more the number of motel units shall be made to comply herewith. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.002)

 

13.32.030 Water waste.
        No customer shall knowingly permit leaks or waste of water. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer’s premises, seriously affecting the general service, the city may discontinue the service if such conditions are not corrected within five days after giving the customer written notice. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.003)

 

13.32.040 Responsibility for equipment on customer premises.
        All facilities installed by the city on private property for the purpose of rendering service shall remain the property of the city and may be maintained, repaired or replaced by the city without consent or interference of the owner or occupant of the property. The property owner shall use reasonable care in the protection of the facilities. No payment shall be made for placing or maintaining the facilities on private property. No persons shall place or permit the placement of any object in a manner which will interfere with the free access to a meter box or will interfere with the reading of a meter. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.004)

 

13.32.050 Damage to water system facilities.
        The customer shall be liable for any damage to the city-owned water service facilities when such damage is from causes originating on the premises by an act of the customer or his or her tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees, including the breaking or destruction of locks by the customer or others on or near a meter, and any damage to a meter that may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the customer’s premises. The city shall be reimbursed by the customer for any such damage promptly on presentation of a statement therefor. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.005)

 

13.32.060 Ground-wire attachments.
        No one shall attach any ground-wire or wires to any plumbing which is or may be connected to a service connection to a main belonging to the city, the city will hold the customer liable for any damage to its property occasioned by such ground-wire attachments. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.006)

 

13.32.070 Control valve on the customer property.
        The customer shall provide a valve on his or her side of the service installation as close as is practicable to the meter to control the flow of water to the piping on his or her premises. The customer shall not use the meter valve to turn water on and off for his or her convenience. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.007)

 

13.32.080 Cross-connections—Compliance with regulations.
        The customer shall comply with all regulations governing the separation of dual water systems or installations of backflow protective devices to protect the public water supply from the danger of cross-connections. Backflow protective devices must be installed as near the service as possible and shall be open to test and inspection by the city. Plans for installation of backflow protective devices must be approved by the public works director prior to installation. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.008)

 

13.32.090 Special circumstances.
        In special circumstances, when the customer is engaged in the handling of especially dangerous or corrosive liquids or industrial or process waters, the city may require the customer to eliminate certain plumbing or piping connections as an additional precaution and as protection of the backflow preventive devices. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.009)

 

13.32.100 Pressure regulators.
        Customer shall accept water pressure furnished by the city and is responsible to control such pressure if considered excessive. The customer shall provide a pressure regulator at a point prior to piping entering a structure, if deemed necessary to safeguard structure piping and appliances. Pressure regulators are recommended in all instances where pressure exceeds sixty (60) pounds per square inch (psi). (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.010)

 

13.32.110 Pressure relief valve.
        As a protection to the customer’s plumbing system, a suitable pressure relief valve must be installed and maintained by him or her, at his or her expense, when check valves or other protective devices are used. The relief valve shall be installed between the check valves and the water heater. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.011)

 

13.32.120 Backflow protection.
        A.    Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a customer’s premises, any and all water supply lines from the city’s mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow device, regardless of the use of the additional water supply lines. Cost of installation shall be borne by the customer.

        B.     Approved backflow protection devices must be inspected and tested periodically for water tightness by a certified technician. The devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found defective and all cost of repair and maintenance shall be borne by the customer. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.012)

 

13.32.130 Defect—Discontinuance of service.
        The service of water to any premises may be immediately discontinued by the city if any defect is found in the check valve installation or other protective devices, or if it is found that dangerous unprotected cross-connections exist. Service will not be restored until such defects are corrected. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.013)

 

13.32.140 Ingress and egress.
        The city and its duly authorized representatives shall have the right of ingress and egress to the customer’s premises at a reasonable hour for any purpose reasonably connected with the furnishing of water service. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.45.014)

Chapter 13.36 TEMPORARY SERVICE
13.36.010 Duration of service.
        Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.001)

 

13.36.020 Deposit—Required.
        A.    The applicant shall deposit, in advance, an amount as determined by resolution of the council to establish the desired service. Upon discontinuance of service, the actual cost of installing and removing the facilities required to furnish the service, exclusive of the cost of salvageable material, shall be determined and an adjustment made as an additional charge, refund or credit.

        B.     If service is supplied through a fire hydrant, the applicant will be charged in accordance with the rate schedule established by resolution of the council. The charges will apply to installation and relocation of the connection and for the water used. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.002)

 

13.36.030 Installation and operation.
        All facilities for temporary service to the customer connection shall be made by the city and shall be operated in accordance with its instructions. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.003)

 

13.36.040 Responsibility for meters and installation.
        The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the city which are involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time of installation until removal, or until forty-eight (48) hours notice in writing has been given to the city that the installation is not longer required. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.004)

 

13.36.050 Temporary service from a fire hydrant.
        If temporary service is supplied through a fire hydrant, a permit for the use of the hydrant shall be obtained from the city. It is specifically prohibited to operate the valve of any fire hydrant other than by the use of a spanner wrench designed for this purpose. All control of flow by the user shall be by use of the valve provided. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.005)

 

13.36.060 Unauthorized use of hydrant.
        Tampering with any fire hydrant for the unauthorized use of water therefrom, or for any other purpose, is a misdemeanor, punishable by law. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.006)

 

13.36.070 Rates.
        The rates for temporary service shall be as set forth in the resolution of the council setting forth bulk water rates in effect at the time of use. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.007)

 

13.36.080 Credit.
        The applicant shall pay the estimated cost of service in advance or shall be otherwise required to establish credit. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.50.008)

Chapter 13.40 METERS
13.40.010 Installation of meters.
        A.    All services shall be metered. A sum of money as set forth in the rate schedule shall be deposited with the city prior to installation of the meter facilities to pay all of the cost of said installation when said installation is made at the request of the customer. The service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the city, unless specifically otherwise provided, and the city reserves the right to repair, replace and maintain it, as well as to remove it upon discontinuance of service.

        B.     Meters will be installed at the back of the sidewalk or within the easement, and shall be owned by the city and installed and removed at its expense after payment of the charges established therefor. No rent or other charge will be paid by the city for a meter or other facilities, including housing and connections, located on a customer’s premises. All meters will be sealed by the city at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except as otherwise permitted by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.001)

 

13.40.020 Change in location of meters.
        Meters moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated at the customer’s expense. Meters moved to protect the city’s property will be moved at its expense. If the lateral distance which the customer desires to have the meter moved exceeds eight feet, he or she will be required to pay for and install a new service at the desired location. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.002)

 

13.40.030 Meter reading.
        Meters will be read as nearly as possible on the same day monthly, with billing periods containing thirty (30) days. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.003)

 

13.40.040 Meter tests—Deposits.
        All meters will be factory tested prior to installation and no meter will be installed which registers more than two percent fast. If a customer desires to have the meter serving his or her premises tested, he or she shall first deposit with the city a test fee as set forth in the rate schedule. Should the meter register more than two percent fast, the fee will be refunded but should the meter register less than two percent fast, the test fee will be retained by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.004)

 

13.40.050 Adjustment for meter errors—Fast meters.
        If a meter tested at the request of a customer pursuant to Section 13.40.040 is found to be more than two percent fast, the excess charges for the time service was rendered to the customer requesting the test for a period of six months, whichever shall be less, shall be refunded to the customer. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.005)

 

13.40.060 Adjustment for meter errors—Slow meters.
        If a meter tested at the request of a customer pursuant to Section 13.40.040 is found to be more than twenty-five (25) percent slow in the case of domestic service, or more than five percent slow for other than domestic service, the city may bill the customer for the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the period, not exceeding six months, that the meter was in use. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.006)

 

13.40.070 Nonregistering meters.
        If a meter is found to be not registering, the charges for service shall be at the minimum and monthly rate based on the estimated consumption. Such estimates shall be made from previous consumption for a comparable period or by such other method as determined by the public works director whose decision shall be final. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.007)

 

13.40.080 Meter installation charges.
        At the time of application for water service, the applicant shall pay to the city an installation fee as set forth in the resolution adopted by the council to establish these fees. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.55.008)

Chapter 13.44 RELIEF IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
13.44.010 Relief on application.
        A.    When any person by reason of special circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this title is unjust or inequitable as applied to the premises, he or she may make written application to the council stating the special circumstances, citing the provision complained of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision complained of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to his or her premises.

        B.     The appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk, along with any applicable appeal fees, and shall state the factual basis for the appeal. The council shall consider the appeal within sixty (60) days of receipt of the appeal, provided, however, that council action on the appeal may be continued from time to time. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.60.001)

 

13.44.020 Relief on own motion.
        The council may, on its own motion, find that by reason of special circumstances any provision of this title should be suspended or modified as applied to a particular premises and may, by resolution, order such suspension of modification for such premises during the period of such special circumstances, or any part thereof. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.60.002)

 

13.44.030 Appeal fee.
        The council shall set by resolution the fee to be charged for the filing of an appeal with the city clerk, for matters relating to this title. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.60.003)

Chapter 13.48 BILLING
13.48.010 Billing period.
        The regular billing period will be monthly. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.001)

 

13.48.020 Opening and closing statements.
        Opening and closing statements for less than the normal billing period shall be prorated. If the total period for which service is rendered is less than one month, the bill shall not be less than the monthly minimum charge applicable. For purposes of expediency, closing bills may be estimated for the final period to permit the customer to pay the closing bill at the time service is discontinued. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.002)

 

13.48.030 Payment of bills.
        Statements for service shall be rendered at the end of each billing period. Statements shall be payable upon presentation. If payment is not received within twenty (20) days of the billing date a ten percent late fee will be added to the billing. If payment is not received within sixty (60) days of the billing date, service shall be discontinued. A reconnection charge and additional penalties will be imposed and collected prior to renewing service following a discontinuance. The amount of the fees are established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.003)

 

13.48.040 Billing of separate meters not combined.
        Separate bills will be rendered for each service connection or meter installation except where the city has, for its own convenience, installed two or more meters in place of one meter. Where such installation is made the meter readings will be combined for billing purposes. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.004)

 

13.48.050 One statement for each account.
        Only one statement covering water service charges shall be rendered for each account. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.005)

 

13.48.060 Tax bill collection.
        In case any such charges remain unpaid at the time specified for fixing the tax rate of the city, if the property is owned, controlled or in the possession of the same person who owned, controlled or was in possession of it during the time such charges were incurred, or if the only transfers made of the property since the date such charges were incurred have been transfers by gifts, descent, or devise, the amount due for such charges may be added to and become a part of the annual taxes levied against the land served by the city facilities. Such charges so added constitute a lien on the land. If the taxes are divided and made payable in two installments, the unpaid charges may be added to and become a part of the first installment. The council shall include in the statement of tax rate transmitted to the tax authorities the amount of such charges to be levied against the land served, which amount shall be included in the tax bill. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.007)

 

13.48.070 Charges upon opening account with the city.
        In addition to all other charges of the city, the following deposits and fees shall be imposed and collected upon the opening of any account with the city for water services provided by the city.

        A.    Deposit. Upon the opening of any account with the city for water services provided by the city, there shall be deposited with the city, by the person opening the account, or on his or her behalf, an amount equal to twice the average monthly service charge for such water service. The average monthly service charge for such water service shall be computed based upon the average monthly service charge for the premises during the twelve (12) month period preceding the opening of the account. The public works director shall, where applicable, identify those new accounts in which the historical water use of the premises for which the service is requested is not comparable to the projected water use for the premises. For such accounts, the average monthly service charge for purposes of computing the deposit shall be based upon the average of the average monthly service charge during the twelve (12) month period preceding the opening of the account of that class of users within the city whose water use is comparable to the use proposed by the new account holder. The public works director shall, where applicable, determine the users which shall constitute the class of users for purposes of determining the amount of the deposit. Such determination shall, generally, be based upon the projected water use taking into account the size of the premises and nature of the use.

        B.     Application of Deposit. Such deposits shall be held by the city to secure payment of the charges incurred for such account. Should any sums be owing to the city for services provided on such account upon termination of such account, the city may apply the deposit to the amount owing, refunding the balance, if any, to the account holder. Should the application of the deposit to the amount owing not fully satisfy the account, the application thereof by the city shall not alter or diminish any other legal remedies that the city may have against the account holder for satisfaction of the balance due.

        C.     Refund of Deposit. The full amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the account holder after twelve (12) consecutive months of services provided without the imposition of a delinquent charge. If, after the deposit is refunded, a valid termination notice is issued by the city, to the account, a new deposit shall be imposed and collected in an amount computed in accordance with the provision of this chapter. Payment of the deposit shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the date of the notice of the imposition of the deposit. In the event the deposit or any part thereof remains unpaid thirty (30) days after the date of the notice, water services shall be discontinued and a turn-on fee established by resolution of the council shall be imposed and collected prior to resuming service.

        D.    Right to Appeal. Should the determination of the public works director as to the class of users, projected use, applicable deposit, or other determination under this ordinance be contested, the party responsible for the premises shall have the right to request review of such determination by the public works director, and if not satisfied after such review, may appeal such determination by filing a written appeal with the city clerk in conformance with Chapter 13.44 of this title.

        E.     New Account Set-Up Fee. Prior to the opening of any new account for water services provided by the city, an account set-up fee as established by resolution of the council shall be imposed and collected from the person opening the account. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.65.008)

Chapter 13.52 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
13.52.010 Disconnection—Reconnection—Compliance.
        A.    Disconnection for Nonpayment. Service may be discontinued for nonpayment of statements on or after the twentieth day of the month following the month during which the statement was sent. At least five days prior to such discontinuance, the customer will be sent a final notice informing him or her that discontinuance will be enforced if payment is not made within the time specified in the notice. The failure of the city to send or any such person to receive said notice shall not affect the city’s power hereunder. A customer’s water service may be discontinued if water service furnished at a previous location is not paid for within the time herein fixed for the payment of statements. If a customer received water service at more than one location and the bill for service at any one location is not paid within the time provided for payment, water service at all locations may be turned off. Domestic service, however, will not be turned off for nonpayment of statements for other classes of service.

        B.     Reconnection Charge. A reconnection charge as established by resolution of the council, plus applicable penalties shall be imposed and collected prior to renewal of water service following discontinuance of service for nonpayment of city fees and charges. A charge, in the amount to be determined by resolution of the council, shall be imposed for checks returned by the bank for any reasons, however, an amount equal to the reconnection charge will be imposed for returned checks given to avoid discontinuance of service, with service again discontinued pending payment of all outstanding charges.

        C.     Unsafe Apparatus. Water services may be refused or discontinued to any premises where apparatus or appliances are in use which might endanger or disturb the service to other customers.

        D.    Cross-Connections. Water service may be refused or discontinued to any premises where there exists a cross-connection in violation of state or federal laws.

        E.     Fraud or Abuse. Service may be discontinued if necessary to protect the city against fraud or abuse.

        F.     Noncompliance with Regulations. Service may be discontinued for noncompliance with this code or any other regulation related to the water service.

        G.    Upon Vacating Premises. Customers desiring to discontinue service should so notify the city two days prior to vacating the premises. Unless discontinuance of service is ordered, the customer shall be liable for charges whether or not water is used.

        H.    Short Term Disconnection. Upon notification to the city short term disconnection will be made where the time involved comprises multiples of the minimum billing period.

        I.      Voluntary Destruction, Demolition, or Removal of Connected Structures. The voluntary destruction, demolition, or removal of any structure served by an existing connection to the city water system shall constitute the abandonment and termination of said connection. Subsequent to the voluntary destruction or removal of such structure, there shall be imposed and collected the charges and fees specified in other chapters of this title prior to the connection to the city water system of any new or replacement structure. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code §§ 14.70.001 — 14.70.009)

Chapter 13.56 WATER SALES FEES AND MONTHLY METER FEES
13.56.010 Water sales and meter fees—Purpose—Established—Limitations.
        A.    Purpose. In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing adequate potable water for the citizens of the city, the city must maintain certain facilities and services. The policy of the city is that the cost of providing water service should be borne by the customers who benefit from the service. In establishing water sales and meter fees it is the intent of the city that the fees be set at a level that covers the cost of providing the service, including without limitation, the cost of the water, as well as the costs to operate and maintain the water system.

        B.     Water Sales and Meter Fees Established. Water sales and meter fees are established to cover the reasonable cost of providing water to the residents of the city, including without limitation the costs of water obtained from the State Water Project and city wells, as well as the costs of operating and maintaining the system which provides water service to the city and its residents.

        C.     Water Sales and Meter Fees to be Established by Resolution.

        1.     The council shall set by resolution the specific amount of the fees to be charged for water sales and meter fees which shall be in reasonable relation to the cost of providing water and delivery thereof to the residents of the city.

        2.     The council shall, at least once every five years, review the water sales and meter fees to determine whether they accurately reflect the then current and anticipated cost of providing water service and may, by resolution, adjust the fees to an amount which bears a reasonable relationship to the then-current and anticipated cost of providing water service to the residents of the city.

        D.    Limitation as to the Use of Water Sales and Meter Fees. Water sales and meter fees established in this chapter, as set from time to time by resolution of the council, shall not be used for any purpose not related to the provision of water to the residents of the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code §§ 14.75.001 — 14.75.015)

Chapter 13.60 WATER CONNECTION FEES
13.60.010 Water connection fees—Purpose—Established—Limitations.
        A.    Purpose. In order to promote the public health, safety and welfare by providing adequate potable water for the citizens of the city, the city must maintain certain facilities and services. The policy of the city is that the cost of providing water service should be borne by the customers who benefit from the service. In establishing connection fees it is the intent of the city that the fees be set at a level that covers the cost of providing the service, including without limitation, the capital costs attributable to providing and maintaining a system which is capable of providing water service to new development.

        B.     Water Connection Fees — Established. Water connection fees are established as a condition of approval for, and prior to issuance of, any building permit within the city.

        C.     Fee to be Set by Resolution.

        1.     The council shall set by resolution the specific amount of the connection fees to be charged fees which shall be in reasonable relation to the cost of providing water service to the new development in the city.

        2.     The council shall, at least once every five years, review the connection fees to determine whether they accurately reflect the then current and anticipated cost of providing water service to new development and may, by resolution, adjust aid fees to an amount which bears a reasonable relationship to the then-current and anticipated cost of providing water service to new development in the city.

        D.    Limitation as to Use of Connection Fees.

        1.     Connection fees established in this chapter shall be used only for the following purposes:

        a.     To pay for the cost of design and construction, including construction management, of water facilities needed to serve new development within the city.

        b.     To reimburse developers who have been required or permitted to construct water delivery or treatment facilities in excess of their pro rata contribution to the need for such facilities.

        c.     To repay bonded indebtedness owed by the city to the CCWA for construction of delivery and treatment facilities necessary for delivery of state water.

        2.     If a proposed development is replacing any existing development, the connection fee shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at the time the applicant obtains a building permit for the new development. No credit for the previous service will be permitted in the event that the service is abandoned or terminated.

        E.     Appeal Process. Any person subject to water connection fees may appeal to the council for an adjustment, reduction or waiver of such fees based on the absence of any reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of providing water service to the development. If an appeal for adjustment, reduction or waiver from connection fees is granted, any subsequent change in the development proposal shall invalidate the adjustment, reduction or waiver. The appeal process to be followed is stated in Chapter 13.44 of this title.

        F.     Pro Rata Return for Fees Not Spent or Committed Within Five Years. Any connection fees which have not been expended or committed for expenditure within five years from the time of being collected shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the current owners of development projects which have paid connection fees. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code §§ 14.80.001 — 14.80.025)

Chapter 13.64 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
13.64.010 Collection and enforcement—Procedures outlined.
        A.    Charges Collectible Together. No payment of water charges shall be accepted without payment of the sewer service charges. The city shall discontinue water service to any premises for which the sewer service charges are in arrears.

        B.     Premises Using Both Sewer and Water. When premises are served by the city water system, sewer service charges shall be collected together with and not separately from the charges for water services rendered by the city, and all charges shall be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. If all or any part of the bill is not paid, the city may discontinue any and all services for which the bill was rendered.

        C.     Premises Using Only Sewer. Where the user of the sewer system is not a user of the city water system, he or she shall be billed separately for sewer services charges.

        D.    Penalty on Delinquency. All bills not paid within twenty (20) days of billing shall be delinquent and penalties shall be such as set forth by resolution of the council.

        E.     Public Nuisance During Disconnection. During the period of such disconnection, inhabitation of such premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the council shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the city a reasonable attorney’s fee and costs of suit arising in the action.

        F.     Enforcement, Not Penalty. The foregoing procedure for disconnection delinquent premises is established as a means of enforcement of collection of the charges, and not as a penalty.

        G.    Suit. All unpaid rates and charges and penalties provided in this chapter may be collected by suit. Defendant shall pay all costs of suit in any judgment rendered in favor of city.

        H.    Contract. All users of the water system shall be deemed to have contracted with the city for the services of such system and to have agreed to comply with all the regulations of the city in regard thereto. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code §§ 14.85.001 — 14.85.008)

Chapter 13.68 WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS
13.68.010 Enacting authority.
        This chapter is enacted to regulate the use of a public water supply distributed by the city during a period of water shortage pursuant to Water Code Sections 350 through 359 and to enact water conservation measures during the period of water shortage pursuant to Water Code Sections 375 through 377. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.001)

 

13.68.020 Declaration of policy.
        The council of the city finds and declares that these regulations are adopted to deal with the use of water obtained from or through the distribution facilities of the city during any period of water shortage so declared to exist by the council, to conserve the water supply for the greatest public benefit. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.002)

 

13.68.030 Definition of waste.
        For the purposes of this chapter waste refers to any excessive, unnecessary or unwarranted use of water, including, but not limited to, any use which causes unnecessary runoff beyond the boundaries of any property as served by its water meter, and any failure to repair as soon as reasonably possible, any leak or rupture in any water pipe, faucet, valves, plumbing fixtures or other water services appliances or devices. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.003)

 

13.68.040 Prohibition on waste of water.
        No water user whether consumer or customer, shall waste water supplied through the city water distribution system. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.004)

 

13.68.050 Water use regulations during water shortage.
        A.    Stage One. Effective upon the adoption by the council of a resolution that a Stage One condition exists, and so long as that condition continues to exist, the following water use regulations and restrictions, and such other regulations and restrictions as may be adopted by the council, shall apply to all use of water provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city.

        1.     The watering of crops, grass, ground cover, lawns, open ground, shrubbery, trees, including greenbelt, golf courses, parks, recreation areas, agricultural, or any other area containing vegetation shall be prohibited between the hours of ten a.m. and four p.m.

        2.     The use of water described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, shall be in a manner and to the extent which does not allow unreasonable excess water to run off the area being watered. Every water user is considered to have his or her water system under his or her control and is accountable for the knowledge of and the manner and extent of excess water run off.

        3.     The washing of driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, buildings or any other hard surface on which water will run off except for the washing of surfaces necessary for preventing a potential threat to health and safety as determined by the public works director, shall be prohibited.

        4.     The washing of any vehicle, camper, trailer, or boat, except at a commercial car washing facility or by use of a bucket and/or hose equipped with a self closing valve that requires operator pressure to activate the flow of water, shall be prohibited.

        5.     The escape of water through leaks or breaks within any water user’s distribution or plumbing system for an unreasonable time shall be prohibited. Unreasonable time shall be twelve (12) hours after the discovery or the notification of such leak or break from the city to correct or implement the correction of such leak or break, whichever occurs first.

        6.     All restaurants that provide table service shall post in a conspicuous place a notice of drought conditions in a form approved by the public works director.

        7.     All hotel/motel operations shall post in each room in a conspicuous place a notice of drought conditions in a form approved by the public works director.

        8.     All recreational/travel trailer parks shall provide to each registered user of said park at the time of registration, a notice of drought conditions in a form approved by the public works director.

        B.     Stage Two. Effective upon the adoption by the council of a resolution that a Stage Two condition exists, and so long as that condition continues to exist, the following water use regulations and restrictions, and such other regulations and restrictions as may be adopted by the council, shall apply to all use of water provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city:

        1.     The Stage One water use regulations and restrictions on water use set forth in subsections (A)(3) through (A)(8) of this section shall be applicable.

        2.     The watering of crops, grass, ground cover, lawns, open ground, shrubbery, trees, including greenbelt, golf courses, parks, recreation areas, agricultural, or any other area containing vegetation shall be prohibited between eight a.m. and six p.m.

        3.     The use of water described in subsection (B)(2) of this section, shall be in a manner and to the extent which does not allow excess water to run off the area being watered. Every water user is considered to have his or her water system under his or her control and is accountable for the knowledge of and the manner and extent of excess water run off.

        4.     The use of city water for the flushing of water lines and mains, storm drains, sewer mains, and fire department training exercises except by the prior written approval of the public works director shall be prohibited.

        5.     The use of potable water cleaning and construction purposes, including, but not limited to, dust control and soil compaction shall be prohibited.

        C.     Stage Three. Effective upon the adoption by the council of a resolution that a Stage Three condition exists, and so long as that condition continues to exist, the following water use regulations and restrictions, and such other regulations and restrictions as may be adopted by the council, shall apply to all use of water provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city:

        1.     Stage One water use regulations and restrictions on water use set forth in subsections (A)(3) through (A)(8) of this section shall be applicable.

        2.     Stage Two water use regulations and restrictions on water use set forth in subsections (B)(4) and (B)(5) of this section shall be applicable.

        3.     The watering of crops, grass, ground cover, lawns, open ground, shrubbery, trees, including greenbelt, golf courses, parks, recreation areas, agricultural, or any other area containing vegetation shall be prohibited except for the use of a reasonable amount of water by means of a hand held bucket. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.005)

 

13.68.060 Place of use of water.
        Except as otherwise provided in this title or as specifically authorized by the public works director, water received from or through a city water meter may be used only on and for the property at the address to which that meter was assigned by the city. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.006)

 

13.68.070 Future restrictions.
        All consumers are hereby notified that further restrictions or prohibitions on water use and service including, but not limited to, the prohibition of new connections and the rationing of water, may hereafter become necessary, and nothing herein, and no application, permit or approval of any water service or water service facilities granted pursuant to these rules shall vest in the applicant any right to a particular use or quantity of water, but such applicant shall be subject to all further prohibitions, restrictions, rules and regulations in the same manner and extent as any other consumer, or class of consumer, similarly situated and existing at the time such prohibitions or restrictions are imposed. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.007)

 

13.68.080 Exemptions and appeals.
        Exemptions to the water use regulations set forth in this title may be granted by the public works director for specific uses of water, on the basis of hardship, or for reasons of health or safety. Any consumer may appeal any decision concerning application of the provisions of this chapter by the public works director to the council by filing a written appeal in accordance with Chapter 13.44 of this code. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.008)

 

13.68.090 Violation—Penalty.
        A.    Any failure to comply with a provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation, regardless of whether the failure to comply is caused by a customer, consumer or any other person or entity.

        B.     Where the failure to comply is found by the council to be continuing and intentional, each successive failure to comply shall be a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.009)

 

13.68.100 Penalties and charges.
        A.    It is a misdemeanor for any person or other entity to use or apply water received from the city contrary to or in violation of any water use restriction or prohibition contained in this chapter.

        B.     Service may be terminated to any consumer or customer who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this chapter, after having been given reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard to protest against the finding of such wilful violation and the discontinuance of service.

        C.     The following shall apply to any violation of any provision of this chapter:

        1.     For the first and second violation within any consecutive twelve (12) calendar months, the city will issue a written notice of the fact of such violation.

        2.     For the third violation within any consecutive twelve (12) calendar months, the city shall impose a surcharge against the customer for the property where the violations occurred or is occurring, in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the water bill for the billing period in which the violation occurred.

        3.     For a fourth violation and any subsequent violation within any consecutive twelve (12) calendar months, the city:

        a.     Shall impose a surcharge against the customer for the property where the violation occurred, or is occurring, in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the water bill for the billing period in which the violation occurred;

        b.     May install a flow restrictor on, or shut off water service to the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a period to be determined by the public works director;

        c.     If a flow restrictor is installed or water service shut off pursuant to this section, prior to restoration of normal water service the customer whose service is affected shall be required to reimburse the city for whatever cost it has occurred and will incur in installing and removing a flow restrictor and in shutting off and turning on water service;

        d.     Any surcharge imposed pursuant to this section shall be added to the account of the customer for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service;

        e.     Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of a customer to seek reimbursement of a surcharge from a tenant or other consumer responsible for violation. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.010)

 

13.68.110 Notice of violation/hearing.
        A.    For each violation of this chapter the public works director shall give notice as follows:

        By sending written notice through the United States Postal Service to the customer for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, at the current billing address shown in the city’s water billing records.

        B.     In addition, the public works director may provide notice as follows:

        1.     By sending written notice through the United States Postal Service to the consumer at the property address where the violation occurred or is occurring; or

        2.     By causing the giving of written notice personally to the person who committed the violation or by leaving written notice with some person deemed by the city to be of suitable age and discretion can be found, then by affixing written notice in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring; or

        3.     If neither the person who committed the violation nor a person deemed by the city to be of suitable age and discretion can be found, then by affixing written notice in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring.

        C.     Any written notice given under this section shall contain a statement of:

        1.     The time, place and nature of the violation;

        2.     The person(s) committing the violation, if known;

        3.     The possible penalties for each violation;

        4.     The customer or consumer’s right to request a hearing on the violation, the time within which and to whom such request must be made; and

        5.     The customer or consumer’s loss of the right to a hearing in the event the customer or consumer fails to request a hearing within the time required.

        D.    Any customer or consumer provided a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to request a hearing before the council. The request must be made in writing and must be actually received at the office of the city within ten calendar days of the date of the notice of violation. If a hearing is requested, the council shall give the customer or consumer requesting such hearing a notice in writing of the date, time and place of the hearing in the manner set forth above at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The council shall conduct the hearing at which both written and oral evidence may be presented, and shall decide whether a violation has occurred and the appropriate action and/or surcharge to be imposed. In determining the appropriate action and/or surcharge to be imposed, the council may consider whether the customer or consumer knew of the violation at the time it occurred and whether he or she took reasonable action to correct the violation upon notification of it. The decision of the council shall be final.

        E.     If a customer or consumer fails to request a hearing before the council in the manner and within the period provided in this section, the action of the city shall be deemed final.

        Pursuant to California Government Code section 66017, this title shall become effective sixty (60) days after its adoption by the city council. (Ord. 94-1 § 1, 1994; prior code § 14.90.011)

Chapter 13.72 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
13.72.010 Purpose.
        A.    The state of California has enacted the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006 and has found that:

        1.     The waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

        2.     The continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

        3.     It is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

        4.     Landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

        5.     Landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

        6.     Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use. (Ord. 10-02 § 3, 2010)

 

13.72.020 Water efficient landscaping ordinance.
        A.    Consistent with the legislative findings of the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006, the city of Buellton shall, by ordinance, adopt a water efficient landscaping ordinance that is at least as effective at conserving water as the state’s adopted model standards. The purpose of the city of Buellton’s water efficient landscaping ordinance is to:

        1.     Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

        2.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects;

        3.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

        4.     Encourage the use of water efficiently, without waste by reducing water use to the lowest practical amount;

        5.     Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

        6.     Encourage local agencies and water purveyors to use economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water; and

        7.     Encourage local agencies to designate the necessary authority that implements and enforces the provisions of the water efficient landscape ordinance or its local landscape ordinance. (Ord. 10-02 § 3, 2010)

 

13.72.030 Applicability.
        A.    The water efficient landscape ordinance shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

        1.     New construction, which includes rehabilitated landscapes, for public agency projects and private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or grading permit;

        2.     New construction, which includes rehabilitated landscapes, which are developer-installed in new single-family and multifamily projects with a total landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or grading permit;

        3.     New construction landscapes, which are homeowner-provided and/or homeowner-hired on single-family and multifamily residential lots with a total project landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet requiring a building or grading permit.

        B.     The water efficient landscape ordinance will not apply to:

        1.     Registered local, state, or federal historical sites;

        2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

        3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

        4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public; or

        5.     Existing single-family homes. (Ord. 10-02 § 3, 2010)

 

13.72.040 Penalty.
        The violation of any of the requirements of this chapter or the water efficient landscape ordinance will be subject to the penalties and enforcement actions as contained in Chapter 1.28 of this code. (Ord. 10-02 § 3, 2010)

 

13.72.050 Adoption.
        The Buellton water efficient landscape ordinance, Exhibit “A,” is hereby adopted. In adopting Exhibit “A” of said ordinance, the city council specifically finds that the standards contained therein are at least as effective at conserving water as the state’s Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. (Ord. 10-02 § 3, 2010)

Title 14 SEWER CODE
Chapter 14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 14.08 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS—REQUIRED
Chapter 14.12 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Chapter 14.16 BUILDING SEWERS, LATERAL SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Chapter 14.20 PUBLIC SEWER CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 14.24 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Chapter 14.28 DISCHARGE FROM WATER CONDITIONING AND/OR WATER SOFTENING EQUIPMENT
Chapter 14.32 PERMITS AND FEES—GENERALLY
Chapter 14.36 CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER SYSTEM—FEES
Chapter 14.40 MONTHLY SEWER RATES
Chapter 14.44 BILLING
Chapter 14.48 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 14.52 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Chapter 14.56 PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
Chapter 14.60 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM
Chapter 14.64 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 14.68 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER COMPLIANCE MONITORING
Chapter 14.72 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Chapter 14.76 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES

Chapter 14.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
14.04.010 Purpose and policy.
        This title sets forth uniform requirements for users of the municipal wastewater system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et. seq.), general pretreatment regulations (including, but not limited to 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403), and the requirements of any National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit or “Waste Discharge Requirement” issued by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board or other agency to the city. This title is enacted pursuant to the city’s authority under Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, the California Health & Safety Code and the California Water Code, as they, from time to time, may be amended. The objectives of this title are:

        A.    To prevent the introduction into the system of pollutants that could pass through the system inadequately treated, enter receiving waters, or otherwise interfere with or be incompatible with the system;

        B.     To protect the general public and city personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment;

        C.     To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and biosolids from the system;

        D.    To provide for a system to set and adopt fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the system; and

        E.     To enable the city to comply with the federal Clean Water Act, the California Water Code, NPDES permit conditions, if any, the provisions of any waste discharge requirements issued by a California Regional Water Quality Control Board, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws and regulations to which the system is subject.

        F.     This title authorizes the issuance of industrial wastewater discharge (“IWD”) permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.

        G.    This title shall apply to all persons within the city who use the system and to persons outside the city who, by contract with the city, are included as users of the system. By discharging wastewater into the system, users located beyond the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this title, as well as any permits, contracts or orders issued hereunder. (Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

 

14.04.020 Administration.
        A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this title. Powers granted to or duties imposed upon the public works director may be delegated by the public works director to other city personnel.

        B.     The city is authorized to promulgate regulations and standards reasonably necessary to protect the system, to comply with all applicable federal and state laws and pretreatment regulations, to control and regulate the proper use of the system, to regulate the rate of flow and the quality and quantity of wastewater discharges to the system, to prevent overflow, and to provide for the issuance, suspension or revocation of IWD permits, provided, however, the regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this title and formulated to result in the uniform control of the system.

        C.     The city shall be the exclusive provider of sewer and related services within the city. This section shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the city from contracting for the provision of any part or all of the sewer and sewer-related service requirements of the city or its inhabitants. (Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

 

14.04.030 Abbreviations and acronyms.
        For purposes of this title the following abbreviations and acronyms shall have the designated meanings:

 

●

BOD

Biochemical Oxygen Demand

●

C.F.R.

Code of Federal Regulations

●

COD

chemical oxygen demand

●

EPA

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

●

gpd

gallons per day

●

IWD

Industrial Wastewater Discharge

●

LC50

lethal concentration for 50% of the test organisms

●

L

liter

●

mg

milligrams

●

mg/L

milligrams per Liter

●

NPDES

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

●

O & M

operation and maintenance

●

POTW

publicly owned treatment works

●

RCRA

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.

●

SIC

standard industrial classification

●

TDS

total dissolved solids

●

TSS

total suspended solids

●

TTO

total toxic organics

●

USC

United States Code

 

(Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

 

14.04.040 Definitions.
        Except as otherwise provided in this title, or unless the context of the code requires otherwise, the following words shall be given the meanings and construction set forth in this title. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed elsewhere under this code, or under the California Water Code, if defined therein, and if not, by the Federal Clean Water Act, and regulations implementing the Clean Water Act. Terms not defined in any of the foregoing shall be construed in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

        “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Sections 1251, et seq., as it may be amended, and any regulations and standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.

        “Applicant” means the person or entity making application for a permit. No person shall be an applicant who is not the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner or person in charge of day-to-day activities of the premises from which wastewater is to be discharged.

        “Authorized representative of the user” as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.12(1) means:

        (a)    If the user is a corporation:

        (1)    The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or

        (2)    The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

        (b)    If the user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

        (c)    If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

        (d)    The individuals described in subparagraphs (a) through (c), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the user, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.

        “Biochemical oxygen demand” means quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic material under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration such as mg/L.

        “Building sewer” means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a person to the public sewer, private sewer, individual wastewater disposal system or other approved point of disposal.

        “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of waste and/or wastewater from any portion of a user’s pretreatment facility.

        “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge pretreatment standards promulgated by the EPA in pursuant to the Act, in 40 C.F.R. Part 403, or elsewhere.

        “Categorical user” means an industrial user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 403, or elsewhere.

        “City” means the city of Buellton, California.

        “City manager” means the city manager of the city or the city manager’s designee.

        “Color” means the optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water in which one hundred (100) percent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.

        “Compliance schedule” means a schedule containing increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment equipment and/or systems required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards.

        “Composite sample” means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, based on an increment of either flow or time.

        “Connection” means that part of any sewer extending from a sewer main in a public easement or right-of-way to private property for exclusive use of the property.

        “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use, including but not limited to, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration units to which the only pollutant added is heat.

        “Discharge” means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the system by a person.

        “Domestic wastewater” means liquid waste free of industrial wastewater, discharged from residential, commercial and industrial premises into the system.

        “Environmental Protection Agency” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, any other duly authorized official to whom EPA’s authority has been delegated.

        “Existing source” means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.

        “Fee” means any charge assessed to a person associated with the use, or continued use, of any portion of the system and includes, but is not limited to, a charge for connection or tap for new customers; monthly sewer service; IWD permit; excess capacity connection; wastewater treatment; excessive wastewater strength; laboratory testing; waste hauler’s permit; oversize sewer; and noncompliance.

        “Food establishment” means a facility engaged in the preparation of food products for sale. A facility engaged in the sale of food products that are wholly prepared off-site is not included within this definition. The term “food establishment” includes restaurants (SIC Code 5812).

        “Formula users” means those users who are regulated under the IWD permit system and billed according to the city of Buellton user charge formula, a formula based on the measured or set strength and volume of their wastewater discharged.

        “Garbage” means the putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, sale and consumption of foods. See 14 CCR Section 17225.30.

        “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.

        “Gravity separation device” means a device designed, constructed, and operated for the purpose of retaining sand, silt, grit, mineral material, and oil by gravity-differential separation from wastewater.

        “Grease” means a varied group of compounds having the common properties of immiscibility with water and a specific gravity lower than water as determined by appropriate procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.

        “Grease interceptor” or “interceptor” or “grease trap” means a device designed, constructed, and operated to separate and retain grease while permitting wastewater to be discharged into the system.

        “Ground garbage” means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in a public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

        “Holding tank wastewater” means any wastewater from holding tanks including, but not limited to, vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.

        “Indirect discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the system from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317(b), (c) or (d).

        “Industrial user” means any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or similar person that discharges wastewater, directly or indirectly, into the system, and which is solid, liquid or gaseous and contains pollutants different from or stronger than or with constituents other than those defined for domestic wastewater.

        “Industrial wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial waste, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the system. Industrial wastewater includes wastewater from sources other than an industrial plant or facility which introduces toxic pollutants, as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 401.15, into publicly owned treatment works, including, without limitation: medical offices; dental offices; hospitals; schools; restaurants; research, education and commercial laboratories; warehouses; shopping centers; car washes; print stores; residential, commercial and public users of pesticides and fertilizers; gas stations; and septage collection and disposal.

        “Industrial wastewater discharge permit” or “IWD permit” means a written conditional authorization by the city to allow a user to utilize the system for the discharge of industrial wastewater.

        “Instantaneous maximum discharge limit” means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

        “Interceptor” means a device designed, constructed, and operated to separate and retain grease, sand or other substance harmful to the system while permitting wastewater to be discharged into the system.

        “Interference” means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the system, its treatment processes or operations or its biosolids processes, use or disposal; and that is therefore a cause of a violation of a provision in any applicable waste discharge requirement, NPDES permit or the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with all applicable federal, state, or local regulations, including but not limited to: Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1342, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.; any and all federal and state clean air acts; and the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. Sections 2601-2692.

        “Mass emission rate” means the weight of material discharged to the system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents.

        “Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

        “Monitoring facilities” means an approved opening to a sewer for the purpose of inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement.

        “Municipal wastewater system” or “system” means a “treatment works” as defined by Section 212 of the Act, and includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater (domestic or industrial) and any conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant.

        “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1342.

        “National Prohibitive Discharge Standard” or “prohibitive discharge standard” or “prohibitive discharge limits” means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317(b), and includes limits established pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Section 403.5.

        “New source” means:

        (a)    Any building structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317(c), which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

        (1)    The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

        (2)    The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge or pollutants at an existing source; or

        (3)    The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

        (b)    Any construction on a site at which an existing source is located and results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subparagraphs (a)(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

        (c)    Construction of a new source as defined under this subparagraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:

        (1)    Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or

        (2)    Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

        (3)    Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subparagraph.

        “Non-contact cooling water” means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

        “Pass-through” means a discharge that exits the system into waters of the state or the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of an applicable waste discharge requirement or a NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

        “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns; and including all federal, state and local governmental entities.

        “pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.

        “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, domestic wastewater, garbage, sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics of the wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

        “Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the system, such pretreatment or treatment accomplished by: physical, chemical, or biological processes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutant unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

        “Pretreatment facility” means any works or device for the treatment or flow limitation of domestic wastewater, liquid waste, industrial waste or industrial wastewater prior to discharge into the system.

        “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

        “Pretreatment standards” or “standards” means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and/or local limits.

        “Private sewer” means a sewer, other than a connection, laid by a person to serve one or more buildings, so as to connect a building(s) to a public sewer and irrespective of whether the sewer is constructed on public or private property.

        “Private wastewater disposal system” means a septic tank with the effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or other wastewater holding facilities.

        “Prohibited discharge standards” or “prohibited discharge” means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances.

        “Public works director” means the public works director of the city or the director’s designee.

        “Radioactive material” means material containing chemical elements that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or energy forms in excess of normal background radiation.

        “Raw wastewater” means wastewater prior to treatment or discharge.

        “Seepage pit” means a lined excavation in the ground that receives the discharge of a septic tank and designed to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and side.

        “Septage” means any domestic wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.

        “Septic tank” means a watertight receptacle which receives the domestic wastewater discharge of a building and is designed and constructed to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention and allow the liquid to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint or perforated piping or a seepage pit.

        “Settleable solids” means any solid that will settle out of a liquid in a specified interval of time as determined by appropriate procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.

        “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit together with appurtenances for carrying wastewater.

        “Significant change” means plus or minus twenty-five (25) percent in an industrial user’s typical discharge pattern: flow rate, peak flow rate, constituents, concentration of constituents or characteristics.

        “Significant industrial user” means:

        (a)    A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or

        (b)    A user that:

        (1)    Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of industrial wastewater to the system (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);

        (2)    Contributes a wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the system; or

        (3)    Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the system’s operation or for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement.

        (c)    Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the system operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R Section 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

        “Slug load” or “slug” means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards set forth in this title.

        “Standard industrial classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (latest edition) issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.

        “Standard methods” means Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest edition) published by American Water Works Association, Water Environment Association, and the American Public Health Association, 1015 18th Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20036.

        “Standard specifications” means the current edition of standards and requirements relating to size, quantity, quality and performance, including standard drawing, as detailed and made available by the city.

        “State” means the state of California.

        “Storm water” means storm water runoff and snow melt runoff.

        “Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter in wastewater, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.

        “System” or “city’s sewer system” means the city’s sewers.

        “Total dissolved solids” means the solid matter in solution in wastewater, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.

        “Total toxic organics” means the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter of the organics contained in 40 C.F.R. Section 413.02.(i), incorporated herein by reference.

        “Toxic pollutant” means one of the pollutants or combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, 40 C.F.R Section 401.15, under authority of Section 307 of the Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317.

        “Uncontaminated water” or “unpolluted water” means any water not contaminated or polluted with sewage or other waste, the discharge of which will not cause any violation of receiving water limitations or provision in any waste discharge requirement or NPDES permit.

        “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical and/or local pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user; but does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

        “User” means a person which discharges, or causes or permits the discharge of any industrial or other discharge into the sanitary sewer system. The term “user” means and includes any tenant or sub-tenant under any rental, lease, or other agreement, or other person in charge of day-to-day activities at any place where there is a connection to the system and all such persons are users and jointly and severally shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this title in the same manner as the owner.

        “Waste” means sewage and any and all other water substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive substances associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purpose of, disposal.

        “Wastewater” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and domestic wastewater from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed directly or indirectly to the city’s sewer system.

        “Wastewater treatment plant” or “treatment plant” means that portion of the system designed to provide treatment of domestic and industrial wastewater. (Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

 

14.04.050 Severability.
        If any title, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title for any reason is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council declares that it would have adopted this title and each chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. This section shall apply to the entire title as enacted and as subsequently amended. (Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

 

14.04.060 Relief on application.
        When any person is of the opinion that any provision of this title is unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her property by reason of special circumstances, the person may make written application to the city council, stating the special circumstances, citing the provisions complained of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to the person’s premises. The city council, by resolution, may deny the application or suspend or modify the provision complained of, as applied to such property, to be effective as to the date of the application and continuing during the period of the special circumstances. See also Section 14.24.110, Variances. (Ord. 03-03 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 14.08 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS—REQUIRED
14.08.010 Disposal of wastes.
        It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.001)

 

14.08.011 Connection to the city’s sewers—General.
        A.    No person shall connect any private property in the city to the system without first obtaining a written connection permit issued by the public works director and paying to the city the connection fee and charges, as required by Sections 14.16.010 and 14.20.010 of this title. It is unlawful for any person to connect to, construct, install or provide, maintain and use any other means of sewage disposal from any building in the city except by connection to the city sewer system in the manner provided in this title.

        B.     The number of connection permits required for any development shall be based upon the number of sewer service connections. A separate sewer connection is normally required for each detached building. Plans, profiles and specifications shall be submitted as required by Sections 14.20.020 and 14.20.030 of this title.

        C.     Food establishments and commercial laundries shall have a water connection separate from other users in the same building, unless specifically authorized by the public works director.

        D.    The public works director may impose other requirements if the director determines that public health and safety, system protection, maintenance costs, or liability concerns so dictate.

        E.     In order for the city to have sufficient information to make a determination of appropriate fees to be charged, building permit applicants shall submit sewer service plumbing plans prepared by a registered engineer or project architect in conjunction with the building permit application for all new and replacement structures. The plumbing plans shall show all the proposed line sizes and locations.

        F.     Every connection, disconnection and permanent blocking or plug made between private property and the system shall be made in the manner and with the material required by the specifications for public sewers approved by the city and in accordance with the city’s standard specifications for construction, as required by Chapter 14.16 of this title. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.012 Connection to mains to be maintained by owner.
        All connections, including the lateral, wye or saddle at the city’s sewer, shall be maintained at the expense of the user of the connection. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.013 Demolition and abandonment of services/premises.
        The user shall disconnect or permanently block or plug connections when further use of the property, for any purpose requiring the connection, is abandoned or when the structure or facility on the property requiring the connection is demolished without replacement. A public works permit for abandonment of sewer lateral shall be required prior to commencement of abandonment. If a user or an agent of the user has failed to so effect the disconnection or blockage, the public works director may disconnect or block the connection, and the cost thereof shall be deemed a debt to the city and shall be charged to the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.014 Availability of capacity—Restriction of discharge rate.
        A.    If system capacity is not available, the public works director may restrict discharge until sufficient capacity is made available. The public works director may refuse immediate service to any new facility located in an area where there is insufficient capacity in the system to accommodate the proposed quantity of the wastewater.

        B.     The public works director may restrict the rate of discharge into the system during the peak flow hours (6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or at any other time when required to prevent the overloading of the system. A discharger so restricted shall be required either to curtail the rate of discharge or to provide approved storage or retention facilities for the wastewater. Wastewater so retained may be discharged into the system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or during other periods and at a rate of flow prescribed by the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.015 Excessive sewer maintenance expense.
        Any person who, either directly or indirectly, introduces or causes to be introduced into the system any pollutant or wastewater which creates a stoppage, plugging, breakage, reduction in the capacity of any portion of the system or any other damage to the system shall be liable to the city for the damage and for costs of maintenance, operation, and replacement expenses, including overhead costs, resulting from the introduction of the pollutant. The costs resulting from the introduction of the pollutant shall be deemed a debt to the city and shall be charged to the offending person by the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.016 Damage to city’s municipal wastewater system—Creation of other liability.
        Any person who introduces or causes to be introduced into the system, either directly or indirectly, any prohibited pollutant or wastewater which causes detrimental effects to the city’s system or treatment plant processes or causes a violation of the city’s NPDES, waste discharge requirements or other permit or other regulation imposed by a regulatory agency shall be liable to the city for all damages and costs occasioned thereby, including any penalty assessed against the city by any regulatory agency. The damages, costs or penalty assessed shall be deemed a debt to the city and shall be charged to the offending person by the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.017 Extension of system.
        A.    In addition to the payment of a connection fee, any person requesting service to a lot that is not adjacent to the system shall be responsible for installation of a sewer extension in dedicated streets, alleys or easements. Sewers shall be installed in sewer easements only when it is not in the public interest for the city to accept dedication of a street or alley in the particular location. The required sewer extension shall include all facilities necessary to serve the property as well as all unsewered properties that could feasibly be served by said extension. All construction shall conform to city standards and detailed plans shall be submitted to and, if appropriate, approved by the public works director. The public works director shall determine the size sewer required for the area for which application for service is made.

        B.     If sewer facilities that the person otherwise would be required to provide have been installed previously, the person shall be required to pay to the city a sewer charge consisting of a pro rata share of such facilities as determined by the public works director. If such previous installation was made by the applicant or his or her predecessor in interest in the property to which service is desired, the applicant may be entitled to credit in an amount to be determined by the public works director for such installation. Previous installations eligible for these credits must have been made not more than twenty (20) years before the application. Credit for previous installations will be applied against sewer charges, but in no event shall such credits be greater than the amount paid for actual construction of the extension.

        C.     When installed, connected and finally inspected, all sewer extensions shall be deemed to have been offered for dedication to the city and upon acceptance by the city shall become the property of the city. All necessary easements shall be granted to the city. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.018 Special provision for extension of system.
        A.    When an application requires construction of a sewer extension and it is necessary or desirable to design the extension to serve an area or users, actual or potential, in excess of that for which the application is made, the applicant may be eligible for a credit for a portion of the design and construction costs for the extension. Any such credit shall be granted in an amount to be determined by the public works director.

        B.     If the sewer is constructed, in part or completely by the applicant, the public works director may authorize an appropriate credit against the applicant’s sewer connection fee. No applicant may receive a credit for more than the total amount of sewer connection fees that would be normally required of the applicant. Any credit granted by the public works director shall be only for the actual engineering and construction costs of the sewer.

        C.     Upon completion of a sewer to which future connections could be made, the public works director shall determine the actual cost thereof and the existing sewer charge against each front foot of abutting property, taking into consideration intersections and other property that would not receive water service. (Ord. 03-03 § 2, 2003)

 

14.08.020 Treatment of wastes required.
        It is unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial waste or other contaminated substance, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.002)

 

14.08.030 Unlawful disposal.
        Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain within the city any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.003)

14.08.040 Occupancy—Prohibited.
        No building, industrial facility or other structure within the city shall be occupied until the owner of the premises has complied with all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.004)

 

14.08.050 Connection to the public sewer.
        A.    The owner of any building situated within the limits of the city, requiring sewage disposal, and abutting on any street in which is located a public sewer, shall at such owner’s expense, connect the building directly to such public sewer. All connections required by this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this title and all other applicable rules and regulations of the city.

        B.     The owner of any building in existence prior to the construction of a public sewer to which connection would otherwise be required under subsection A of this section, shall, upon construction of such public sewer, connect said building to such public sewer within ninety (90) days after the date of receipt of written notice from a duly authorized officer of the city advising of the availability of such public sewer and of the requirement for connection thereto. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.005)

 

14.08.060 No expansion of judicial review or extension of period of limitations.
        Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to expand the scope of judicial review or extend any applicable period of limitations for the filing of a judicial action. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.25.007)

Chapter 14.12 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
14.12.010 Sewer not available.
        Where connection to a public sewer is not required under the provisions of Section 14.08.050, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the health department of Santa Barbara County. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.30.001)

 

14.12.020 Abandonment of facilities.
        At such time as connection to a public sewer is required with respect to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 14.08.050, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this title, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material as determined by the city inspector. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.30.002)

 

14.12.030 Cost of maintenance by owner.
        The owner shall, at the owner’s sole expense, operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.30.003)

Chapter 14.16 BUILDING SEWERS, LATERAL SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
14.16.010 Permit—Required.
        No person shall construct any sewer or make a connection to any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges as required by this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.001)

 

14.16.020 Construction requirements.
        Construction of sewers shall be accomplished in accordance with the applicable requirements of the city in force from time to time. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.002)

 

14.16.030 Sewer materials.
        The side, building and lateral sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, A.S.T.M. specification (A74-42) or equal, vitrified clay sewer pipe, A.S.T.M. specification (C13-44T) or equal, polyvinyl chloride plastic (P.V.C.) pipe which shall conform to A.S.T.M. standard specification D. 3034-72, or acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) pipe which shall conform to A.S.T.M. standard specification D 2513 and to United States Department of Commerce commercial standard CS 270-65. All pipe joints shall be tight and waterproof. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.003)

 

14.16.040 Minimum size and slope.
        The size and slope of the side sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city inspector, but in no event shall the diameter of the lateral sewer be less than four inches nor shall the diameter of the house sewer be less than three inches. The slope of the side sewer shall be no less than one-fourth inch per foot. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.004)

 

14.16.050 Building drain.
        Whenever possible the building drain shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building drain shall be laid parallel to and within three feet of any bearing wall. The building drain shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curbed pipe and fittings. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.005)

 

14.16.060 Joints and connections.
        All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M. specification (C12-19) except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. All joints and connections shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code then in effect. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.006)

 

14.16.070 Connection to public sewer.
        All connections and laterals are to be installed in conformance with standards and details adopted by the city. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the lateral if possible, by placing a cleanout “Y” on its back with the cleanout looking up at the property line. Where there is no properly located lateral or where there is no lateral sewer available in the collection system, in sewer mains to eight inch diameter a “Y” shall be cut into such mains. On mains in excess of eight inch diameter, a neat hole may be cut into the top half of the public sewer to receive the lateral sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of approximately forty-five (45) degrees. A “Y” shall be used for the connection and in no case shall the pipe protrude inside the main sewer. The invert of the lateral sewer at the point of connection shall be at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth neat joint shall be made and the connection made secure and watertight. The connection to the public sewer shall be made in the presence of the city inspector and under his or her supervision and direction and in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. Any damage to the public sewer shall be repaired at the cost of the applicant to the satisfaction of the city inspector. When a lateral sewer is constructed by an applicant, the applicant shall first obtain a permit for such construction, and pay an inspection fee as established by resolution of the city council. Payment of the inspection fee shall not relieve the applicant of the required payment of the connection fees provided in Chapter 14.32, provided, however, that the cleanout “Y” shall be placed on its back with the cleanout looking up at the property line when a lateral is constructed by an applicant. Only a properly licensed, bonded contractor may install lateral sewers in the public right-of-way and connect the same to city sewer lines.

        Every licensed contractor, prior to commencement of work, shall provide the city with a bond from a surety or sureties satisfactory to the city inspector, by the terms of which the contractor agrees to hold the city harmless from damage to the city sewer system caused by action due to contractor. The final amount of such bond shall be at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), if it covers a period not to exceed one year, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) if it covers only a single installation. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.007)

 

14.16.080 Separate sewers.
        No two lots shall be permitted to join in the use of the same side sewer. Except as otherwise provided in this section, every building or industrial facility must be separately connected with a public sewer if such public sewer exists in the street upon which the property abuts or in an easement which will serve said property. However, one or more buildings under the same ownership located on a single parcel may be served with the same side sewer during the period of the ownership. Upon the subsequent subdivision of any such parcel the portion not directly connected with such public sewer shall be forthwith separately connected with a public sewer, and it is unlawful for the owner thereof to continue to use or maintain such indirect connection. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, separate residential, commercial or industrial condominium units in the same condominium development may join in the use of a common side sewer. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.008)

 

14.16.090 Old building sewers.
        Old building sewers, excepting bituminous (orangeburg), may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, upon examination and testing by the city inspector, to conform to all applicable requirements of the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.009)

 

14.16.100 Sewer too low.
        In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building sewer shall be lifted by means, approved by the city inspector, and discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.010)

 

14.16.110 Protection of excavation.
        All excavations for installation of side sewers shall be adequately guarded with barricade and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.011)

 

14.16.120 Maintenance of side sewer.
        Side sewers, including the horizontal piping beginning at the building drain of any building and terminating in the main sewer, shall be maintained by the owner of the property served thereby. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.012)

 

14.16.130 Backflow protection device.
        In any structure in which the sewer waste outlets-drains are lower than the top elevation of the sewer manholes in the street/easement a backflow protection device shall be installed on the building sewer. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.35.013)

Chapter 14.20 PUBLIC SEWER CONSTRUCTION
14.20.010 Permit—Required.
        No person shall construct, extend or construct, extend or connect to any public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges and furnishing bonds as required by this code. The provisions of this section requiring permits shall not be construed to apply to contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into by the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.001)

 

14.20.020 Plans—Profiles and specifications—Required.
        The application for a permit for public sewer construction shall be accompanied by complete plans, profiles and specifications, complying with this code, prepared by a registered civil engineer showing all details of the proposed work based on an accurate survey of the ground. The application, together with the plans, profiles and specifications shall be examined by the public works director or designee, who shall approve them as filed or require them to be modified as he or she deems necessary for proper installation. When the public works director is satisfied that the proposed work is proper and the plans, profiles and specifications are sufficient and correct, he or she shall order the issuance of a permit predicated upon the payment of all connection charges and fees, and the furnishing of an agreement in form to be approved by the city that the subdivider will construct the facilities in strict accordance with the approved plans and specifications, the faithful performance of which agreement shall be secured by a faithful performance bond in an amount and with sureties satisfactory to the city. The permit shall prescribe such terms and conditions as the public works director deems necessary in the public interest. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.002)

 

14.20.030 Subdivisions.
        The requirements of this section shall be fully complied with before any final subdivision map shall be approved by the city engineer. The final subdivision map shall provide for the dedication for public use of all streets, easements or rights-of-way in which public sewer lines are to be constructed. If a final subdivision map of a tract is recorded and the work of constructing sewers to serve the tract is not completed within the time limit allowed in the permit, the city council may extend the time limit or may complete the work and take appropriate steps to enforce the provisions of the bond furnished by the subdivider. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.003)

 

14.20.040 Easement or right-of-way.
        In the event that an easement is required for the extension of the public sewer or the making of connections, the applicant shall procure and have accepted by the city council a proper easement or grant of right-of-way sufficient to permit the laying and maintenance of such extension or connection. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.004)

 

14.20.050 Persons authorized to perform work.
        Only properly licensed contractors shall be authorized to perform the work of public sewer construction within the city. All terms and conditions of the permit issued by the city to the applicant shall be binding on the contractor. The requirements of this section shall apply to side sewers installed concurrently with public sewer construction. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.005)

 

14.20.060 Grade stakes.
        Grade and line stakes shall be set by a licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer, qualified to perform land surveying, prior to the start of work on any public sewer construction. The licensed contractor shall be responsible for accurately transferring grades to the sewer invert. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.006)

 

14.20.070 Compliance with local regulations.
        Any person constructing a sewer within a street shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to the cutting of pavement, opening barricading, lighting and protecting of trenches, backfilling and repaving thereof and shall obtain all permits and pay all fees required prior to the issuance of a permit by the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.007)

 

14.20.080 Protection of excavation.
        The applicant shall maintain such barriers, lights and signs as are necessary to give warning to the public at all times that a sewer is under construction and of each dangerous condition to be encountered as a result thereof. He shall also likewise protect the public in the use of the sidewalk against any such conditions in connection with the construction of the sewer. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other property disturbed in the course of the work shall be reinstalled in a manner satisfactory to the city and any other person or entity having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.008)

 

14.20.090 Compliance with occupational safety and health acts.
        All construction undertaken under a city permit shall be in strict compliance with state and federal occupational safety and health acts in effect at the time. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.009)

 

14.20.100 Design and construction standards.
        Minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers within the city shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code. The city may permit modifications or may require higher standards where unusual conditions are encountered. Record drawings showing the actual location of all mains, structures, Y’s, T’s, laterals and cleanouts shall be filed with the city before final acceptance of the work. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.40.010)

Chapter 14.24 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
14.24.010 Drainage into sanitary sewers—Prohibited.
        No leaders from roofs and no surface drains for rain water shall be connected to any sanitary sewer. No surface or sub-surface drainage, rain water, storm water, seepage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters shall be permitted to enter any sanitary sewer by any device or method whatsoever. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.001)

 

14.24.020 Wastewater discharge policy.
        A.    Domestic and industrial wastewater origination within the city will be accepted into the city’s sewerage system if there is capacity in the system and the wastewater will not:

        1.     Menace public health;

        2.     Detrimentally affect the local environment;

        3.     Create a nuisance, including odor and infestation;

        4.     Impose excessive collection, treatment or disposal costs upon the city;

        5.     Significantly interfere with or impede wastewater treatment processes;

        6.     Interfere with or impede wastewater reclamation processes;

        7.     Exceed quality limits and quantity requirements established by these rules or regulations promulgated thereunder;

        8.     Significantly contaminate the sludge from the treatment process;

        9.     Cause the city to violate its NPDES permit.

        B.     These rules and regulations provide specific limits for prohibited constituents only where they are now reasonably well established. In some cases, the concentration or amount of any particular constituent which will be judged to be excessive or unreasonable cannot be foreseen, but will depend on the results of technical determinations relating to the particular situation and the actions of regulatory agencies.

        C.     No person shall discharge any domestic or industrial wastewater to the ground, into any surface drainage conduit, storm drain or channel, or stream or other waste course. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.001)

 

14.24.030 Specific discharge prohibitions.
        No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the city’s sewerage system. These city’s prohibitions apply to all such users of the city’s sewerage system whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances, directly or indirectly, to the city’s sewerage system (Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.5(b)):

        A.    Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the city’s sewerage system, its operation or personnel. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the Lower Explosive Limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system (Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.5(b)(1)).

        B.     Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the city’s sewerage system or exceed the limitation set forth in categorical pretreatment standards. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant defined pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act.

        C.     Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or a pH higher than 10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive or detrimental characteristics capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the city’s sewerage system (Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.5(b)(2)).

        D.    Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment plant such as but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood and/or components, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, and glass grinding or polishing wastes (Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.5(b)(3)).

        E.     Rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, sub-surface drainage, roof drainage, swimming pool and/or spa water, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays or other uncontaminated water, or water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which exceed maximum concentration limitations. (Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.6(d)).

        F.     Nonbiodegradable oils commonly called soluble oils which may form persistent water emulsions or oil, petroleum oil or refined petroleum products beyond a concentration of one hundred (100) parts per million. Disposal of oils and fats including lard, tallow, or vegetable oil in concentrations of one hundred (100) parts per million which may be detrimental to the city’s sewerage system or which violate the city’s NPDES permit.

        G.    Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.

        H.    Any substance which may cause the city’s wastewater treatment plant’s effluent or any other product such as residue, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a material be discharged which causes the city’s wastewater treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act. Any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.

        I.      Any substance in concentration sufficient to cause the city’s wastewater treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.

        J.      Any wastewater with objectionable color including, by not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.

        K.    Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the city’s wastewater treatment plant resulting in interference but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the city’s sewerage system which exceeds one hundred four (104) degrees F.

        L.     Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public works director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

        M.    Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.

        N.    Deionized water, steam underwaste or distilled water in excess of laboratory usage; single pass cooling water, blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or other evaporation coolers exceeding one third of the make-up water, (quantities in excess of one third of the make-up water may be discharged into the district’s sewerage system, subject to Section 2-5(B), during off-peak hours if hydraulic sewer capacity is available).

        O.    Any wastewater with amounts of TDS which may be detrimental to the city’s sewerage system. Any salt brine from water softening devices utilizing salt in the regeneration process.

        P.     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city’s sewerage system any waste or wastewater if in the opinion of the public works director the discharge may have an adverse or harmful effect on sewers, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, public or private property or may otherwise endanger ecological systems or create a public nuisance. In determining the acceptability of specific wastewater under this section, the public works director shall consider, in addition to the foregoing, the nature of the wastewater, the adequacy and nature of the collection, the treatment and disposal system available to accept the wastewater, and the city’s policy embodied in these rules and regulations. Upon such consideration, the public works director shall adopt rules and regulations as provided herein and upon appropriate application shall establish terms and conditions appropriate to specific dischargers.

        Q.    Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

        R.     No person may add any wastewater containing quantities or concentrations which exceed the limits set out below, as they may be amended, or in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.5(c), as it may be amended, whichever is more stringent, for the following pollutants:

 

Constituent

Concentration (mg/L)

Ammonia

35

EPA Method 350

BOD 5 day

300

EPA Method 405.1

Suspended solids

300

EPA Method 160.2

Arsenic

0.05

 

Beryllium

0.2

 

Cadmium

0.1

 

Chromium (T)

1.3

 

Copper

1.0

 

Cyanide (total)

0.2

EPA Method 335

Lead

0.9

 

Mercury

.001

EPA Method 245

Nickel

1.5

 

Total Toxic Organics (TTOs)

1.0

EPA Method 608, 624, 625

Phenolic compounds

0.5

EPA Method 420

Selenium

0.05

 

Silver

0.5

 

Sulfide (dissolved)

0.05

EPA Method 376

Zinc

5.0

 

 

        Any exceedence of any of the foregoing limits, as they may be amended, subjects the user to enforcement action. Concentration limits apply at the point of discharge to the system or at an alternate point (or points) specifically designated by the public works director. All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal. At the discretion of the public works director, mass limitations may be imposed on users in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations on the above listed pollutants. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample.

        S.     No person may add to the system any wastewater not treated in accordance with the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as they, from time to time, may be amended, and which, by this reference, are incorporated into this title. Discharge of wastewater not treated in accordance with the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall constitute a violation of this title.

        1.     Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the public works director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.6(c), as it may be amended.

        2.     When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the public works director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.6(e), as it may be amended.

        3.     A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.

        4.     A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.15.

        The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in IWD permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the system. (Ord. 03-03 § 3, 2003; Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.002)

 

14.24.040 Interceptors—Required.
        Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid water containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

        A.    Restaurants. All restaurants or similar establishments shall install an approved grease interceptor which is of sufficient size so as to prevent excessive discharges of grease into the city’s sewerage system. The grease interceptor shall be easily accessible for inspection by the public works director. Exceptions to the installation of a grease interceptor shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the public works director. The public works director shall take into account the following items when determining exceptions: (1) size of restaurant; (2) meals served per day; (3) seating capacity; (4) dishwashing and garbage disposal facilities on-hand; and (5) any other criteria the public works director deems applicable.

        B.     Car Washes, Vehicle Service Stations and Garages. Car washes and vehicle service stations or garages shall be required to install a gravity separating device designed to prevent the discharge of sand, silt, oil and grease to the city’s sewerage system.

        C.     Laundries and Cleaners. After the effective date of these rules and regulations all new laundries and dry cleaners or similar establishments shall install a gravity separating device of a size and design approved by the public works director. They shall also install any other pretreatment facility required by the public works director to ensure their compliance with all requirements and specifications of these rules and regulations. Establishments in existence prior to this date shall install an appropriate pretreatment system if in the opinion of the public works director the system is warranted.

        D.    Existing Gravity Separation Device and Grease Interceptors. If the public works director finds that a grease interceptor or gravity separating device installed prior to the effective date of these rules and regulations is incapable of retaining adequately the grease or sand and oil in the wastewater flow from a service station, car wash or restaurant or similar establishment, or, if no such device exists where one is required, the public works director shall give the proprietor a written notice requiring that an adequate interceptor or gravity separating device be installed within a reasonable time period.

        E.     Approved Design. The public works director may maintain an information file available for public use of acceptable designs of grease interceptors and gravity separating devices. The installation of a design shown in such file or of any design meeting the size requirement set forth in these rules and regulations or any recommendation of requirements made by the public works director shall not impute any liability to the city for the adequacy of the interceptor or gravity separating device under the actual condition of use. Such installation shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping prohibited substances or substances above the limitations of these rules and regulations out of the city’s sewerage system. If the interceptor, gravity separating device or other pretreatment facility is not adequate under the conditions of use, one shall be constructed which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.003)

14.24.050 Grease interceptors and gravity separating devices.
        Except as noted in Section 14.24.050A. and B., below, grease interceptors, oil, and sand interceptors and gravity separating devices (separators) shall be installed by the user, at user’s expense, when, in the opinion of the city’s public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of the liquid wastes containing grease or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be sized using the Uniform Plumbing Code, current edition, as a guide. Interceptors must be of a capacity sufficient to provide the appropriate quality of effluent as per city standards and shall be in an easily accessible location for the purposes of cleaning and inspection. A sample box or tee installed by the user, at user’s expense, is required on all interceptors and separators. All interceptors and separators shall be properly maintained by the user to ensure compliance with city requirements.

        A.    Not later than January 1, 2006, each food establishment user, including each restaurant, shall cause to be installed an approved grease interceptor or grease trap or to implement alternate grease reducing practices. The alternate grease reducing practice to be employed shall be submitted to city for review and, if appropriate, approval. Specifications for a grease interceptor proposed by user shall be submitted to the city for review, and, if appropriate, approval, using the UPC as a guide.

        B.     Not later than January 1, 2006, the person in charge of day-to-day activities at each car wash facility, and automotive service facility (SIC Codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) shall cause to be installed at the facility of which that person is in charge a gravity separating device designed to prevent the discharge of sand, silt, oil and grease to the sewerage system. Specifications for gravity separating devices shall be submitted to the city for review, and, if appropriate, approval, using the UPC as a guide.

        C.     If the city finds that a grease interceptor or other gravity separating device installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance is incapable of adequately retaining the grease, sand or oil in the wastewater flow, the city shall notify the user, in writing, that the user shall cause to be installed an adequate interceptor or gravity separating device within a specific, reasonable time period.

        D.    Installation of a grease interceptor or gravity separating device shall not relieve the user of responsibility for keeping prohibited substances or substances above the limitations of this title from being discharged into the sewerage system. If the interceptor, gravity separating device or other pretreatment facility is not adequate under the conditions of use, the user shall cause an adequate interceptor or device to be installed, at user’s expense, which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose.

        E.     Each user required to use and maintain a grease interceptor or gravity separating device shall maintain a maintenance record, which shall be maintained on the user’s premises and made available for inspection by city and the regional board upon request. This maintenance record shall include the dates of inspections and cleanouts, the name of the person who inspected and cleaned it and the disposal site of the waste. (Ord. 03-03 § 4, 2003; Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.004)

 

14.24.060 Control manholes.
        When required by the city, the owner of any property served by a side sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the side sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.005)

 

14.24.070 Measurements and tests.
        All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be determined in accordance with the standard methods and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in Section 14.24.060, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side sewer is connected. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.006)

 

14.24.080 Agreements with users—Variances.
        The city council reserves the right to enter into agreements with users, setting out terms under which a user may discharge into the system. In no case will the city waive compliance with pretreatment or prohibited discharge standards or requirements. However, a user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Section 403.15. A user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the city in accordance with Section 14.24.110. Such a request will be approved only if the user proves that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that categorical pretreatment standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.13 and Section 14.24.110. (Ord. 03-03 § 5, 2003: Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.007)

 

14.24.090 Swimming pools.
        It is unlawful for any person to discharge the contents of a swimming pool into a sanitary sewer, without first applying for and receiving written permission from the public works director. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.45.008)

 

14.24.100 Control of wastewater discharges.
        If wastewater containing any substance referred to in this chapter is discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewer system, the public works director may take any action necessary to:

        A.    Prohibit the discharge of the wastewater.

        B.     Require the discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications would reduce or eliminate the discharge in conformance with prohibitions, limitations and requirements of this title.

        C.     Require pretreatment to reduce or eliminate the objectionable or harmful nature of the pollutants prior to their discharge to the sewer system.

        D.    Require the discharger to pay any additional costs incurred by the city for handling and treating the excess loads imposed on the treatment system as a result of allowing such wastewater to enter the system.

        E.     Take any other remedial action as may be deemed necessary to achieve the purpose and requirements of this title. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.110 Variances.
        A.    The city council may grant variances from one or more of the provisions of this title. Prior to submitting such a variance request to the city council, the public works director shall verify that in no case will the granting of a variance either (a) allow the user to exceed applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements or federally mandated prohibitions or (b) place the general public, wastewater system or wastewater system personnel at risk of adverse health and safety effects.

        B.     The city council may require the user to monitor the volumes and/or concentrations of the discharge in excess of previously imposed levels, if the public works director deems it necessary to properly enforce any variance granted under this section.

        C.     The city reserves the right to impose requirements that are stricter than, or in addition to, those specified under the authority of Section 14.24.100 if the quantity or quality of the user’s discharge merit unique consideration by virtue of the impact of the user’s discharge on the system or public health and welfare.

        D.    The city council shall have the right to revoke any variance at any time.

        E.     The city council shall have the right to charge fees and/or deposits related to the granting of a variance. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.120 Dilution.
        No user shall modify the use of process water to dilute a discharge, or in any other way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge. The public works director may impose volume limitations on users suspected of using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of volume limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.130 Separation of domestic and industrial wastewater.
        Users shall keep all domestic wastewater including, but not limited to, wastewater from restrooms, showers and drinking fountains separate from industrial wastewater until the industrial wastewater has passed through any required pretreatment system and/or monitoring facility. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.140 User responsibilities.
        Any tenant or sub-tenant under any rental, lease, or other agreement, or other person in charge of day-to-day activities at any place where there is a connection to the system is a user and shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this title in the same manner as the owner, and both owner and tenant and, if applicable, sub-tenant, or other person in charge of day-to-day activities jointly and severally shall be liable to the city for any costs, damages, fines or penalties incurred and/or imposed by the city due to non-compliance with provisions of this title by the tenant, sub-tenant, owner, or other person in charge of day-to-day activities. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.150 Hauled wastewater.
        No person shall discharge wastewater, including septage, industrial wastewater, and other hauled liquid wastes, into the system from a vehicle. The city council may grant a variance to this prohibition, subject to approval, if required, by the regional board. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.160 Vandalism.
        No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent city access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the system, or place any obstruction, such as, but not limited to, rocks, logs, boards, wood or other debris, in any part of the system. Any person found in violation of any of these prohibitions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

 

14.24.170 Commercial garbage grinders.
        No owner of a commercial garbage grinder who is a user may operate any such grinder that discharges any waters, wastes or other substances into the city’s sewer system without first providing, at owner’s expense, the appropriate treatment as may be necessary to reduce the suspended solids, daily flow or objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the limits contained in this title. (Ord. 03-03 § 6, 2003)

Chapter 14.28 DISCHARGE FROM WATER CONDITIONING AND/OR WATER SOFTENING EQUIPMENT
14.28.010 Declaration of purpose.
        The city council of the city finds that it is desirable and in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its residents and invitees to establish regulations for discharge of waste from water conditioning and/or softening equipment in order to comply with the regulations of the California Regional Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region, regarding discharge requirements for mineral constituents into the wastewater treatment effluent. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.001)

 

14.28.020 Prohibition of discharge of wastes except as provided in this chapter.
        No person shall allow, permit or cause any water conditioning or softening equipment of any type to discharge its wastes into the city sewage system except as expressly provided in this chapter. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.002)

 

14.28.030 Registration and permit required for prior uses.
        Any person, who on the date of adoption of this chapter was or since has continued to operate, maintain or use any regenerating ion exchange water conditioning and/or softening equipment on any premises served by the city sewage system shall register such operation, maintenance or use with the public works director of the city and obtain the permit required by Sections 14.28.040 or 14.28.050, of this chapter, unless such operation, maintenance or use has ceased prior to July 1, 1993. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.003)

 

14.28.040 Permit required for use of equipment on July 1, 1993 or thereafter.
        Commencing July 1, 1993, no person shall connect to the city sewage system or cause to connect any discharge from a water conditioning and/or softening equipment of any type without first applying for and obtaining a permit for such discharge issued by the city, nor shall any such connection to the city sewage system in existence prior to July 1, 1993 but after September 1, 1979 be continued or maintained by any person without a permit issued by the city as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.004)

 

14.28.050 Registration and permit required for uses subsequent to July 1, 1993.
        Subsequent to July 1, 1993 any person desiring to install, alter, enlarge or replace any regenerating ion exchange water conditioning or softening equipment on any premises served by the city sewage system shall submit to the public works director an application for a permit providing information regarding the planned installation, alteration, enlargement or replacement, including, but not limited to, such information describing the existing or intended installation, alteration, enlargement or replacement and the method utilized to prevent the improper discharge of wastes into the city sewage system in order to comply with the provision of this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.005)

 

14.28.060 Accessibility to equipment by city.
        Any person using, operating or maintaining water conditioning and/or softening equipment of any type within the city limits of the city shall make such equipment accessible to the public works director or designated representative for inspection at such reasonable times as the public works director may request. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.006)

 

14.28.070 Definitions of “regenerating ion exchange water conditioning and/or softening equipment” for purposes of this chapter.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase “regenerating ion exchange water conditioning and/or softening equipment” means any ion exchange water conditioning and/or softening equipment which is regenerated by the possessor thereof at the place where such equipment is installed and operated. Said phrase shall not include any water conditioning or softening equipment which is serviced by the replacement of a tank or cylinder by a water conditioning and/or softening service. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.007)

 

14.28.080 Written application for permit required.
        An application for permit to discharge or deposit waste water from water conditioning and/or softening equipment into the city sewage system shall be filed in writing with the city on such form as the city shall specify. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.008)

 

14.28.090 No permit granted if needs can be met by another method.
        No permit application shall be granted by the city for regenerating ion exchange water conditioning and/or softening equipment when, in the discretion of the pubic works director or designated representative, the water conditioning and/or softening needs of the applicant can be met by another method which meets the requirements of the Central Coast Region Order 74-81. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.009)

 

14.28.100 Right of appeal to city council from staff decision.
        Any applicant for a permit who is denied by the public works director or designated representative shall have the right to appeal the decision to the city council following the process established in the Buellton Municipal Code in Sections 1.24.010 through 1.24.040. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.010)

 

14.28.110 Findings required of city council before approving appeal.
        The city council shall not overturn the decision of the public works director or designated representative on an appeal filed pursuant to Section 14.28.100 unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city council all of the following.

        A.    That the water conditioning and/or softening equipment has automatic sensing devices which allow regeneration only upon needs and that such equipment is functional; and

        B.     That all water fixtures being served by the water conditioning and/or softening equipment products have water saving devices and that such devices are ones approved by the city; and

        C.     That toilets and urinals are not served by the product of the water conditioning and/or softening equipment. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.011)

 

14.28.120 Permit cancellation if city notified it has failed to meet state water quality requirements.
        All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to cancellation upon notification to city by the California Regional Quality Control Boards, Central Coast Region, that the city has failed to meet the requirements set forth by the Regional Board and addressed in this chapter. Should the city cancel any permit, the permittee shall have thirty (30) calendar days to remove any water conditioning and/or softening equipment which discharges its waste into the city sewage system. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.012)

 

14.28.130 Permits require annual renewal.
        Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance and shall be subject to renewal for annual periods thereafter. Applications for renewal permits shall be filed with the city and shall follow the same procedure as that required for an initial permit. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.013)

 

14.28.140 Application and permit fees to be established by city council by resolution.
        Application and permit fees shall be established by the city council pursuant to resolution. Until such fees are established by the city council the fees charged by the Buellton Community Services District for the application and permit shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.50.014)

Chapter 14.32 PERMITS AND FEES—GENERALLY
14.32.010 Permit—Required.
        No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances or perform any work on any sewer or drainage system without first obtaining a written permit from the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.001)

 

14.32.020 Application for permit.
        Any person entitled to apply for and receive a permit shall make such application on forms provided by the city for that purpose. He shall give a description of the character of the work proposed to be done and the location, ownership, occupancy and use of the premises in connection therewith. The city may require plans, specifications or drawings and such other information as may be deemed necessary. If the city determines that the plans, specifications, drawings, descriptions or information furnished by the applicant are in compliance with this code, it shall issue the permit applied for upon payment of the required fees as hereinafter fixed. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.002)

 

14.32.030 Compliance with permit.
        After approval of the application, evidenced by the issuance of a permit, no change shall be made in the location of the sewer, the grade, materials or other details from those described in the permit or as shown on the plans and specifications for which the permit was issued except with written permission from the city, the building inspector or other authorized representatives. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.003)

 

14.32.040 Agreement.
        The applicant’s signature on an application for any permit shall constitute an agreement to comply with all of the provisions, terms, and requirements of this code, and with the plans and specifications he or she has filed with his or her application, if any, together with such corrections or modifications as may be made or permitted by the city, if any. Such agreement shall be binding upon the applicant and may be altered only by the city upon the written request for the alteration from the applicant. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.004)

 

14.32.050 Special connection fee (latecomer fee).
        In addition to all other charges established by this code there shall be collected, prior to connection to the sanitary sewage system of the city, special connection charges for any real property that can be served by existing sewer house service or lateral or sanitary sewerage facilities of the city constructed by and at the expense of the city for which the real property did not pay its proportionate cost of installation. The special connection charge shall be collected in a sum to be computed by the city as the real property’s share of the cost of the installation. The sum to be fixed by the city shall be fixed on the basis of the actual cost of the installation of said facilities, including all expenses incidental thereto and all engineering, legal inspection, administration and other charges, and estimating the number of acres in the area to be served by said installation in order that a pro rata share of the cost be fixed for each acre or portion thereof, within the area. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.006)

 

14.32.060 Determination of applicable special connection fee.
        The public works director shall determine, in his or her judgment, the applicable special connection fee to be charged for a particular connection. The ruling of the public works director shall be final unless appealed in writing to the city council within five days of notification of the fee to be charged. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.007)

 

14.32.070 Permit fee.
        A permit fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the applicant to reimburse the city for the cost of construction inspection and the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.008)

 

14.32.080 Performance bond.
        Prior to the issuance of a permit for public sewer construction the applicant shall furnish to the city a faithful performance bond or cash in the amount of the total estimated cost of the work, or other approved surety at the option of the city council, the bond to be secured by a surety or sureties satisfactory to the city. The cash deposit or faithful performance bond shall be conditioned upon the performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and shall guarantee the correction of faulty workmanship and the replacement of defective materials for a period of one year after the date of acceptance of the work. Cost of plans and engineering shall be the responsibility of the property owner. This section does not apply to contractors who have provided the undertaking required by Section 14.16.070. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.009)

 

14.32.090 All work to be inspected.
        All sewer construction work shall be inspected and approved by the public works director or designee to insure compliance with all requirements of the city. No sewer shall be covered at any point until it has been inspected and passed for acceptance. No sewer shall be connected to any public sewer until the work covered by the permit has been completed, inspected and approved by the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.010)

 

14.32.100 Notification.
        It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by permit to notify the city in writing that said work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work to make sure that the work will withstand the tests required by the city before giving the above notification. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.011)

 

14.32.110 Condemned work.
        When any work has been inspected and the work condemned and no certification of satisfactory completion given, a written notice to that effect shall be given instructing the owner of the premises, or the agent of such owner, to repair the sewer or other work authorized by the permit in accordance with this code. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.012)

 

14.32.120 All costs paid by owner.
        All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of any sewer or other work for which a permit has been issued shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the work. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.013)

 

14.32.130 Permits for outside sewers.
        Permission shall not be granted to connect to the sewer system any lot or parcel of land outside the city unless a permit therefor is obtained. The applicant shall first enter into a contract in writing whereby he or she shall bind him or herself, his or her heirs, successors and assigns to abide by this code in regard to the manner in which such sewer shall be used, the manner of connecting therewith and drainage in connection therewith and also shall agree to pay in advance all fees required for securing the permit and a monthly or annual fee in the amount set by the city for the privilege of using such sewer. The granting of such permission in any event shall be discretionary. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.014)

 

14.32.140 Special outside agreements.
        Where special conditions exist relating to an outside sewer, they shall be the subject of a special contract between the applicant and the city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.015)

 

14.32.150 Street excavation permit.
        A separate permit must be secured from the city, state, county or any other entity having jurisdiction thereof by owners or contractors intending to excavate in a public street for the purpose of installing sewers or making sewer connections. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.016)

 

14.32.160 Liability.
        As a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit under this title, the applicant shall agree to hold the city harmless against all liability and defend the city against all claims, actions, and litigation, arising out of any work performed by applicant or by applicant’s duly authorized representatives with respect to any permit issued under this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.017)

 

14.32.170 Time limit on permits.
        If work under a permit is not commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of its issuance or if after partial completion the work is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) days, the permit shall thereupon become void and no further work shall be done until a new permit shall have been secured. A new fee shall be paid upon the issuance of the new permit. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.55.018)

Chapter 14.36 CONNECTION TO CITY SEWER SYSTEM—FEES
14.36.010 Connection to city wastewater conveyance and treatment system.
        A.    In addition to all other charges imposed by the city, there shall be charged and collected with respect to all connections to the city wastewater conveyance and treatment system, a wastewater connection and user fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council.

        B.     As used in this section, the term “city wastewater conveyance and treatment system” is synonymous with the term “city sewer system” and shall refer to all facilities maintained by the city for the purpose of transporting, treating, and disposing of sewage and wastewater. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.60.001)

Chapter 14.40 MONTHLY SEWER RATES
14.40.010 Monthly sewage service charges.
        In addition to all other charges imposed by the city, there shall be imposed and collected with respect to each premises connected to the city sewer system for sewage service furnished by the city, a monthly charge in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.65.001)

 

14.40.020 Relief on application.
        The owner or occupant of any premises who, by reason of special circumstances, finds that the rates imposed by this chapter are unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her premises, may make written application to the city council stating the circumstances and requesting a different basis of charges for sewer services to his or her premises. If such application be approved, the city council may by resolution fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises to be effective as of the date of such application and continuing during the period of such special circumstances. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.65.002)

 

14.40.030 Relief on own motion.
        The city council may, on its own motion, find that by reason of special circumstances, the rates imposed by this chapter are unjust and inequitable as applied to particular premises and may, by resolution, fix and establish fair and equitable charges for such premises during the period of such special circumstances, or any part thereof. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.65.003)

Chapter 14.44 BILLING
14.44.010 Billing period.
        The regular billing period will be monthly. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.70.001)

 

14.44.020 Opening and closing statements.
        Opening and closing statements for less than the normal billing period shall be prorated. Closing statements may be estimated for the final period for purposes of expediency to permit the customer to pay the closing statement at the time service is discontinued. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.70.002)

 

14.44.030 One statement for each service account.
        Only one statement covering water and sewer service charges shall be rendered for each service account. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.70.003)

 

14.44.040 Payment of statements.
        Statements for water and sewer service shall be rendered at the end of each billing period. Statements shall be payable upon presentation. If this statement is not paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month service is rendered, service may be discontinued. A reconnection charge and penalties, if applicable, will be made and collected prior to renewing service following a discontinuance. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.70.004)

 

14.44.050 Tax bill collection.
        In the event any charges for water and sewer service remain unpaid at the time specified for fixing the tax rate of the city, if the property is owned, controlled or in the possession of the same person who owned, controlled or was in possession of it during the time such charges were incurred, or if the only transfer made of the property since the date such charges were incurred have been levied against the land served by the city facilities. Such charges so added shall constitute a lien on the land. If the taxes are divided and made payable in two installments, the unpaid charges may be added to and become a part of the first installment. The city council shall include in the statement of tax rate transmitted to the authorities the amount of such charges to be levied against the land served, and such charges shall be included in the tax bill. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.70.005)

Chapter 14.48 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
14.48.010 Charges collectible together.
        No payment of water charges shall be accepted without payment of the sewer service charges. Water service shall be discontinued to any premises for which the sewer service charges are in arrears. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.001)

 

14.48.020 Premises using both sewer and water.
        When premises are served by the city water system, sewer service charges shall be collected together with and not separately from the charges for water services rendered by the city, and all charges shall be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. If all or any part of the bill is not paid, the city may discontinue any and all services for which the bill was rendered. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.002)

 

14.48.030 Premises using only sewer.
        Where the user of the sewer system is not also a user of the city water system, the user shall be billed separately for sewer service charges. Sewer service to a user of the sewer system who shall fail to pay sewer charges for his or her premises before they become delinquent shall be disconnected. The public works director shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall deposit the cost as estimated of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. In the event such arrearages are paid and the user is reconnected to the system, the public works director shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.003)

 

14.48.040 Penalty on delinquency.
        All statements not paid within fifteen (15) days of billing shall be delinquent and a penalty of ten percent of the bill or amount due plus interest at the rate of one percent per month shall accrue for the period of said nonpayment, and shall be collected as a part of the principal amount thereof. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.004)

14.48.050 Suit.
        All unpaid rates and charges and penalties provided in this chapter may be collected by suit. Defendant shall pay all costs of suit in any judgment rendered in favor of city. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.005)

 

14.48.060 Contract.
        All users of the sewer system shall be deemed to have contracted with the city for the services of such system and shall be deemed to have agreed to comply with all of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.006)

 

14.48.070 Violation—Penalty.
        In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any person found to be in violation of any provision of this title except Section 14.52.010 of this title, shall be served by the public works director or other authorized person with a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The time limit shall not be less than two nor more than seven working days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations set forth in the notice. Users of the sewer system shall be responsible for any and all acts of their agents or employees. Upon being notified by the city inspector of any defect arising in any sewer or of any violation of this code, the person or persons having charge of the work shall immediately correct the same. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.007)

 

14.48.080 Public nuisance—Abatement.
        Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this title or any other applicable rule or regulation of the city is declared to be a public nuisance. The city may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial facility during the period of such violation. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.008)

 

14.48.090 Disconnection cost of reconnection.
        As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this title the public works director shall have the power to disconnect the user of sewer system from the sewer mains of the city. Upon disconnection, the public works director shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. The public works director shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.009)

 

14.48.100 Public nuisance—Abatement—Legal costs.
        During any period of disconnection pursuant to Section 14.48.090, habitation of any premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the city shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of said premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there shall be paid to the city reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit arising in the action. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.010)

 

14.48.110 Means of enforcement only.
        The procedures set in this chapter are established as a means of enforcement of the terms and conditions of this title and not as a penalty. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.011)

 

14.48.120 Liability for violation.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by such violation. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.75.012)

Chapter 14.52 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
14.52.010 Damage to sewer works.
        No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city’s sewage works. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.80.001)

 

14.52.020 Powers and authorities of inspectors.
        The officers, inspectors and any duly authorized employees of the city shall wear or carry an official badge of office or other evidence establishing his or her position as such and upon exhibiting the proper credentials and identification in accordance with provisions of applicable law shall be permitted to enter in and upon any and all buildings, industrial facilities and properties for the purposes of inspection, reinspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or otherwise performing such duties as may be necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 93-7 § 1, 1993; prior code § 15.80.002)

Chapter 14.56 PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER
14.56.010 Pretreatment required.
        A.    No user shall discharge wastewater not in compliance with the limitations of this title to the sewer system. Each user shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with this title and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the public works director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the public works director for review, and shall be approved by the public works director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

        B.     Pretreatment facilities shall be constructed and maintained in good working order, and operated as efficiently as possible, at the expense of the discharger, subject to the requirements of this title and all other applicable codes and laws. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.020 Additional pretreatment measures.
        A.    Whenever deemed necessary to protect the wastewater system or public health and safety, the public works director may require a user to restrict the user’s discharge, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

        B.     The public works director may require any person discharging into the system to install and maintain, on the user’s property and at the user’s expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure active management of flow. An IWD permit may be issued solely for flow regulation.

        C.     A user, at user’s sole expense, shall provide, install and maintain one or more gravity separation devices when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of oil and grease or sand that exceed discharge limitations set forth in this title. All gravity separation devices shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director and shall be located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such devices shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at user’s expense.

        D.    The public works director may require any user with the potential to discharge flammable substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.030 Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
        A.    Each industrial user shall prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this title. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify his or her facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this title or of any other applicable rule, regulation, order or ordinance of a governmental authority.

        B.     An accidental discharge/control slug plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

        1.     Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;

        2.     Description of stored chemicals;

        3.     Procedures for immediately notifying the public works director of any accidental or slug discharge; and

        4.     Procedures to prevent adverse impacts from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.040 Industrial wastewater analysis.
        When requested by the public works director, an industrial user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its raw wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request, in a format prescribed by the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.050 Review and approval of facility plans.
        Prior to discharging wastewater to the system, a user required to install pretreatment or monitoring facilities, shall submit detailed plans to the city for review showing the pretreatment facility and operating procedures before construction of the facility. All such plans and construction shall be prepared at the user’s expense. The city’s review and approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this title, and the user shall remain responsible for compliance with all applicable codes, regulations and orders of any governmental authority. Any subsequent proposed changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be submitted to and, if appropriate, approved by the city prior to user’s implementation of the changes. Permits for facility construction are required as set forth in this title. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.060 Sampling station.
        When required by the city, a sampling station of a design and location to facilitate inspection, sampling and flow measurements, approved by the city, shall be furnished and installed by the user, at the user’s expense. Each user shall provide the city with unrestricted access to its sampling station at all times. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.070 Correction of defects.
        When a defect results from improper installation, or installation of sewer facilities with materials not meeting city standards, the person responsible for the defect shall correct it at that person’s sole expense. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

 

14.56.090 Reporting of accidental discharges.
        A.    Each industrial user shall immediately notify the city of any discharge that could cause a plant upset or pass-through or other problem to the POTW, including any slug loading or accidental discharge. Each user shall post notices in prominent locations, such as bulletin boards, lunchrooms, and other places as appropriate, advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Users shall ensure that all employees who may cause such an accidental discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

        B.     Any person who causes an accidental discharge or who discovers an uncontrolled discharge that does not comply with this title, shall immediately notify the city so that corrective action may be taken to protect the system.

        C.     In addition to the immediate notification requirements imposed by Section 14.56.090.A and B, above, a user responsible for an accidental discharge shall file a written report with the city detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge, cleanup and response actions taken and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges. The report shall be filed with the city by the responsible industrial user within five calendar days of the occurrence of the discharge (40 C.F.R. Section 403.12(f)).

        D.    Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, treatment plant or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code, or any other applicable state or federal statute or regulation. (Ord. 03-03 § 7, 2003)

Chapter 14.60 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM
14.60.010 Permit requirements.
        A.    No industrial user shall discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the system without first obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit (“IWD permit”) from the public works director.

        B.     The public works director may require other users to obtain an IWD permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this title.

        C.     Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWD permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and subjects the user to the sanctions set out in Chapter 14.72. Obtaining an IWD permit does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.020 Permitting—User connections.
        Any user required to obtain an IWD permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the system shall obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an IWD permit, in accordance with this chapter, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.030 Permitting—Extrajurisdictional industrial users.
        New users located beyond the city limits that are required to obtain an IWD permit shall submit a permit application to the public works director at least ninety (90) days prior to any proposed discharge into the system. Upon review of such application, the public works director may enter into an agreement with the user that requires the user to subject itself to and abide by this title, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternatively, the public works director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against the user or the public works director may conclude that no such agreement with the user or the neighboring jurisdiction is warranted. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.040 Permit application contents.
        Each user required to obtain an IWD permit shall submit a permit application to the public works director at least ninety (90) days before any proposed discharge. The public works director may require any user to submit as part of an application the following information:

        A.    All information required by this title;

        B.     Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility that are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the system;

        C.     Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;

        D.    Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production;

        E.     Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);

        F.     Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;

        G.    Time and duration of the discharge; and

        H.    Any other relevant information deemed necessary by the public works director to evaluate the application.

        Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.050 Permit application signatories and certification.
        Each IWD permit application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:

 

        “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a System designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the System, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”

 

(Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.060 Permit decisions.
        The public works director shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete permit application, as such is determined by the public works director, the public works director shall determine whether to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit and notify the user of such decision. If no decision is made during such time period, the permit application shall be deemed denied upon expiration of the sixty (60) day period. The public works director may deny any application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit that is inconsistent with any of the provisions in this title. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

14.60.070 Permit duration.
        IWD permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. Each IWD permit shall indicate a specific date of expiration. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.080 Permit contents.
        A.    An IWD permit shall include such conditions that are consistent with the provisions of this title and as are reasonably deemed necessary by the public works director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate biosolids management and reuse, and protect against damage to the system.

        B.     Subject to the provisions of Section 14.60.080.A, above, IWD permits shall contain:

        1.     A statement of the duration of the permit;

        2.     A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval of the public works director, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit;

        3.     Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;

        4.     Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and

        5.     A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.

        C.     IWD permits may contain additional conditions including, but not limited to, the following:

        1.     Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

        2.     Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system;

        3.     Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;

        4.     Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the system;

        5.     Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

        6.     A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those that become effective during the term of the permit; and

        7.     Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the public works director to ensure compliance with this title, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.090 Permit appeals.
        A.    Any person, including any user, may petition the city to reconsider denial of an IWD permit or the terms of an IWD permit by filing a petition for reconsideration with the city clerk, with copy to the public works director, within ten days of denial or issuance of the industrial wastewater discharge permit.

        B.     Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative remedy.

        C.     The petition for reconsideration shall identify and address, as applicable, reasons why the IWD permit should not have been denied, specific permit provisions objected to, and any additional or alternative conditions petitioner seeks to be included in the permit. All legal arguments and evidence, with substantiating declarations, photographs, drawings, etc., shall be included in the petition. No legal arguments or evidence not included in the petition when filed with the clerk shall be considered by the city.

        D.    The conditions and provisions of the permit objected to by the user shall not be stayed pending a hearing on the petition.

        E.     If the city council fails to act on the petition within ninety (90) days, the petition shall be deemed to have been denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit shall be considered final and conclusive administrative actions.

        F.     Parties seeking judicial review of such final administrative petitions shall comply with the requirements set out in Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.100 Permit modification.
        A.    The public works director may modify a permit for good cause consistent with the provisions of this title.

        B.     Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the following reasons:

        1.     To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

        2.     To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or characteristic since the time of permit issuance;

        3.     A change in the system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

        4.     Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the system, city personnel, or the receiving waters;

        5.     Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit;

        6.     Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;

        7.     Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standard pursuant to 40 C.F.R. Section 403.13;

        8.     To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; or

        9.     To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.110 Permit transfer.
        A.    An IWD permit may be transferred to a new user only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the public works director and the public works director approves the transfer. The notice shall include a written certification by the new user that:

        1.     The new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

        2.     Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and

        3.     Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.

        B.     Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the permit void as of the date of facility transfer.

        C.     The public works director shall approve the transfer unless he/she determines that the proposed transferee is unwilling or unable to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.120 Permit revocation.
        The public works director may revoke an IWD permit for good cause consistent with the provisions of this title, including, but not limited to, the following:

        A.    Failure to notify the public works director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

        B.     Failure to provide prior notification to the public works director of changed conditions pursuant to this title;

        C.     Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application;

        D.    Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

        E.     Tampering with monitoring equipment;

        F.     Refusing to allow the public works director timely access to the facility premises and records;

        G.    Failure to meet effluent limitations;

        H.    Failure to pay fines;

        I.      Failure to pay sewer use charges;

        J.      Failure to meet compliance schedules;

        K.    Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the permit application;

        L.     Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or

        M.    Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the permit or this title.

        N.    IWD permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All IWD permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new IWD permit to that user. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.130 Permit reissuance.
        A user may apply for reissuance of the IWD permit by submitting a complete IWD permit application in accordance with Sections 14.60.040 and 14.60.050; such application shall be made at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.140 Continuation of expired industrial wastewater discharge permits.
        An expired IWD permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until a decision is rendered as to whether to reissue the permit:

        A.    The user has submitted a complete IWD permit reissuance application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user’s existing permit; and

        B.     The failure to reissue the IWD permit before the expiration of the existing permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.150 Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions.
        A.    If another legal jurisdiction outside the city (an “outside contributing entity”), or user located within another legal jurisdiction outside the system, contributes wastewater to the system, the public works director may enter into an agreement for wastewater services with the outside contributing entity or user pursuant to this title.

        B.     Prior to entering into an agreement as provided by Section 14.60.150.A, above, the public works director shall request the following information from the outside contributing entity:

        1.     A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the system by the outside contributing entity;

        2.     An inventory of all users within the outside contributing entity that are dischargers to the system; and

        3.     Any other information as the public works director may deem necessary.

        C.     The agreement, as required by Section 14.60.150.A, above, shall contain the following conditions:

        1.     A requirement for the outside contributing entity to adopt sewer use legislation which is at least as stringent as this title and local limits that are at least as stringent as those established under authority of this title. The requirement shall specify that such legislation and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to this chapter or local limits;

        2.     A requirement for the outside contributing entity to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;

        3.     A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including IWD permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement will be conducted by the contributing entity; which of these will be conducted by the public works director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the outside contributing entity and the public works director;

        4.     A requirement for the outside contributing entity to provide the public works director with access to all information that the outside contributing entity obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;

        5.     Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the outside contributing entity’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the system;

        6.     Requirements for monitoring the outside contributing entity’s discharge;

        7.     A provision ensuring the public works director access to the facilities of users located in the outside contributing entity’s jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the public works director; and

        8.     A provision specifying remedies for breach of the terms of the agreement. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

 

14.60.160 Monitoring facilities.
        A.    Each user required to obtain an IWD permit shall furnish, install and properly maintain a monitoring facility for wastewater sampling. This monitoring facility shall be of a design or configuration approved by the public works director, who may require wastewater flow measurement equipment, automatic flow-proportional sampling equipment and automatic wastewater analysis and data recording equipment.

        B.     Each user, as a part of its application for obtaining an IWD permit, shall propose a suitable location and design for the wastewater monitoring facility. The monitoring facility shall be located so as to be safe and accessible to city employees, and shall be constructed in accordance with the city’s requirements, and all applicable local building codes and other local construction requirements. The user’s proposal for a wastewater monitoring facility shall comply with the city’s design requirements and shall be reviewed and, if satisfactory, shall be approved by the public works director.

        C.     The user’s wastewater sampling analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment, and results shall be subject to inspection by the public works director at any time. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times by the user.

        D.    Failure of a user to keep approved wastewater monitoring facilities clean and in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that any sample results are unrepresentative of the user’s wastewater. Flow measurement systems shall be regularly maintained and calibrated in accordance with guidelines established by the public works director and the manufacturer. (Ord. 03-03 § 8, 2003)

Chapter 14.64 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
14.64.010 Baseline monitoring reports.
        A.    Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard by an agency with the appropriate jurisdiction and authority to adopt categorical pretreatment standards, or within one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. Section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, each categorical user currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the system shall submit to the public works director a report which contains the information listed in Section 14.64.010.C, below.

        B.     At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the public works director a report which contains the information listed in Section 14.60.010.C, below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

        C.     Users described above shall submit the following information:

        1.     The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner;

        2.     A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility;

        3.     A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes.

        4.     Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.6(e).

        5.     The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

        6.     The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or the public works director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.

        7.     The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 14.64.090 of this chapter. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 14.64.100 of this chapter.

        8.     A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (“O & M”) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

        9.     If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall provide the public works director with the shortest schedule by which the user shall complete such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 14.64.020 of this chapter.

        10.   Any other relevant information requested by the public works director.

        11.   Signed and certified baseline monitoring reports in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.020 Compliance schedules.
        Compliance schedules shall meet the following requirements:

        A.    The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation;

        B.     No increment required by Section 14.64.020, above, shall exceed nine months;

        C.     The user shall submit a progress report to the public works director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and

        D.    In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress reports to the public works director required by Section 14.64.010.C, above. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.030 Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
        Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the public works director a report containing the information described in Section 14.64.040. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. Section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 14.60.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.040 Periodic compliance reports.
        A.    All significant industrial users, at a frequency determined by the public works director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), shall submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 14.60.050 of this chapter.

        B.     All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

        C.     If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the public works director, using the procedures prescribed in Section 14.64.010 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report sent to the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.050 Report of changed conditions.
        A.    Each user shall notify the public works director of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.

        B.     The public works director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an IWD permit application under Sections 14.60.010 or 14.60.030 of this chapter, if necessary.

        C.     The public works director may issue an IWD permit under Section 14.60.060 of this chapter, or modify an existing IWD permit under Section 14.60.100 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

        D.    For purposes of this section, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty-five (25) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.060 Reports of potential problems.
        A.    In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, which may cause potential problems for the system, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the public works director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

        B.     Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless this requirement is waived by the public works director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by this chapter or any other applicable provision of federal, state or local law.

        C.     A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in Section 14.64.060.A, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.070 Reports from unpermitted users.
        All users not required to obtain an IWD permit shall provide appropriate reports as the public works director may require. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.080 Notice of violation—Repeat sampling and reporting.
        If user’s sampling indicates a violation, the user shall notify the public works director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the public works director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the public works director conducts monitoring at user’s facility at least once a month, or if the public works director samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.090 Analytical requirements.
        All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of an IWD permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.100 Sample collection.
        A.    Except as indicated in Section 14.64.100.B, below, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the public works director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the public works director that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.

        B.     Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.110 Timing.
        Written reports, applications, notices, and all mailings shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.120 Record keeping.
        Users subject to the reporting requirements of this title shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this title and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the public works director. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

 

14.64.130 Right of entry—Inspection and sampling.
        A.    The public works director or the director’s designee shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with the requirement of this title and any IWD permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the public works director or the director’s designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting, sampling, examining and copying records, and performing of any additional duties.

        B.     Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into user’s premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with user’s security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the public works director or the director’s designee shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

        C.     The public works director or the director’s designee shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operation.

        D.    The public works director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at user’s sole expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow shall be electronically calibrated at least every six months and hydraulically calibrated at least every five years to ensure their accuracy.

        E.     Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the public works director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.

        F.     Refusal of access or unreasonable delays in allowing the public works director or the director’s designee access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this title. The public works director may give notice of inspections at the public works director’s discretion, but unannounced inspections are an important part of the city’s enforcement program, and users shall have no right to advance notice of any city inspections. (Ord. 03-03 § 9, 2003)

Chapter 14.68 INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER COMPLIANCE MONITORING
14.68.010 Inspection—Search warrants.
        If the public works director or the director’s designee has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, in violation of this title and/or any IWD permit, the city attorney may seek issuance of an inspection or search warrant from a court in addition to pursuing any other remedies available to the city provided by federal, state or local law. (Ord. 03-03 § 10, 2003)

 

14.68.020 Confidential information.
        A.    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, IWD permit applications, IWD permits and monitoring programs, and from the public works director’s or the director’s designee’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable federal and state law. Any such request must be asserted by the user at the time of submission of the information or data.

        B.     Upon request and demonstration by the user that information or data should be held confidential, the portions of such report containing the confidential information or data shall not be made available to the public for inspection. The entire report, including confidential information and data, shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to the waste discharge requirements or NPDES program, pretreatment program enforcement proceedings or any other permitted action in accordance with applicable federal and state law. (Ord. 03-03 § 10, 2003)

 

14.68.030 Publication of significant violators.
        A.    The public works director shall publish annually, in the daily newspaper with the largest circulation published in the area where the system is located, a list of the users that, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

        B.     The term “significant noncompliance” shall mean:

        1.     Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;

        2.     Technical review criteria violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

        3.     Any other discharge violation that the public works director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, and/or endangered the health, safety and welfare of city personnel or the general public;

        4.     Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

        5.     Failure, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in an IWD permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

        6.     Failure, within thirty (30) days after the due date, to provide any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

        7.     Failure to report noncompliance accurately; or

        8.     Any other violation that the public works director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city’s wastewater management program. (Ord. 03-03 § 10, 2003)

 

14.68.040 Notification of violation.
        A.    When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.

        B.     Within ten calendar days of the service of such notice, the user shall submit to the public works director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.

        C.     Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public works director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 03-03 § 10, 2003)

Chapter 14.72 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
14.72.010 Consent orders.
        The public works director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for the noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 14.72.030 and 14.72.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.020 Order to show cause.
        A.    The public works director may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the public works director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.

        B.     The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the meeting. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. An order to show cause shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.030 Administrative compliance orders.
        A.    When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued until such time as the conditions of the administrative order have been satisfied.

        B.     Issuance of an administrative compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other action against the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.040 Cease and desist orders.
        A.    When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirements, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the public works director may issue an order to the user directing the user to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

        B.     Immediately comply with all applicable requirements; and

        C.     Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

        D.    Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other against the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.050 Administrative fines.
        A.    When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director may issue an administrative complaint alleging the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the provisions of law authorizing imposition of the administrative fine, and the proposed administrative fine.

        B.     The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the user and shall inform the user that a hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days after the user has been served. The hearing officer shall be the public works director or the director’s designee. The user may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the hearing officer shall not conduct the hearing and decide the matter based upon the administrative complaint.

        C.     The public works director may impose administrative fines as follows:

        1.     In an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day for failing or refusing to furnish a self-monitoring report or any other technical report required by this title;

        2.     In an amount not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule order by the public works director;

        3.     In an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation per day for discharges in violation of discharge standards or limits, permit conditions, or prohibitions issued, reissued, or adopted by the public works director; and

        4.     In an amount not to exceed ten dollars per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, cease-and-desist order or other orders, or prohibitions issued, reissued, or adopted by the public works director.

        D.    The amount of any administrative fine imposed under this section, which remains delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days or more, shall accrue interest at a standard rate of ten percent per year. Further, the amount of any administrative fine and interest accrued that remains delinquent after sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the user from which the discharge originated.

        E.     Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action, whether criminal or civil, against the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.060 Emergency suspensions.
        A.    The public works director may immediately suspend a user’s permission to discharge into the system, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that could or does cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the operation of the system, to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare. The public works director may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after the user is given notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the system, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare.

        B.     Any user notified of the suspension of the user’s permission to discharge into the system shall immediately halt discharge into the system. In the event any user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the public works director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, the receiving waters, to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare. The public works director may allow the user to recommence discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the public works director that the threat of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in this chapter are initiated against the user.

        C.     A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful or potentially harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any such future occurrence, to the public works director before the date of any order to show cause or termination hearing under Sections 14.72.020 and 14.72.040 of this chapter.

        D.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring any hearing before issuance of any suspension order and the taking of any action permitted under this section. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.070 Termination of discharge.
        A.    In addition to all other remedies available under this title, federal, state and local law, the public works director may terminate any user’s permission to discharge into the system if the user does any of the following acts:

        1.     Violates IWD permit conditions;

        2.     Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the user’s discharge;

        3.     Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;

        4.     Refuses reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or

        5.     Violates the pretreatment standards in this chapter.

        B.     Any user violating the provisions in Section 14.72.040 will be notified of the proposed termination of the user’s permission to discharge into the system and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 14.72.020 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the public works director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any action, whether criminal or civil, against the user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.080 Appeals.
        Except for actions taken pursuant to Section 14.72.060, all actions taken by the public works director or the director’s designee pursuant to this title may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.24, Administrative Appeals and Judicial Review, of this code. Any appeal to the city council shall include all legal arguments and factual evidence. The action of the city council on any appeal, shall be deemed the final and conclusive action of the city. In the event of a tie vote of the city council, the action of the public works director shall be deemed to have been upheld. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

 

14.72.090 Injunctive relief.
        A.    When the public works director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works director, through the city attorney, may petition the superior court of the county of Santa Barbara for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the conditions/requirements of an IWD permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this title on activities of the user.

        B.     The city may also seek other appropriate legal and/or equitable relief; including an order for the user to perform environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, the taking of any action, whether criminal, civil, or administrative against a user. (Ord. 03-03 § 11, 2003)

Chapter 14.76 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
14.76.010 Civil penalties.
        A.    A user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this title, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day.

        B.     Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other enforcement action, whether criminal, civil or administrative, against a user. (Ord. 03-03 § 12, 2003)

 

14.76.020 Criminal prosecution.
        A.    A user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this title, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.

        B.     A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this title, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or that falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this title shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 03-03 § 12, 2003)


14.76.030 Remedies nonexclusive.
        The provisions in this title are not exclusive remedies. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city may take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 03-03 § 12, 2003)

Title 15 STORMWATER

Chapter 15.01 STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL

Chapter 15.01 STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 20-08. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.010 Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “Stormwater Quality Management and Discharge Control Ordinance” of the city of Buellton and may be so cited. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.020 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of waters of the state and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and State Water Resources Control Board Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system.

 

        All regulated projects, except those exempted in the Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, shall be subject to the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region Resolution No. R3-2013-0032, Post-Construction Stormwater Management Requirements for Developmental Projects in the Central Coast Region. In addition, please refer to the Buellton Stormwater Manual.

        The objectives of this chapter are:

        A.    To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user;

        B.     To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;

        C.     To eliminate, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants that would degrade the water quality of local creeks and streams;

        D.    To reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes and non-point source pollution whenever possible through stormwater management controls, and ensuring that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety; and

        E.     To establish legal authority to implement and enforce stormwater management requirements, and carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.030 Definitions.
        The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

        “Authorized enforcement agency” means employees or designees of the director of public works of the city of Buellton designated to enforce this chapter.

        “Best management practices (BMPs)” means activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the municipal storm drain system and waters of the state. Best management practices include, but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from stormwater; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-stormwater, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. Please refer to the Buellton Stormwater Manual.

        “Buellton Stormwater Manual” means the manual provided to staff and the public which provides the most current applicable best management practices guides, low impact design tools, and post construction requirements and parameters as established by the regional water quality control board and other agencies and accepted by the city of Buellton to be incorporated with city practices and development/construction activities.

        “City” means the city of Buellton.

        “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.

        “Commercial activity” means any public or private activity involved in the storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities or providing professional and/or nonprofessional services.

        “Construction activity” means sites where activities, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.

        “Contamination” means contamination as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(k), as amended, as follows:

        “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.

        “Contamination” includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste, whether or not waters of the state are affected.

        “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance.

        “Hazardous materials” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.

        “Illegal discharge” means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 15.01.080 of this chapter.

        “Illicit connection” is defined as either of the following:

        1.     Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, wash water, and any solid materials and debris to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or

        2.     Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city.

        “Industrial activity” means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(14).

        “Low impact development” means development features designed to reduce runoff and impacts to the post developed site. These features include items such as grass drainage swales, depressed retention/filtration ponds, etc.

        “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permits” means the general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in Federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region (hereinafter, Regional Board) and the State Water Resources Control Board have adopted general stormwater discharge permits, including, but not limited to, the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits.

        “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

        “Nuisance” means the meaning ascribed to nuisance by California Water Code Section 13050(m), as amended, as follows:

        “Nuisance” means anything which meets all of the following requirements:

        A.    Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.

        B.     Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.

        C.     Occurs during, or as a result of, the treatment or disposal of wastes.

        “Pollutant” means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); beverage (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) manufacturing wastes such as pomace, lees, diatomaceous earth, stems, spent grain, spent hops, trub, yeast, caustic and acid cleaners, and waste wine, waste beer, and waste alcohol; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.

        “Pollution” means alteration of the quality of waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. Pollution also includes contamination.

        “Porter-Cologne Act” means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended, California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.

        “Premises” means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

        “Remediation” means the abatement or removal of pollution or contaminants from land or water (including sediments in waterways) for the general protection of human health and the environment.

        “Storm drain system” means the publicly-owned facilities operated by the city by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the city.

        “Stormwater” means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from precipitation.

        “Wastewater” means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.

        “Waters of the state” means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at California Water Code Section 13050, as amended, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.040 Applicability.
        This chapter, including any amendments or revisions thereto, shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on or flowing over any developed and undeveloped land lying within the city of Buellton. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.050 Responsibility for administration.
        The director of public works/city engineer for the city (“director”) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated in writing by the director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.060 Regulatory consistency.
        This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and any amendments thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.070 Ultimate responsibility of discharger.
        The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the state caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger’s reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.080 Prohibition of illegal discharges.
        No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.

        A.    Illegal discharges from industrial and/or commercial sources into the storm drain system or waters of the state include, but are not limited to, the following, and are prohibited, unless the discharge is permitted under a separate NPDES permit, or as allowed by the proper application of BMPs adopted by the city:

        1.     Water from the cleaning of gas stations, vehicle service garages, or other types of vehicle service facilities;

        2.     Water, cleansers, or solvents from the cleaning of vehicles, machinery or equipment, and other such commercial and industrial activities;

        3.     Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles containing soap, detergents, solvents, or other cleaners (individual private vehicle washing is exempt per subsection B of this section);

        4.     Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles, with or without soap, from auto body repair shops;

        5.     Water from the cleaning or rinsing of vehicle engine, undercarriage, or auto parts cleaning;

        6.     Vehicle fluids;

        7.     Mat wash and hood cleaning water from food service facilities;

        8.     Food and kitchen cleaning water from food service facilities;

        9.     Leakage from dumpsters or trash containers;

        10.   Water from the cleaning or rinsing of garbage dumpster areas and areas where garbage is stored or contained;

        11.   Water from pressure washing, steam cleaning, and hand scrubbing of sidewalks, gutters, plazas, alleyways, outdoor eating areas, steps, building exteriors, walls, driveways, and other outdoor surfaces;

        12.   Wastewater or cleaning fluids from carpet cleaning;

        13.   Swimming pool and spa water, unless dechlorinated;

        14.   Wash out from concrete trucks;

        15.   Runoff from areas where hazardous substances, including diesel fuel, gasoline and motor oil are stored, except as allowed by Section 15.01.100;

        16.   Super-chlorinated water normally associated with the disinfection of potable water systems;

        17.   Construction debris, such as, but not limited to, paint, dirt, and wash water;

        18.   Sewage or other forms of pollutants from recreational activities including boating and camping, and from recreational vehicles and boats;

        19.   Wine, beer, and/or distillery manufacturing wastes such as beverage (alcoholic and non-alcoholic) manufacturing wastes such as pomace, lees, diatomaceous earth, stems, spent grain, spent hops, trub, yeast, caustic and acid cleaners, and waste wine, waste beer, waste alcohol, or other associated industry waste.

        B.     The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:

        1.     Discharges from the following sources will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the state when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this chapter:

        a.     Potable water line flushing;

        b.     Pumped groundwater not containing pollutants and other discharges from potable water sources;

        c.     Landscape irrigation and lawn watering;

        d.     Diverted stream flows;

        e.     Rising groundwater;

        f.      Groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR Section 35.2005(20)) not containing pollutants;

        g.     Foundation and footing drains not containing pollutants;

        h.     Water from crawl space pumps not containing pollutants;

        i.      Air conditioning condensation;

        j.      Nonindustrial roof drains not containing pollutants;

        k.     Springs;

        l.      Individual private vehicle washing;

        m.    Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

        n.     Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and

        o.     Flows from firefighting.

        C.     The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the city of Buellton for any discharge to the storm drain system.

        D.    With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the city may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the state. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.090 Prohibition of illicit connections.
        A.    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.

        B.     This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.100 Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit.
        Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, grading permit, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.110 Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants.
        A.    Generally. Any person engaging in activities that may result in pollutants entering the city’s stormwater system shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include the use of premises that may be a source of pollutants, such as parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, business enterprises, dwelling units and open spaces/parks.

        B.     Litter. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, keep or maintain any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or other litter in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, business place, creek, stormwater system, river or any other body of water, or upon any public or private parcel of land, except in proper waste receptacles/containers (for the purposes of trash collection) or in lawfully established waste disposal facilities.

        C.     Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices. The city may adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state as a separate BMP guidance series. Where BMPs requirements are promulgated by the city or any federal, state of California, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or water of the U.S., every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements.

        D.    The director will periodically report to the city council on the status of implementation of the stormwater program.

        E.     New Development and Redevelopment. The city shall require any owner or person developing real property to identify appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants during the course of construction. The city shall incorporate such requirements in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required. In addition, the city shall require any owner or person developing real property to integrate post construction requirements that will control the volume, rate and potential pollutant load of runoff. These post construction requirements shall comply with the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region Resolution No. R3-2013-0032, “Post-Construction Stormwater Management Requirements for Developmental Projects in the Central Coast Region.”

        F.     These requirements may include a combination of structural and nonstructural BMPs, and shall include requirements to ensure the proper long-term operation and maintenance of these BMPs.

        G.    Construction Sites. BMPs to reduce pollutants in any stormwater runoff activities shall be incorporated in any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required by the city.

        H.    Responsibility to Implement and Maintain Best Management Practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections A, B and C, any person or entity engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state shall implement and maintain BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be maintained at the operator’s/property owner’s expense.

        I.      Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, will be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit or stormwater/water quality management plan shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator’s expense. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.120 Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges.
        Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 15.01.180, the director may require by written notice that a person or entity responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.130 Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections.
        A.    The director may require by written notice that a person or entity responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the illicit connection by a specified date, regardless of whether the connection or discharges had been established or approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        B.     If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person or entity can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person or entity may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible party’s expense. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.140 Watercourse protection.
        Every person or entity owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such owner’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, or remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or such owner’s lessee shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.150 Requirement to remediate.
        Whenever the director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., the public works director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person or entity that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of Sections 15.01.220 through 15.01.250. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.160 Requirement to monitor and analyze.
        The director may require by written notice that any person or entity engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the state, to undertake at said person’s or entity’s expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the city of Buellton as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.170 Notification of spills.
        Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S. from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city’s public works/engineering department in person or by phone or email no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city’s public works/engineering department, within three business days of the phone/email notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge, the actions taken to contain and clean-up the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.180 Compliance letter for stormwater management facilities.
        By October 31st of every year, property owners of parcels or premises containing stormwater management facilities shall submit a compliance letter to the public works department. The compliance letter shall certify that the stormwater site design measures, treatment measures and source control measures (as applicable) have been properly operated and maintained during the preceding year, and have been recently inspected and repaired as necessary to ensure continued operation. The compliance letter shall also include certification and signature from the property owner, and qualified stormwater practitioner (QSP). (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.190 Authority to inspect.
        Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director (or the designee) may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.200 Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test.
        During any inspection as provided herein, the public works director or designee may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.210 Access to facilities.
        The city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.

        A.    Facility operators shall allow the city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.

        B.     The city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.

        C.     The city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.

        D.    Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.

        E.     Unreasonable delays in allowing the city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.

        F.     If the city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee (authorized enforcement agency) has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.220 Enforcement and administration.
        Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person.

        Violations of this chapter may be remedied using the procedures set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1.28 Code Violations, Penalties and Enforcement, of the Buellton Municipal Code. These remedies include the issuance of administrative citations (Chapter 1.30). These remedies shall be in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the city to address any violations of this chapter. In addition, the director may require without limitation:

        A.    The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;

        B.     The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;

        C.     That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;

        D.    The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;

        E.     The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs;

        F.     Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs (fines shall be a minimum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per day and equitable to those imposed through violations of the California State Water Code Section 13385 and Federal Clean Water Act Section 301 – penalties of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day of violation and ten dollars ($10.00) per gallon of waste discharged);

        G.    Cease and desist of operations and shut-off of water meter.

        If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.230 Urgency abatement.
        The director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the director, the city of Buellton, its staff, authorized contract staff or other designee is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city of Buellton shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent the city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.240 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
        In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.250 Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 15.01.260 Civil penalties to be deposited in the general fund.
        Any civil penalties collected by the city as a result of violations of this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund for appropriation to fund costs related to stormwater compliance programs. (Ord. 13-05 § 3, 2013)

Title 16 (Reserved)

Title 17 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 17.01 EXCAVATION AND GRADING
Chapter 17.04 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 17.06 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS
Chapter 17.08 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.10 STREET NAMING AND ADDRESS NUMBERS

Chapter 17.01 EXCAVATION AND GRADING
17.01.010 Title.
        The regulations contained in this chapter may be known and referred to as the “Excavation and Grading Code.” (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.020 Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health and property, to control erosion and flood damage, and to promote public welfare, by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use, location and maintenance of grading, excavations and fills. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.030 Permissive provisions.
        The permissive provisions of this chapter shall not be presumed to waive any limitations imposed by other statutes or ordinances of the state or city. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.040 Person defined.
        The word “person” as used in this chapter means and includes any individual person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, public agency, public district or municipal corporation, but shall not include the county of Santa Barbara, the city, the state of California, or the United States. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.050 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter certain terms shall be defined as follows:

        “Applicant” means a person, partnership, corporation or public agency applying for a city permit.

        “Approved” means reviewed and found to be in substantial compliance with requirements of this chapter and the applicable uniform codes.

        “Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill may be placed. Usually a mid-slope drainage device.

        “Building” means any structure used by the public, used as a primary place of employment, used for human habitation, used for storage; or any enclosed barn which is over six thousand (6,000) square feet in size.

        “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

        “Certification” means the attestation of a licensed professional that, based upon the appropriate level of observation and testing, and in accordance with applicable principles of the professional’s training, background and experience, the work in question has been completed and performed in conformity with the plans and specifications approved and the provisions of this chapter.

        “City engineer” means that person charged with the responsibility of coordinating all phases of engineering for the city government. He shall be the custodian of and responsible for all maps, plans, profiles, field notes and other records and memoranda belonging to the city and pertaining to his or her office and work thereof. It shall also be his or her responsibility to enforce all state regulations, ordinances, policies, standards, etc., pertaining to his or her office and work and to delegate authority and responsibilities to subordinates under his or her jurisdiction.

        “Civil engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered by the state of California who makes tract layouts for subdivisions and furnishes the necessary control to achieve the proper angle of cut and fill slopes, the necessary drainage provisions, street and curb grades, storm drain design and other matters related to the geometric finish of subdivisions, shopping centers, condominiums, etc.

        “Compaction” means the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

        “Continuous” means nearly full-time visual observation of equipment and materials used therein, sufficient to permit the engineer to render a professional opinion as to the contractor’s conformance with the engineer’s recommendations, plans, or specifications.

        “Director of public works” means that person charged with the responsibility of coordinating all phases of administration determining policy and procedures and directing the work of subordinates within the various divisions encompassed with the department of public works.

        “Engineering geologist” means a geologist, duly licensed, qualified and capable of applying the geological sciences to engineering practice for the purpose of assuring that the geological features affecting the location, design, construction, operation and maintenance of engineering works are recognized and adequately provided.

        “Existing grade” means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavating or filling.

        “Fill” means deposits of soil, rock, or other materials placed by man.

        “Finished grade” means the final grade or elevation of the building site, slope or terrace.

        “Periodic” means intermittently throughout the course of the project.

        “Rough grades” means the approximate elevation of the ground surface conforming to within two-tenths of that of the proposed design grade.

        “Site” means any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership where grading is performed or permitted.

        “Soil” means all earth material, of whatever origin, that overlies bedrock.

        “Soils engineer” or “geotechnical engineer” means a civil engineer duly registered by the state of California who is experienced in soils mechanics and slope stability analysis. Primary duties shall encompass the investigation of proposed grading sites and tracts as related to the stability of the finished graded product. The soils engineer shall have proper laboratory facilities available in which to perform any and all testing required to properly evaluate materials under consideration. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.060 Chapter applicability—Exceptions.
        A.    Except as provided in this chapter, these regulations shall apply to all new grading, excavations, fills, borrow pits and borrow areas, and to all alterations, changes, additions or repairs to existing excavations, fills, borrow pits, borrow areas occurring after the effective date of this chapter and no such work shall be commenced or completed except in compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter.

        B.     These regulations shall not apply to the following:

        1.     Work in any street, right-of-way or easement, unless the work affects or is involved in the construction of a building or structure subject to regulations of the city building code;

        2.     Working in any street, road or highway owned and under the control of the state, or the city;

        3.     The depositing of rubbish or other material at any dump or sanitary fill operated by the county or by the city or by any agency under contract with the city or county;

        4.     Work involved in the construction of dams or reservoirs regulated by the state Department of Water Resources;

        5.     The stockpiling of rock, sand, aggregate or clay, or the temporary stockpiling of earth in the construction of a building or structure authorized by a valid building permit;

        6.     The operations, work or projects of the county or the Santa Barbara County Flood Control and Water Conservation District;

        7.     Provided a conditional use permit therefor has been issued under an applicable zoning ordinance, the mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling of soil, rock, sand or aggregate, unless such work affects the support of adjacent or contiguous property or structures;

        8.     The digging of trenches by public agencies, or public utility companies or oil companies for the purpose of installing public utility pipelines or underground wires or other public utility services or oil pipelines, where the slope of the surface of the ground is less than one vertical to five horizontal. All trenches in areas where the surface is steeper than one vertical to five horizontal shall require a permit;

        9.     The drilling, maintaining or operating of oil wells by persons, firms or corporations having a valid oil drilling permit and complying with all other applicable ordinances and laws. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.070 Grading permit required when—Waived in lieu of building permit when.
        A.    No person shall commence or perform any grading, excavation or fill without first obtaining a grading permit from the city engineer. A separate permit shall be required for each building site, but one permit may be issued for the main building and all accessory buildings and structures and one permit may include all grading, excavation and fill in one building site.

        B.     In the event all of the requirements of this chapter which are imposed upon any grading, excavation or fill are met in an application for a building permit, the city engineer shall have the authority to waive the permit for such grading, excavation or fill in connection therewith. A grading permit will not be issued for a parcel of land on which no project has been approved. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.080 Grading permit exceptions.
        A grading permit shall not be required in the following exceptions, but in all other respects the provisions of this chapter shall apply:

        A.    An excavation or fill which does not exceed three feet in vertical depth at its deepest point, measured from the natural ground slope, and/or thirty (30) cubic yards of material moved in any twelve (12) month period. The exception shall not affect the applicability of this chapter to, or the requirement of a grading permit for, any fill made with the material from such excavation;

        B.     An excavation below finished grade for tanks, vaults, basements, swimming pools, or footings of a building or structure authorized by a valid building permit. This exception does not apply to any fill using materials removed from such excavation. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.090 Grading permit application—Filing information required.
        Applications for grading permits shall be filed with the city engineer on forms furnished by the city and shall be accompanied by or include:

        A.    A description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract, and street address or by similar description;

        B.     A plot plan to scale (1″:40′ or larger) showing property boundaries with dimensions, legend identifying all symbols and abbreviations, location of existing buildings and structures on the property and within fifteen (15) feet of the boundaries thereof, adjoining streets or easements, present contours and proposed contours (minimum two-foot interval) after completion of grading and details of proposed drainage structure, pipelines, walls and cribbing, and plans for final disposition of all surface waters;

        C.     Quantity and type of material to be graded, excavated or filled;

        D.    Purpose of grading, excavation or fill;

        E.     Source of material to be used for fill and/or location to which excavation material will be removed;

        F.     A statement of starting and completion dates;

        G.    A statement describing routes for hauling material, hours of work and methods of controlling dust;

        H.    Name and address of person responsible for the correctness of work done under the permit and for requesting inspections;

        I.      Plans and specifications when required herein;

        J.      Specifications for erosion and dust control;

        K.    List of plantings to be installed. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.100 Grading permit—Applicant eligibility and bond determined by job size.
        A.    If the quantity of material to be graded, excavated or filled exceeds ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards, the application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the land upon which the grading, excavation or fill is to be made, and such owner or lessee shall also furnish the bond required by this chapter.

        B.     If the amount of such material to be removed is less than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards, the application may be made by the owner or lessee of the land upon which the grading, excavation or fill is to be made, or the application may be made by any authorized contractor or agent of such owner or lessee, and the bond required under this chapter shall be furnished by such applicant. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.110 Permit fees.
        A.    Fees for permits issued and/or services rendered pursuant to this chapter shall be set by resolution of the council.

        B.     Public agencies shall not be required to pay a permit fee. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.120 Permit—Denial, revocation and suspension when.
        A.    A permit shall not be issued where the work proposed is likely to endanger public or private property, taking into consideration saturation of earth by rains, surface water runoff, earth movement or subsurface conditions or susceptibility to erosion. Failure of any officer, agent or employee of the city to observe or recognize hazardous conditions shall not relieve the owner or permittee of responsibility for damages to the city, nor to any of its officers, agents or employees.

        B.     Upon failure to comply with any of the conditions of this chapter or the permit, the city engineer may revoke or suspend the permit and, in either case, shall notify the owner or permittee of such action and the reasons therefor.

        C.     If the operations of the permittee create an unreasonable nuisance by reason of dust or noise, or otherwise, the city engineer may require the permittee to take reasonable measures to abate such nuisance and may revoke or suspend the permit until such measures are taken. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.130 Grading permit expiration.
        Grading permits shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized under such permit is not commenced within one hundred twenty (120) days or is not completed within one year of the date of issue, except that prior to expiration of the permit, the city engineer may grant a reasonable extension of time upon showing of evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented start or completion of the work within the time limits specified. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.140 Permit revocation or denial—Appeal.
        If a permit is denied or revoked under Section 17.01.120, the applicant may appeal to the council. Such appeal must be in writing and set forth the reason for the denial or revocation of the permit and the ground for appeal, and must be accompanied by a full and correct copy of the applicant’s application for such permit. The appeal shall be filed with the council or with the city clerk. After receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall set a date for hearing thereon and cause the applicant to be notified of the time and place for such hearing. At the hearing on such appeal, the applicant or licensee shall present competent evidence and proof that the work proposed to be done can and will be done in compliance with the terms and requirements of this chapter and of any other chapter or laws applicable. The council may hear any other pertinent evidence and make any investigations and require any other reports and evidence which the council may consider pertinent in the matter. After such hearing and making any investigations it deems necessary, if the council finds and determines that the excavation proposed may be in compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other chapters or laws applicable and in such a manner that the resulting excavation or fill will not unreasonably endanger life or property, the council may impose any reasonable condition and order the city engineer to issue such permit, to reinstate such permit upon compliance by the permittee of all conditions imposed. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.150 Bond required—Cash deposit in lieu of.
        The applicant for a grading permit shall file a performance bond, prior to the issuance of any grading permit. In lieu of the bond, the applicant may make a deposit of cash or of a certified check or cashier’s check. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.160 Bond or deposit amount.
        The amount of the bond or deposit shall be fixed by the city engineer. He shall set the same in a sum sufficient to insure prompt completion of the entire excavation project within specified time limits and in compliance with plans and specifications therefor. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.170 Bond form.
        The bond shall:

        A.    Be in form joint and several;

        B.     Name and city as obligee;

        C.     Provide that the term of each bond shall begin upon the date of filing with the city, and shall remain in effect until grading is completed and approved by the city engineer and a notice of completion is filed;

        D.    Provide that in the event of failure to complete the work authorized by the grading permit, the city engineer, subject to the approval of the council, may order and proceed to complete necessary emergency work and the surety shall be bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all costs incurred thereby;

        E.     Provide that the surety assents to any extension of the time limit which may be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.180 Bond or deposit—Conditions.
        Every bond posted and every deposit made pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned as follows:

        A.    That all work will be done in accordance with approved plans and specifications and in compliance with all terms and conditions of the grading permit;

        B.     That all work will comply with provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances;

        C.     That all maintenance shall be performed for the period of time determined by the city engineer and made a condition of the grading permit;

        D.    The surety consents to any extension of time granted the permittee by the city engineer. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.190 Blank bond or deposit when.
        Any contractor or other person engaged in continuous or repeated excavations may post a blanket bond or a blanket deposit in an amount sufficient to insure prompt completion of all excavation projects being conducted at any one time. If the number or amount of excavation projects exceeds the amount of the bond or deposit, the city engineer may require an additional bond or deposit to insure completion of all work being done at any one time. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.200 Permittee responsible for site maintenance—Spillage.
        The permittee and his or her agents shall carry out the proposed grading in accordance with approved plans and specifications, the conditions of the permit and with the requirements of this chapter. The permittee and his or her agents shall maintain all required protective devices and temporary drainage during the progress of the grading work and shall be responsible for observance of hours of work, dust controls and methods of hauling. The permittee or his or her agents shall be responsible for maintenance of the site until such time as a certificate or notice of completion has been granted by the city engineer. The permittee, his or her agents, and each or all of them shall become subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter in the event of failure to comply with this chapter and other applicable laws of the city. No approval shall exonerate the permittee or his or her agents from the responsibility of complying with the provisions and intent of this chapter. If at any time it is determined by the city engineer that material has been spilled upon city streets during the course of hauling material from the site by the permittee, the city engineer shall immediately notify the permittee to remove the material from the city streets and to clean the city streets, including the sweeping thereof. If such material is not removed and the city streets cleaned within forty-eight (48) hours after receiving such notice, the city engineer may cause the street to be cleaned by city forces at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.210 Inspections and grading certificate issuance.
        A.    All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections by authorized employees of the city, and certain types of work, as determined by the city engineer, shall have either continuous or periodic observation by a civil engineer, soils engineer, or engineering geologist as a condition of issuance of the grading permit. Prior to issuing a grading certificate, a final inspection shall be made of all construction or work for which a permit has been issued.

        B.     Exposure of Work. Whenever any work on which called inspections are required, as specified in this section, is covered or concealed by additional work without having first been inspected, the city engineer may require, by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail expense to the city of Buellton.

        C.     Notice. The permittee or his or her agent shall notify the city engineer a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time when the grading operation is ready for each of the following inspections:

        1.     Initial Inspection. When the permittee is ready to begin work, but before any grading or brushing is started;

        2.     Toe Inspection. After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but prior to the placement of any fill;

        3.     Excavation Inspection. After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds ten feet;

        4.     Fill Inspection. After the fill emplacement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts exceed ten feet;

        5.     Drainage Device Inspection. After forms and pipe are in place but before any concrete or backfill is placed;

        6.     Rough Grading. When all rough grading has been completed. This inspection may be called for at the completion of the rough grading without the necessity of the city engineer having previously reviewed the reports;

        7.     Final. When all work, including installation of all drainage structures, other protective devices, and planting and slope stabilization has been completed and the record drawing plan and required reports have been submitted;

        8.     Other Inspection. In addition to the called inspections above, the city engineer may make other inspections of any work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other laws;

        9.     Special Inspections. Where necessary the city engineer may require the permittee to employ:

        a.     A soils engineer to monitor all grading,

        b.     A soils engineer to provide either periodic or continuous soils inspection,

        c.     An engineering geologist to provide geological inspections and certification of all slopes.

        The employment of the above shall not be deemed to render unnecessary any inspections described in this chapter except that on any work requiring continuous monitoring by a soils engineer, the inspections required by this section may be delegated to the soils engineer by the city engineer. If the soils engineer fulfilling his or her responsibility under this section finds that work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the plans and specifications approved by the soils engineer, he or she shall immediately notify the person in charge of the grading work and the city engineer in writing of the nonconformity and the corrective measures to be taken.

        The soils engineer monitoring grading work shall immediately notify the city engineer in writing upon the termination of his or her services.

        All work shall immediately stop upon the termination of the services of the soils engineer whose name appears on the grading permit as having been approved to supervise the grading work, and it shall not commence again until the new approved soils engineer certifies in writing to the city engineer that he or she has reviewed all phases of the project, is thoroughly familiar with it, he or she approves in writing the work already completed or will assume responsibility for making the necessary improvements. Upon receipt of this notice the city engineer shall give written notice that work may proceed. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.220 Standards and specifications (excavations).
        A.    Height. Cut slopes shall not exceed a vertical height of twenty-five (25) feet, unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of eight feet are installed at each twenty-five (25) feet of vertical height.

        B.     Slope. Excavations shall not be made with a cut face steeper in slope than 2H:1V (horizontal to vertical, H:V typ.) or the bedding plane in any exposed formation, whichever is flatter in slope.

        Exception: The city engineer may permit the excavation to be made with a cut face steeper in slope than 2:1 (H:V), if the applicant shows through subsurface exploration by both a soils engineer and an engineering geologist to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the material making up the slope of the excavation and the underlying bedrock is capable of standing on a steeper slope.

        C.     Excavation Setback. Excavations shall not extend below an angle of 2:1 (H:V) under the nearest point of any footing or foundation of any building or structure unless such footing or foundation is first properly underpinned or supported against settlement or a soils engineer has determined to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the proposed excavation will not affect the existing structure. In no case will a temporary excavation over a depth of twenty (20) feet be allowed without prior approval by the city engineer.

        D.    Unstable Slopes. If the material of the slope is of such composition and character as to be unstable, considering all types of anticipated loading and moisture conditions, the engineering geologist or soils engineer shall, by testing and analysis, provide specific criteria for its stabilization by the reduction of slope angle, buttressing, or by a combination of these or other means.

        E.     Cut Slope Setback. All cut slopes shall be within properties or parcels under one ownership. That is, they shall not be divided horizontally by property lines. Tops of cut slopes shall not be made nearer than one foot plus one-fifth the height of the cut to a project boundary, with a minimum of two feet and a maximum horizontal distance of ten feet. If the city engineer determines that the above is unnecessary because of special conditions, he or she may make adjustments as a condition of the grading permit. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.230 Standards and specifications (fills).
        A.    Gradient. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface steeper in slope than 2:1 (H:V), except under one or more of the following conditions:

        1.     A retaining wall or other approved support is provided;

        2.     The city engineer may permit a fill to be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than 2:1 (H:V) if the applicant shows through the investigation and report, to be reviewed by the city engineer, of a soils engineer and engineering geologist, that the strength characteristics of the material to be used in the fill are such as to produce a safe and stable slope, and that the areas on which the fill is to be placed have sufficient strength characteristics to support the fill within reasonable settlement values.

        B.     Gradient Reduction. The city engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an exposed surface flatter than 2:1 (H:V) if, under the particular conditions, such flatter surface is necessary for stability or safety.

        C.     Height. No fill slope shall exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet without intervening benches having a minimum width of eight feet. These benches shall be spaced at vertical intervals of twenty-five (25) feet except that for slopes less than forty (40) feet in height, the bench shall be approximately at mid-height. The benches shall have hard surface drainage conveyances.

        D.    Placement. All fills shall be placed, compacted, inspected and tested in accordance with the following provisions. If the strict enforcement of this section is determined by the city engineer to be unnecessary because of the proposed or probable use of land, he or she may waive these requirements.

        These requirements shall not be waived when structures are to be supported by the fill or where they are necessary as a safety measure to aid in preventing the saturation, settling, slipping or erosion of the fill.

        1.     Preparation of Ground. The existing ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, and other incompetent material. Where the slope of the existing ground surface is 5:1 (H:V) or steeper, the fill shall be supported on level benches cut into competent material. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than 5:1 (H:V) shall be at least ten feet wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least ten feet wide, but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and before acceptance by the civil engineer, as a suitable foundation for fill. Except where recommended by a soils engineer as not being necessary, subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the soils engineer and acceptable to the city engineer. The permittee shall provide periodic monitoring during the process of subdrain installation to conform with approved plans and soils engineer’s recommendations. Such monitoring shall be done by the soil testing agency. The locations of the subdrains shall be shown on a plan approved by the soils engineer.

        2.     Fill Material. Organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Soil containing small amounts of roots may be allowed, providing that the roots are in a quantity and distributed in a manner that will not be detrimental to the future use of the site and the use of such material is approved by a soils engineer and the city engineer.

        No rock or similar irreducible materials with a maximum dimension greater than eight inches shall be buried or placed in fill except as recommended by the soils engineer, approved by the city engineer, and meeting the following requirements:

        a.     The oversized material shall be placed ten feet or more below finish grade;

        b.     A representative of the soils engineer shall be present while the oversized material is placed and covered;

        c.     The reports submitted by the soils engineer shall acknowledge the placement of the oversized material and whether the work was performed in accordance with his or her recommendations and the approved plans;

        d.     The location of oversized rock dispersal areas shall be shown on the record drawing. Rock or similar irreducible materials less than eight inches in greatest dimension shall be placed in such a manner as to prevent nesting of oversize particles and to assure that all voids are filled with fine-grained materials.

        3.     The fill shall be spread in a series of loose lifts, each not exceeding eight inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by sheepsfoot roller or other approved method after each layer is spread. The next lift shall not be placed until the compacted lift is tested or authorized by the soils engineer.

        4.     The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at the time of spreading and compaction to obtain required relative compaction. A soils engineer shall establish the allowable moisture range which minimizes hydroconsolidation for fills which exceed thirty (30) feet in depth.

        5.     All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety (90) percent of maximum density as determined by A.S.T.M. D-1557 or other approved testing methods giving equivalent test results. If the required degree of relative compaction cannot be attained on sloped surfaces, the slope shall be over filled and cut back until the compacted inner core is exposed. Field density shall be determined by A.S.T.M. D-1556 or other methods approved by the city engineer which give equivalent results.

        6.     A sufficient number of tests shall occur to satisfy the soils engineer that all requirements have been met. As a minimum, a field density test, as herein provided, shall be taken for each eighteen (18) inches of fill, or portion thereof, measured vertically from the lowest point of the area to be filled, and for each five hundred (500) cubic yards of fill placed. In addition, in the case of subdivisions, at least one field density test shall be taken on each lot which receives fill. One field density test shall be taken on the slope face for every four feet in elevation of the slope or every one thousand (1,000) square feet of slope for each lot.

        7.     All fills regulated by this chapter shall be tested for relative compaction by a qualified soil testing agency. A certificate of compliance with the terms of this section and the grading permit, setting forth densities, relative compaction and other soil characteristics shall be prepared and signed by a soils engineer. This report shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer before any final approval of the fill is given and before any foundation construction begins.

        E.     Toe Location. Fills toeing out on natural slopes which are steeper than 2:1 (H:V) shall not be permitted.

        Exception. The city engineer may permit the placement of fill slopes as steep as one and one-half horizontal to one vertical, if the applicant shows through subsurface exploration and appropriate analysis by both a soils engineer and an engineering geologist, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, that the making up the natural slope is capable of supporting the proposed fill.

        F.     Toe Setback. Toes of fill slopes shall not be made nearer to a project boundary line than one-half the height of the fill, with a minimum of two feet but need not exceed a horizontal distance of twenty (20) feet. Fill slopes shall not be divided horizontally by property lines. If the city engineer determines that the above is unnecessary because of special conditions, he or she may make adjustments as a condition of the grading permit.

        G.    Combined Cut and Fill Slopes. Combined cut and fill slopes shall meet the requirements of subsections (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section insofar as steepness, height, and benching are concerned except that, where the slope exceeds twenty-five (25) feet in height, the required drainage bench shall be placed at the top of the cut slope.

        H.    Old Fills. All existing man-made fills, on any and all sites will be properly evaluated and recommendations and design criteria for corrective measures shall be included within the soils engineering report.

        I.      Progress Reports. Periodic soils reports by a soils engineer certifying the compaction or acceptability of all fills will be required monthly for projects extending three months or longer. These shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection of cleared areas and benches prepared to receive fill, removal of soils and unsuitable materials, the placement and compaction of fill materials, the inspection of buttress fills, subdrains, and similar devices.

        The city engineer may require sufficient inspection by an engineering geologist to assure that all geologic conditions have been adequately considered. Where geologic conditions warrant, the city engineer may require periodic geologic reports. These inspections and reports may be required to include but need not be limited to inspection of cut slopes, canyons during clearing, operations for groundwater and earth material conditions, placement of subdrains, benches prior to placement of fill, and possible spring locations.

        J.      A written report of the compaction, showing location and depth of test holes, materials used, moisture conditions, recommended soil bearing pressures, and relative density obtained from all tests, shall be prepared by a geotechnical, soils or civil engineer licensed by the state of California shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval.

        K.    The city engineer may require additional tests or information if the conditions or materials are such that additional information is necessary and may modify or delete any of the above listed requirements that are necessary. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.240 Civil engineer supervision permitted when.
        The city engineer may authorize work done under supervision of a registered civil engineer retained by the owner or the permittee, and accept such certifications by such engineer as will insure that the work was done in accord with the provisions of the permit and of this chapter. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.250 Planting and irrigation of cut and fill slopes.
        A.    General. All fill and cut slope areas which are determined by the city engineer to be subject to erosion shall be planted and irrigated with an irrigation system to promote the growth of ground cover plants to protect the slopes against erosion, as required in this section.

        The owner shall be responsible for planting and maintaining all slopes where such is required in this section.

        No project bond, posted to insure planting, shall be withheld for more than one year after planting without specific approval of the city engineer or unless the planting or its maintenance fails to comply with this chapter.

        B.     Minimum Requirements.

        1.     Plant with grass or ground cover as recommended on the approved planting schedule. Other plants recommended by a registered landscape architect will be considered for approval by the public works department;

        2.     A sprinkler system shall be installed to irrigate these slopes as a part of the house plumbing installation, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or public works director;

        3.     The owner shall water the slopes which have been planted with grasses and ground cover at sufficient time intervals to promote growth, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

        Exception: Where the city engineer finds the slope is located in such an area to make hand-watering possible, conveniently located hose bibs will be accepted in lieu of the sprinkler system. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.260 Special precautions and stop-work order.
        The city engineer may issue a stop-work order if, at any time during progress of the work it appears that public or private property is endangered and may impose special precautions to be followed as a condition for continuance of the work. Such special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, flatten exposed slopes, additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing and retaining walls. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.270 Violations deemed unlawful.
        A.    No person, as defined in this chapter, shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any provision of this chapter.

        B.     It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter and each person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

 

17.01.280 Rules and regulations.
        The council may enact rules and regulations not in conflict herewith to accomplish the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 95-04 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 17.04 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
17.04.010 Statutory authorization.
        The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.008)

 

17.04.020 Purpose and intent.
        A.    The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

        B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage and the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and when inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

        C.     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

        1.     To protect human life and health;

        2.     To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

        3.     To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

        4.     To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

        5.     To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

        6.     To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

        7.     To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

        8.     To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

        D.    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

        1.     Restriction or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

        2.     Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

        3.     Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

        4.     Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

        5.     Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood-waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.010)

 

17.04.030 Definitions.
        Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

        “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

        “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited in the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

        “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

        “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

        “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). In such zones, the base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

        “Area of special flood hazard.” See “special flood hazard area.”

        “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one-hundred-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

        “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

        “Buildings.” See “structure.”

        “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

        “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of the floodplain.

        “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

        “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed to the lots (including without limitation, the installation of utilities, construction of streets, final site grading and the pouring of concrete pads).

        “Flood” or “flooding” or “floodwater” means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) — See “mudslides”; and (b) the condition resulting from flood-related erosion — See “flood-related erosion.”

        “Flood boundary and floodway map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

        “Flood hazard boundary map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

        “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the city.

        “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

        “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).

        “Floodplain administrator” means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

        “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

        “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. The term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

        “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures or their contents.

        “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

        “Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state of California and local floodplain maps.

        “Floodway fringe” means the area(s) of a floodplain on either side of a designated floodway where encroachment may be permitted.

        “Fraud and victimization” as used in this chapter shall mean that a variance granted pursuant to this chapter shall not cause the public to be victimized or the conduct of fraud. In examining this requirement, the floodplain administrator shall consider the following facts and the potential that construction in a floodplain may result in serious, costly and dangerous situations: (1) that construction of each building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for a period of years (typically fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years); (2) buildings which are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject to increased risk of damage from floods throughout their lifetimes, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all of the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering which those flood damages bring; and (3) in addition, future owners who may purchase property in the floodplain, without knowledge of the risks assumed, can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

        “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

        “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

        “Hardship” as used in this chapter means the hardship which would result from a failure to grant a requested variance. The floodplain administrator shall require that the need for a variance be exceptional and unusual and that the circumstances surrounding the property for which a variance is sought be peculiar to the property. Mere economic or financial hardship shall not alone constitute grounds for a variance. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot constitute a hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

        “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

        “Historic structure” means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (Department of Interior) or preliminarily ruled by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register of Historic Places; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state of California inventory of historic places in a program which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States; or, (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in the city of Buellton or the county of Santa Barbara pursuant to a program which has been certified by either (1) an approved California program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States in a program approved for the state of California.

        “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually but not limited to an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

        “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, including, but not limited to, closures and drainage devices, which is or are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

        “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)

        “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

        “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

        “Mean sea level” means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the city’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

        “New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulations adopted by this city, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

        “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home or park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured home is to be affixed parcel, including at a minimum the installation of utilities, construction of streets and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads, is in progress or completed on or after February 1, 1992.

        “Obstruction” means, but is not limited to, a dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, levee system, dike, pile abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

        “One hundred-(100) year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

        “Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

        “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Section 17.04.080 of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

        “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and/or (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

        “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and land adjacent to such river or watercourse which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

        “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

        “Sheet flow area.” See “area of shallow flooding.”

        “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood or mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, E, or M.

        “Start of construction” includes substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

        “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

        “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

        “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

        A.    Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

        B.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

        “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

        “Water surface elevation” means the height in relation to the National Geodetic Datum (“NGVD”) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

        “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically. Watercourse also includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.012)

 

17.04.040 General provisions.
        A.    Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

        B.     Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”) or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study” for Santa Barbara County, California, and incorporated areas dated June 3, 1992, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City Hall. This Flood Insurance Study and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at City Hall, 107 West Highway 246, Buellton, California.

        C.     Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, enlarged, extended, expanded, converted, or substantially improved unless the entire structure is made to conform with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Title 1 of this code; provided, however, that each person violating this chapter shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

        D.    If any existing structure shall be destroyed or damaged to any extent by flood or wave action, then the structure, and the land on which said structure was located or maintained shall be subject to all the regulations of this chapter.

        E.     Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter, another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

        F.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

        1.     Considered as minimum requirements;

        2.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

        3.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

        G.    Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards, or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

        H.    Severability. This chapter and the various sections thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.014)

 

17.04.050 Administration.
        A.    Establishment of Site Development Permit. A site development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards established in or pursuant to Section 17.04.040(B) of this chapter. Application for a site development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. The following information is required:

        1.     A certificate from a registered civil engineer stating that the information in the application is correct;

        2.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor including the basement of all structures; in Zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

        3.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

        4.     All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (C)(4) of this section;

        5.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and

        6.     A statement that the standards in Section 17.04.070 have been satisfied.

        B.     Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The city manager, or such member of the administrative staff of the city as the city manager may appoint, shall administer this chapter in accordance with its provisions.

        C.     Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

        1.     Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

        a.     The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

        b.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

        c.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

        d.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

        e.     All development subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be referred to the county flood control and water conservation district for review and appropriate action, pursuant to the terms and conditions of Resolution No. 93-33, establishing a joint powers agreement between the city and said district. All new development, including construction, excavation, and grading, except for flood control projects and nonstructural agricultural uses, shall be prohibited in the floodway unless offsetting improvements in accordance with this chapter are provided. All requirements or conditions imposed by the county flood control and water conservation district shall be met.

        2.     Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.04.040(B) the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

        3.     Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, the floodplain administrator shall:

        a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

        b.     Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.

        4.     Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

        a.     The certification required in Section 17.04.070(A)(3)(a) (floor elevations);

        b.     The certification required in Section 17.04.070(A)(3)(b) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);

        c.     The certification required in Section 17.04.070(A)(3)(b)(iii) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

        d.     The certification required in Section 17.04.070(A)(3)(c)(i) or 17.04.070(A)(3)(c)(ii) (wet floodproofing standard);

        e.     The certified elevation required in Section 17.04.070(C)(2) (subdivision standards); and

        f.      The certification required in Section 17.04.070(E)(1) (floodway encroachments).

        5.     Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards, areas of flood-related erosion hazards, or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal, the interpretation as provided in Section 17.04.080.

        6.     Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 17.04.040 of this chapter.

        7.     Grant, conditionally grant, or deny development permits. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.016)

 

17.04.060 Appeals.
        The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.017)

 

17.04.070 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
        A.    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:

        1.     Anchoring.

        a.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

        b.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection D of this section.

        2.     Construction Materials and Methods.

        a.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

        b.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

        c.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

        d.     Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be installed to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

        3.     Elevation and Floodproofing.

        a.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (A)(3)(c) of this section.

        i.      In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to at least two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

        ii.     In an A zone, elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, as determined by this community;

        iii.    In all other zones, elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation.

        Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor or verified by the city building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        b.     Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

        i.      Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

        ii.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

        iii.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

        c.     Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

        i.      Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screen louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or

        ii.     Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

        d.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in subsection D of this section.

        B.     Standards for Utilities.

        1.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.

        2.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

        C.     Standards for Subdivisions.

        1.     All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

        2.     All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final first floor and pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

        3.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

        4.     All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

        5.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

        D.    Standards for Manufactured Homes. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map, on sites located:

        1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

        2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

        3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

        4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood;

shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

        All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of the previous paragraph will be elevated so that either the:

        1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

        2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

        E.     Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones 1-30, AH and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map will either:

        1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

        2.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use — a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

        3.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 17.04.050 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection D of this section.

        F.     Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 17.04.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

        1.     Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

        2.     If subsection (E)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.018)

 

17.04.080 Variance procedure.
        A.    Nature of Variances. The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

        It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

        B.     Appeal Board.

        1.     The city council of the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for exceptions from the requirements of this chapter.

        2.     The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement of administration of this chapter.

        3.     In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

        a.     The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

        b.     The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

        c.     The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

        d.     The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the city;

        e.     The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

        f.      The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

        g.     The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

        h.     The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

        i.      The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

        j.      The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

        k.     The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.

        4.     Generally, exceptions may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (B)(3)(a) through (B)(3)(k) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the exception increases.

        5.     Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B)(3) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of exceptions as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

        6.     The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any exceptions to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.

        7.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

        a.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and

        b.     Such construction below base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

        C.     Conditions for Variances.

        1.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 17.04.050 and 17.04.070 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

        2.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 17.04.030 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

        3.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

        4.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993; prior code § 8.06.020)

Chapter 17.06 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS
17.06.010 Title.
        The regulations contained in this chapter may be known and referred to as the “Construction and Demolition Materials Code.” (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.020 Purpose of chapter.
        The purpose of this chapter is to reduce landfill waste by requiring an applicant for every covered project to divert a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the construction and demolition materials resulting from that project in compliance with state and local statuary goals and policies and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the stated diversion requirements. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.030 Definitions.
        This section provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this chapter that are technical or specialized. Words and phrases not defined herein may be defined in Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Section 40000, et seq., the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, (RCRA) 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901, et seq. and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time to time.

        “Applicant” means any person, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever required to apply to the planning department for an applicable permit to undertake any construction, demolition, renovation or parking area construction project within the city. An applicant must comply with this chapter.

        “Construction” means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to a previously unoccupied existing facility or structure. Construction does not include a project limited to interior plumbing work, electrical work or mechanical work.

        “Construction and demolition materials” or “C&D materials” means used or commonly discarded materials removed from the premises of a covered project during construction, remodeling, repair, demolition, deconstruction or renovation resulting from construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, deconstruction or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure, or from landscaping. Such materials include, but are not limited to, dirt, sand, rock, gravel, bricks, plaster, gypsum wallboard, aluminum, glass, asphalt material, plastic pipe, roofing material, carpeting, concrete, wood, masonry, racks, trees, remnants of new materials, including paper, plastic, carpet scraps, wood scraps, scrap metal, building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, renovation, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. C&D materials shall be deemed solid waste and regulated as such, whether or not they are potentially recyclable, in all cases where a fee, charge or other consideration, in any form or amount, is directly or indirectly paid by the generator in exchange for collection, removal, transportation, storage, processing, handling or disposal services (fee for service recycling), whether or not arranged by or through a subcontractor, broker, agent, or affiliate of the container supplier.

        “Construction and demolition diversion security deposit” or “security deposit” means any performance bond, surety bond, money order, letter of credit, cash, certified check or certificate of deposit in a form acceptable to the city, submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter.

        “Construction and demolition materials management plan” or “C&DMMP,” means a completed C&DMMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project.

        “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a construction and demolition materials management plan.

        “Covered project” means a project for which a zoning clearance is required to be issued by the city and a building permit is required from the county of Santa Barbara building division for any construction, remodeling, repair, demolition, deconstruction, or renovation project.

        “Deconstruction” means a process to dismantle or remove useable materials from structures, in a manner which maximizes the recovery of building materials for reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported for disposal in landfills and transformation facilities.

        “Demolition” means the destruction, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

        “Divert” or “diversion” means activities which reduce or eliminate the amount of C&D material from disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. See Public Resources Code Section 40124.

        “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty (50) percent of the total C&D materials generated by a covered project by reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to this chapter. If the applicant has not been granted an exemption, the diversion requirement for the project shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the planning director.

        “Feasible” shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code Section 21061.1, as it, from time to time, may be amended.

        “Generator” means and includes the property owner, occupant, or its contractor.

        “Planning department” means the planning department of the city of Buellton.

        “Planning director” or “director” or designee means the city staff person authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter.

        “Project” means any activity for which a zoning clearance and building permit for a building, demolition, parking area construction or other activity, is required. (See also “covered project,” above).

        “Recycling” shall have the meaning ascribed by Public Resources Code Section 40180, as it, from time to time, may be amended.

        “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure that requires a zoning clearance and building permit or demolition permit but does not include a project limited to interior plumbing work, electrical work or mechanical work.

        “Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction and demolition materials.

        “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction and demolition materials from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.040 Covered projects.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each applicant for a permit required by this chapter for a covered project shall complete and submit a C&DMMP unless the project is an exempt project, as defined below. On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no zoning clearance for building or demolition shall be issued unless the applicant for a covered project has submitted to the planning department a C&DMMP in a form approved by the planning director. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be a condition of approval for any covered project. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.050 Exempt projects.
        No C&DMMP or C&DMMP security deposit shall be required for any of the following:

        A.    Work for which a building permit is not required by the Buellton Municipal Code;

        B.     Work for which a demolition permit is not required by the Buellton Municipal Code;

        C.     Any new residential construction project with a valuation of less than or equal to seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00);

        D.    Any new non-residential construction project with a valuation of less than or equal to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00);

        E.     Residential alterations with valuations less than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00);

        F.     Nonresidential alterations with valuations less than or equal to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00);

        G.    Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical permit or mechanical permit is required;

        H.    Roofing projects that do not include removal of the existing roof; and

        I.      Demolition or construction required to protect public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21060.3, as it, from time to time, may be amended. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.060 City-sponsored projects.
        All city-sponsored construction, demolition and renovation projects, except as provided below, shall be considered covered projects for the purposes of this chapter and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. Prior to the start of any city-sponsored covered project, a C&DMMP shall be prepared by the planning director. The city is not required to submit a security deposit for city-sponsored covered projects. City-sponsored projects limited to interior plumbing work, electrical work or mechanical work are not covered projects. City-sponsored demolition or construction projects required to protect public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21060.3, as it, from time to time, may be amended, is not a covered project. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.070 Construction and demolition materials management plans, security deposits, exemptions, appeals.
        A.    Construction and Demolition Materials Management Plans. Each applicant submitting an application for a zoning clearance for any covered project shall complete and submit to the planning department a C&DMMP, on a C&DMMP form approved by the city for this purpose. The completed C&DMMP shall include all of the following: (1) the estimated volume or weight of C&D materials, by materials type, to be generated; (2) the maximum volume or weight of C&D materials that it is feasible to divert, considering cost, energy consumption and delays, via reuse or recycling; (3) the vendor or facility, including name, address, telephone number and contact person that the applicant proposes to use to collect, reuse or receive diverted the C&D materials; (4) a certification by the applicant that it will ensure strict compliance with the city’s exclusive solid waste franchise and acknowledges that the only person authorized to conduct solid waste handling activities or services, including fee for service recycling, is the solid waste enterprise granted the exclusive franchise; (5) the estimated volume or weight of residual C&D materials that would be transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility; and (6) the applicant (or property owner if different from applicant) gives consent to the city or its agent to enter the project site to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the C&DMMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

        B.     Deconstruction. In preparing the C&DMMP, covered projects involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall include deconstruction activities in the C&DMMP, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to being transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

        C.     Review of C&DMMP.

        1.     Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Buellton Municipal Code, no zoning clearance for a building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless the planning director has approved the C&DMMP. The planning director shall approve a C&DMMP only if the director first determines that all of the following conditions have been met: (1) the C&DMMP provides all of the information set forth in this chapter; (2) the C&DMMP indicates that at least fifty (50) percent of all C&D materials generated by the covered project will be diverted; and (3) the applicant has submitted an appropriate security deposit in compliance with this chapter. If the planning director determines that these three conditions have been met, the director shall mark the C&DMMP “Approved” and issue a copy of the C&DMMP to the applicant. Approval shall not be required if construction or demolition is required to protect public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 21060.3.

        2.     Denial. If the planning director determines that the C&DMMP is incomplete or fails to recycle or reuse at least fifty (50) percent of all C&D materials generated by the covered project, the director shall either: (1) return the C&DMMP to the applicant marked “denied,” including a statement of reasons; or (2) return the C&DMMP to the applicant marked “Further Explanation Required,” including a statement of reasons.

        3.     Changes to C&DMMP. If, during the course of construction, the applicant determines that the estimated tonnage of C&D materials to be generated and or recovered from the covered project is substantially different from the C&DMMP, the applicant shall submit an addendum to the original C&DMMP. The addendum shall be processed in the same manner as the original C&DMMP.

        D.    Security Deposits. Each applicant for a covered project shall submit a security deposit with the C&DMMP. The amount of the security deposit shall be calculated as three percent of total project cost or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever is less. The planning director may waive the security deposit if the total security required pursuant to this chapter would be one hundred dollars ($100.00) or less.

        E.     Application for Refund of Security Deposits. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for a covered project, the applicant may submit to the planning director documentation that the applicant has met the diversion requirements of the C&DMMP for the project and apply for a refund of the security deposit. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant has diverted at least fifty (50) percent of the total C&D materials generated by the covered project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the planning director for the covered project. This documentation may include all of the following:

        1.     Receipts and gate tickets from the vendor or facility which collected or received C&D materials showing the actual weight or volume of that material;

        2.     A copy of the previously approved C&DMMP for the covered project adding the actual volume or weight of each type of C&D materials diverted and transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility;

        3.     Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.

        Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D materials diverted, or delivered to disposal facilities for disposal, are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement reasonably available. To the extent practical, all C&D materials shall be weighed on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D materials for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose. Documentation of the foregoing shall consist of photocopies of receipts, weight tickets, gate tickets, and other records from recycling facilities, deconstruction contractors, solid waste enterprises and disposal facilities.

        F.     Determination of Compliance and Release of Security Deposit. The planning director shall review the information and determine whether the applicant has complied with the C&DMMP as follows:

        1.     Full Compliance. If the planning director determines that the applicant has fully complied with the C&DMMP applicable to the covered project, the director shall cause the full security deposit to be released to the applicant.

        2.     Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the planning director determines that the C&DMMP has not been complied with, the director shall determine whether the applicant made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making this determination, the planning director shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D materials transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility, the size of the covered project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D materials. If the planning director determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, the director shall approve the release of the security deposit, or a portion thereof, to the applicant. Any portion of the security deposit not released to the applicant shall be forfeited to the city, and shall be used for the purposes of promoting recycling within the city.

        3.     Noncompliance. If the planning director determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by this chapter within the required time period, then the security deposit shall be retained by the city and a stop work order may be issued for the covered project.

        4.     Partial Refund. The planning director may authorize a partial refund when less than fifty (50) percent by weight of the C&D materials generated by the project was diverted from disposal at a disposal facility. Any partial refund shall be in the same ratio as the demonstrated amount of diverted waste bears to fifty (50) percent by weight of the total.

        5.     Refund of Erroneous Payment. The director may authorize the refund of any security deposit which was erroneously paid or collected.

        6.     Withdrawal of Building or Demolition Permit Application. The director may authorize the refund of any security deposit if the building or demolition permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.

        7.     All security deposits retained by the city shall be used only for:

        a.     Payment of security deposit refunds;

        b.     Costs of administration of the program established by this chapter; and

        c.     Cost of programs to achieve diversion of C&D materials from disposal at disposal facilities.

        G.    Exemptions.

        1.     Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences or anticipates unique circumstances that the applicant believes makes it not feasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that the applicant submits the C&DMMP required by this chapter. The applicant shall indicate on the C&DMMP the maximum rate of diversion the applicant believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that the applicant believes makes it not feasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

        2.     Meeting with Planning Director. The planning director shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the planning director shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

        3.     Granting of Exemption. If the planning director determines that it is not feasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the director shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall designate this rate on the C&DMMP submitted by the applicant. The planning director shall return a copy of the C&DMMP to the applicant marked “Approved for Partial Exemption.”

        4.     Denial of Exemption. If the planning director determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the director shall so inform and give reason(s) to the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such notification to resubmit a C&DMMP form in full compliance with this chapter. If the applicant fails to resubmit the C&DMMP, or if the resubmitted C&DMMP does not comply with this chapter, the planning director shall deny the C&DMMP, and a zoning clearance for a building or demolition permit for that covered project shall not be issued.

        H.    Appeals of Decisions Regarding C&DMMP, Security Deposit, Refunds or Exemptions.

        1.     Appeal. Each applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision made by the planning director to the city manager or the city manager’s designee. The applicant must file a notice of appeal from the ruling of the planning director with the city clerk, with a copy to the planning director within ten calendar days of receipt of notice of the planning director’s decision. The notice of appeal shall include all evidence and legal arguments which the applicant wishes the city, and any reviewing court to consider.

        2.     Decision by the City Manager. The decision made by the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, shall be in writing, stating the legal and factual basis for the decision. The decision shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.080 Violation of this chapter.
        It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to do any of the following:

        A.    To wilfully fail to comply with any provision of this chapter;

        B.     To provide false or misleading information in any plan, report or document required in this chapter;

        C.     To fail to meet the diversion requirement for any covered project. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

 

17.06.090 Prosecution of violations.
        A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be prosecuted in accordance with Chapter 1.28, including Chapter 1.30, of the Buellton Municipal Code. (Ord. 06-01 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 17.08 BUILDING REGULATIONS
17.08.010 Definitions.
        Whenever any of the following terms or phrases are used in the Santa Barbara County Code, each such term or phrase shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this chapter:

        A.    “Building Code,” or “Santa Barbara County Primary Building Code” means Section 17.08.020 of this code.

        B.     “City” shall mean the city of Buellton.

        C.     “County,” “county of Santa Barbara” or “unincorporated portion of the county” shall mean the city of Buellton.

        D.    “Dangerous Buildings Code” shall mean Section 17.08.070 of this code.

        E.     “Electrical Code” shall mean Section 17.08.030 of this code.

        F.     “Housing Code” shall mean Section 17.08.060 of this code.

        G.    “Mechanical Code” shall mean Section 17.08.050 of this code.

        H.    “Plumbing Code” shall mean Section 17.08.040 of this code.

        I.      “Unreinforced Masonry Building Code” shall mean Section 17.08.080 of this code. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.020 Adoption of building code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Building Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article III, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Building Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.030 Adoption of electrical code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Electrical Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article IV, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.040 Adoption of plumbing code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Plumbing Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article V, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Plumbing Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.050 Adoption of mechanical code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Mechanical Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article VI, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Mechanical Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.060 Adoption of housing code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Housing Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article VII, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Housing Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.070 Adoption of dangerous buildings code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Dangerous Building Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article VIII, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Dangerous Buildings Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.080 Adoption of unreinforced masonry building code.
        The Santa Barbara County Primary Unreinforced Masonry Building Code, codified as Chapter 10, Article XV, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the Unreinforced Masonry Building Code of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.090 Adoption of relocated buildings regulations.
        The Santa Barbara County Relocated Buildings Section, codified as Chapter 10, Article IX, of the Santa Barbara County Code, as such code may be amended from time to time, except as amended by this chapter, are adopted by reference as the relocated buildings regulations of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.100 Adoption of private swimming pool regulations.
        The Santa Barbara County swimming pool regulations, codified as Chapter 10, Article X, of the Santa Barbara County Code, is adopted by reference as the swimming pool regulations of the city. (Added during 2010 code republication)

 

17.08.110 Violations, enforcement, and penalties.
        Section 10, Article II, of the Santa Barbara County Code is hereby adopted by reference and amended to include as part of the violation, enforcement, and penalty mechanisms specified in Section 10, Article II, of the Santa Barbara County Code, the violations, enforcement, and penalties provided in Chapter 1.28 of this code. (Added during 2010 code republication)

Chapter 17.10 STREET NAMING AND ADDRESS NUMBERS
17.10.010 Purpose.
        This chapter provides a street naming and address numbering plan for the city of Buellton. These regulations are adopted to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of those who live and work in the city by:

        A.    Improving the response time for fire, police, and ambulance vehicles;

        B.     Expediting postal and business delivery services; and

        C.     Reducing confusion when locating businesses and residences. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.020 Applicability.
        The regulations of this chapter are effective throughout the incorporated boundaries of the city of Buellton. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.030 Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herewith defined as follows:

        “Alley” means an unnamed public or private service road that primarily provides secondary means of access to abutting property but may also provide primary access. Address numbers are not assigned off of alleys.

        “Driveway” means a private access way providing access to a public or private street that does not meet city design standards for a street as defined in the general plan.

        Street, Continuous. “Continuous street” means two or more street segments within sight of one another at an intersection whose centerlines are offset by less than one hundred (100) feet or whose interior angle of intersection is greater than one hundred ten (110) degrees.

        Street, Private. “Private street” means a street providing the principal means of access which is not a public street but is designed to public street standards.

        Street, Public. “Public street” means all existing federal, state, and city public streets and all such public streets acquired in the future that have been accepted into a public maintenance system.

        Street, Segment. “Street segment” means a linear section of street being added to the address numbering system or a section which stands as a separate or noncontinuous street. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

17.10.040 Address maps.
        City address numbering maps are available for public inspection at the city of Buellton planning department and Santa Barbara County fire department. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.050 Road name index.
        The city shall maintain a road name index to identify the existing names of all roads. The index shall also indicate whether the road is public or private. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.060 Legal description of property not affected.
        The adoption and implementation of this chapter shall not affect the legal description of any property. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.070 Existing street standards not affected.
        The adoption and implementation of this chapter shall not affect or supersede city standard details relative to street standards, and shall not limit the authority of the director of public works relative to activities within public road rights-of-way. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.080 Street naming procedures.
        A.    Street Naming Required. A street name shall be required for all public and private streets and for any other streets deemed necessary by the director of public works.

        1.     Exceptions. Public and private alleys, and driveways providing access to twenty (20) or less residential units do not require street names.

        B.     Procedure for Naming and Renaming Existing Streets.

        1.     Who May Initiate Naming. Naming or renaming of an existing public or private street may be initiated by the owner of abutting property, the city council, planning commission, or the planning and public works departments.

        2.     Application and Petition Required. The initiating property owner or other entity shall file a completed street name application and street name petition with the planning department.

        a.     When a naming or renaming is initiated by a property owner, the petition shall be completed with signatures of the property owners or tenants representing at least two-thirds of the dwellings or businesses located along the existing street segment to be named or renamed.

        b.     When a naming or renaming is initiated by a public agency and the affected street segment is a continuation of a previously named street, the petition shall be completed with the signature of a representative from the initiating agency.

        c.     When a naming or renaming is initiated by a public agency and the affected street segment is not a continuation of a previously named street, the petition shall be completed with signatures of the property owners or tenants representing two-thirds of the dwellings or businesses located along the unnamed portion of the street or other verification of support deemed appropriate by the planning department.

        3.     Public Hearing Procedure.

        a.     Scheduling of Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed application and petition, the planning department shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission.

        b.     Notice of the Hearing. At least ten days before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be posted by the planning department in a minimum of three public places along the affected street. Notice of the public hearing shall be sent to all property owners or tenants of parcels abutting the affected street.

        c.     Action of Planning Commission. At the public hearing, the planning commission shall hear and consider all name proposals and objections. If upon conclusion of the public hearing the planning commission finds that one or more names satisfy the requirements of this chapter, the planning commission shall name or rename the affected street and shall make all findings necessary to support that action.

        d.     Recording Action. Upon the naming or renaming of the street, the planning commission, shall enter in its minutes the officially designated name of the street. Thereafter, the street shall be known by the designated name.

        4.     Appeal. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed in writing by any person, agencies, or association to the city council within ten calendar days of the action.

        5.     Notification After Change. After adoption of the street name, the planning department shall notify all the appropriate public agencies and the property owners and tenants of the dwellings and businesses along the affected street of the road name change.

        C.     Procedure for Naming a Public or Private Road Created by the Subdivision of Land. This subsection applies to a street which is located completely within or along a proposed subdivision. Streets created by a proposed subdivision which continue an existing street with a designated name shall bear the name of the existing street.

        1.     Application. The naming of streets created by a proposed subdivision shall be initiated by the property owner or his or her agent. The review and approval or proposed street names shall occur as part of the tentative map process.

        2.     Review and Approval. Proposed street names shown on the tentative map shall be approved by the planning department in consultation with the county fire department and county sheriff’s department. The approved names shall be shown on the tentative map and on the final map submitted for approval and recordation.

        D.    Street Name Selection.

        1.     Objectives. Proposed street names should be pleasant sounding; easy to read (so that the public, and children in particular, can readily pronounce the name in an emergency); and add to pride of home and community.

        2.     Criteria. Street names shall meet the following standards:

        a.     Street names shall not be duplicated within the area served by the same United States post office or police or fire department. No name should duplicate another street name used elsewhere in the county. Similar sounding names are considered duplicates regardless of spelling.

        b.     Streets are encouraged to be named after family surnames prominent in Santa Barbara County history, even if family members still reside in the area.

        c.     Street names shall have less than twenty-four (24) letters, including punctuation, spacing and road classification (e.g., lane, way, street).

        d.     Street names shall be easy to pronounce and spell.

        e.     Street names shall be grammatically correct whether in English or a foreign language.

        f.      Street names shall include an appropriate road classification (e.g., street, lane, way, etc.).

        3.     Continuity.

        a.     A continuous street, or one proposed to be continuous, shall have the same name throughout its length.

        b.     If an otherwise continuous street is interrupted by a drainage channel, freeway, railroad, etc., with no planned connection, the segments shall have different names.

        c.     Where streets intersect at an interior angle of one hundred ten (110) degrees or less, each segment shall be given a different name if doing so will reduce confusion when locating an address.

        4.     Extra Words. Unnecessary words are to be avoided. Words that may be used are:

        a.     “East,” “west,” “north,” and “south” indicating direction from a numbering base line; and

        b.     “Street,” “road,” “place,” “way,” “lane,” etc., indicating road classification in English.

        E.     Street Name Signs.

        1.     Objectives.

        a.     Street name signs should be clearly visible to passing motorists.

        b.     The letters and numbers used should contrast with the background color and should be large enough to be legible from a vehicle on the roadway.

        2.     Signs for Private Streets. The property owners shall install and maintain permanent street name signs for all private streets.

        a.     All street name signs shall be installed per the prevailing city standard requirements.

        b.     All street name signs for private streets shall adhere to the requirements of Section 17.10.080(E)(3).

        c.     Private owner(s) responsible for private street maintenance are responsible for providing and maintaining street name signs.

        3.     Signs for Public Streets. Agencies responsible for street maintenance are responsible for providing street name signs for all streets within their jurisdiction. Street name signs for public streets shall meet the requirements for city standard street name signs as approved by the director of public works. The department of public works is responsible for providing street name signs for all city roads in conformance with the standards of this chapter.

        4.     Signs for Existing Streets Affected by Subdivision. The property owner shall install street name signs at unsigned intersections to provide identification for the subdivision as determined by the subdivision review process:

        a.     Street name signs shall be required for all street created by the subdivision.

        b.     Street name signs may be required for existing streets providing access to the subdivision.

        c.     Street name signs shall meet the requirements for city standard street name signs as approved by the director of public works.

        F.     Fees. A nonrefundable fee may be required to process a street name application submitted by a private party. This fee shall be established by the city council through a resolution. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.090 Address numbers—Procedures, standards, display.
        A.    Procedure for Assigning Address Numbers.

        1.     Assignment of Number. The planning department, in consultation with the county sheriff and fire departments, shall determine and assign all address numbers and shall issue such numbers to property owners and occupants. A record of all assigned numbers shall be maintained by the planning department, county fire department, and county sheriff’s department and shall be available for public inspection during business hours.

        2.     Notification of Change. If an address number is changed, the owner and tenant in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in writing by the planning department at least ten days prior to the effective date.

        B.     Standards for Address Numbers. Address numbers shall be determined according to the incremental distance between system grid lines and the following section standards when applicable:

        1.     Multiple Units. Separate internal units within residential and business complexes may be identified by a suffix (apartment, suite, space, unit, etc.) determined by the planning department in consultation with the property owner, emergency service agencies, and the United States postal service.

        2.     Corner Lots. Corner lots will be addressed from the street upon which the principal entrance faces; except when the principal entrance is not visible from that street or is inaccessible for fire access from that street, then the parcel shall be addressed from the street intersected by the driveway.

        3.     Parcels Less Than One Acre. The address shall be assigned at the center point of the parcel frontage.

        4.     Parcels Greater Than One Acre. The address shall be assigned where the driveway intersects the parcel frontage.

        5.     Unnamed Streets/Alleys. The address number shall be assigned corresponding to the numbering on the street where the unnamed/alley originated.

        6.     Vacant Lots. Vacant lots may be assigned an address number at the center point of the parcel frontage. This pre-assigned address may be changed at the time a building permit is issued in order to comply with this chapter.

        7.     Accessory Structures. Accessory structures will not be issued an address number unless the property owner can demonstrate special circumstances requiring a separate number.

        C.     Display of Address Numbers.

        1.     New Construction. The property owner shall display the assigned address number before requesting a final building inspection. The address number shall be displayed in compliance with paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of this subsection.

        2.     Existing Structures. Within thirty (30) days after receiving written notification of an address change, the owner or tenant shall display the number in compliance with paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of this subsection and shall remove any obsolete number.

        3.     Size of Numbers. All address numbers shall be a minimum height of three inches, reflective, and a color contrasting to the background color.

        4.     Number Location. Address numbers shall be placed at front doors, on mailboxes, on private lamp posts, near garage doors, at driveway entrances, or other places of similar proximity, so that the number is visible from the public right-of-way.

        5.     Number Location for Obscured Structures. Where residences or businesses are not clearly visible from the street, address numbers shall be posted on a marker other than a mailbox. The address number shall be elevated at least three feet from the ground for clear visibility and easy directional identification. This section also applies to the names of streets with private driveways or forks. The address numbers of the homes on the private driveway shall be posted on the named street and shall include a directional arrow to indicate location of the residence or business.

        6.     Mailboxes. When the mailbox of a residence or business is located on the same street as the residence or business, only the number need be posted on the box. When the mailbox and building are located on separate streets, both the street name and address number are required to be placed on the mailbox. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.100 Administration.
        A.    Issuing Agency. All street names and address numbers shall be issued by the planning department in compliance with this chapter.

        B.     Street Name Signs. Street name signs along city-maintained roads shall be installed by the public works department or at its direction. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

 

17.10.110 Enforcement.
        A.    Enforcement Responsibility.

        1.     Planning Department. It is the duty of the planning department to enforce this chapter and all of its provisions.

        2.     Santa Barbara County Building and Safety Division. The Santa Barbara County Building and Safety Division shall require the installation of address numbers in compliance with this chapter for any construction associated with the issuance of a building permit.

        B.     Penalties. Those who fail to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.28 of the Buellton Municipal Code. (Ord. 11-01 § 4, 2011)

Title 18 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 18.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 18.02 TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
Chapter 18.04 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
Chapter 18.06 CERTIFICATES, ADJUSTMENTS, AND OTHER PROCEDURES
Chapter 18.08 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 18.10 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS, DEDICATIONS AND AGREEMENTS
Chapter 18.12 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 18.20 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS

Chapter 18.01 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
18.01.010 Title and purpose.
        This title is the subdivision ordinance of the city, Title 18 of the Buellton Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as this “title.” This title is enacted to provide regulations for the subdivision of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, Title 7, Section 4, Division 2 of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the “Map Act”), implement the Buellton general plan, and more particularly, to avoid:

        A.    The creation of new parcels of inadequate size and poor design;

        B.     The development of roads of inadequate width, or improper alignment, grade or improvements;

        C.     The lowering of property values and the loss of opportunity for the satisfactory overall development of neighborhoods caused by successive, uncontrolled or haphazard subdivisions;

        D.    Excessive costs to the city for providing services as a result of new subdivisions not adequately paying for the costs of services they demand. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.010)

 

18.01.020 Scope and applicability.
        A.    Where Applicable. The provisions of this title apply to any subdivision of real property within the city (hereafter referred to as the “city”), except as otherwise provided by this title, state or federal law.

        B.     Compliance with Subdivision Ordinance Required. It is unlawful, and a violation of this code, for any person to subdivide any real property within the city without fully complying with all applicable provisions of this title. The penalties for violation of the provisions of this title and procedures for enforcement are established by Chapter 18.10 of this title.

        C.     Conflicting Provisions. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this title and the provisions of the Buellton zoning ordinance (Title 19 of this code), or any other applicable provision of this code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act (Division 2 of the California Government Code), the Map Act shall control. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.020)

 

18.01.030 Subdivision map approval requirements and exemptions.
        A.    Subdivision Approval Required. Any subdivision of land in the city shall require the filing and approval of a tentative map in compliance with Chapter 18.01 of this title, and:

        1.     A parcel map (Sections 18.04.100 et seq.) for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels, with or without a designated remainder in compliance with Chapter 1, Article 2 of the Map Act; or

        2.     A final map (Sections 18.04.200 et seq.) for a subdivision of five or more parcels, except as provided in subsection B of this section.

        B.     Exemptions—No Subdivision Approval Required. As provided by Article 1, Chapter 1 of the Map Act, the following subdivisions do not require the filing or approval of tentative, parcel or final maps:

        1.     The financing or leasing of: apartments, or similar spaces within apartment buildings, mobile-home parks or trailer parks; or “granny” units or secondary units in compliance with Government Code Sections 65852.1 or 65852.2, respectively.

        2.     The financing or leasing of: offices, stores or similar spaces within industrial or commercial buildings; existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel.

        3.     The financing or leasing of any parcel or portion of a parcel, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on the same site, if the Buellton zoning title (Title 19 of this code) requires a conditional use permit for the project.

        4.     Mineral, oil or gas leases.

        5.     A lot line adjustment processed in compliance with Sections 18.06.100 et seq.

        6.     Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

        7.     The conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to condominiums, if the conversion satisfies the requirements of Map Act Sections 66412(g) or 66412(h), respectively.

        8.     Any conveyance of land to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for rights-of-way.

        9.     The conversion of certain mobilehome parks to condominiums as provided by Map Act Section 66428(b). (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.030)

 

18.01.040 Issuance of building or development permits.
        No building permit or land use permit shall be issued if the planning director has first determined that the subject parcel has either:

        A.    Not been divided as required by this title; or

        B.     If divided in violation of this title, has not complied with the conditions stated in a recorded conditional certificate of compliance in compliance with Sections 18.06.210 et seq. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.040)

 

18.01.100 Administrative responsibility.
        It shall be the responsibility of the Buellton planning department and its director, the city engineer, the planning commission (hereafter referred to as the “commission”), city council (hereafter referred to as the “council”), and other affected city departments, to administer and enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.100)

 

18.01.110 Planning department.
        The director or designee shall be responsible for the general administration of this title, and for the processing of tentative maps for all types of subdivisions; for notifying and furnishing information to interested persons and agencies; for coordination, accumulation and presentation of information to the commission and council on subdivision matters; for making recommendations relating to the overall design of land divisions including land for recreational purposes; and for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this title pertaining to tentative maps. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.110)

18.01.120 Subdivision committee.
        A.    Authority and Duties. The subdivision committee is established as an official advisory agency in compliance with Map Act Section 66415, and is assigned the duties of making investigations and advisory reports recommending approval or disapproval, and conditions of approval on the design and improvements of subdivision applications. The subdivision committee is also empowered to evaluate alleged illegal lots and to determine whether such lots have been created in violation of this title, in compliance with Chapter 18.10, to review and approve lot line adjustments in compliance with Chapter 18.06, and to review and approve conditional certificates of compliance in compliance with Chapter 18.06.

        B.     Membership and Meetings. The committee shall be composed of the following Buellton officials or their designated representatives, as voting members:

        1.     The planning director, who shall chair the committee;

        2.     The city engineer;

        3.     The fire chief; and

        4.     The public works director.

        Meetings of the subdivision committee shall be called by the planning director. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.120)

 

18.01.130 Duties of city officials.
        The following city departments, and officials or their designated representatives, shall assist in the administration of this title by making recommendations on proposed subdivisions and performing other duties as follows:

        A.    City Engineer. Shall be responsible for recommendations about geology, drainage or flooding conditions that may affect the public, as well as grading, stability, and erosion control in relation to lot access and building sites, streets, utilities, improvements within street rights-of-way, and drainage affecting streets, and for:

        1.     Processing parcel and final maps and coordinating the approvals of other officials involved with the maps.

        2.     Presentation of final maps to the council.

        3.     The approval of parcel maps, as provided by Map Act Section 66463(b).

        4.     Reviewing engineering or land surveying conditions of approval that are to be imposed on a tentative map, to determine compliance with accepted engineering or surveying practices.

        B.     Fire Chief. Shall be responsible for recommendations about fire prevention and protection.

        C.     Police Chief. Shall be responsible for recommendations about crime prevention and public safety.

        D.    Public Works Director. Shall be responsible for recommendations on water and sewer service.

        Recommendations prepared in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the planning director for forwarding to the commission and/or council. Each city official shall be responsible for making any inspections necessary to formulate their recommendations and thereby ensure compliance with the provisions of this title and any conditions of approval of a tentative map adopted in compliance with Section 18.02.230 of this title. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.130)

 

18.01.140 Commission and council.
        A.    The Buellton planning commission is designated to be the appeal board in compliance with Map Act Section 66416, to hear and decide upon appeals of the recommendations of the subdivision committee on tentative maps and their conditions of approval. The commission shall also serve as an advisory agency in compliance with Map Act Section 66415 by conducting public hearings and making recommendations to the council on tentative maps.

        B.     The city council is also designated as an appeal board in compliance with Map Act Section 66416, to decide upon appeals of decisions of the commission on tentative maps and their conditions of approval. The council shall also perform all duties assigned to the legislative body by the Map Act for the processing of subdivisions. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.140)

 

18.01.200 Notice of judicial challenge.
        At least thirty (30) days prior to filing any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the commission or council concerning a tentative, parcel or final map, or any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, written notice shall be served upon the council detailing the nature of the conduct or action intended to be challenged. This section is not intended to extend or toll in any way the statute of limitations provided in Government Code Section 66499.37. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.200)

 

18.01.210 Partial invalidation of subdivision title.
        If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this title is for any reason held to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. It is declared that this title, and each section, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and word thereof, would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more of such portions of this title be declared invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.01.210)

Chapter 18.02 TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING
18.02.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter establishes procedures for the preparation, filing, processing, and approval or disapproval of tentative map applications. This chapter also sets time limits for the expiration of approved tentative maps and procedures for appeals. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.010)

 

18.02.100 Processing of applications.
        Tentative map applications shall be prepared, filed with the city, accepted for processing, and reviewed by city staff in compliance with Sections 18.02.110 through 18.02.180 of this chapter. Review and approval or disapproval of a tentative map application by the planning commission and city council shall then occur as provided by Sections 18.02.200 et seq. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.100)

 

18.02.110 Tentative map application contents.
        Tentative map submittals shall include the following information and materials, as well as any additional materials required by this chapter:

        A.    Application Form and Fee. Tentative maps shall be accompanied by the appropriate application form furnished by the department, and the fee required by the city fee resolution.

        B.     Tentative Map. The tentative map shall be accurately drawn, to the scale specified by this section. The department shall reject maps containing inaccurate, insufficient, or incomplete information, and shall require that the tentative map be drawn by a qualified registered civil engineer, or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall contain the following information, as well as any other information deemed necessary by the director:

        1.     Size, Scale, Date, Number. The tentative map shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches in size and be drawn to a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, unless another scale is approved by the director. The map shall show the date the map was prepared, a north arrow, the scale, and the tentative map number furnished by the department.

        2.     Names and Addresses. The names, addresses and phone numbers of each owner of record, the subdivider, and the engineer, surveyor or other person who prepared the map.

        3.     Site Location Sketch. A sketch showing the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to the roads and properties in the surrounding area, and an ownership sketch, showing all land contiguous to the land proposed for division, in which the subdivider has any ownership interest, or has previously divided.

        4.     Record Data. The following information for each of the original parcels being divided:

        a.     Assessor’s parcel numbers.

        b.     The parcel boundary lines, based on survey data or information of record, and the area of the parcels shown in square feet or acres to the nearest tenth.

        5.     Proposed Parcels. The proposed lot lines with dimensions in feet, and both the gross and net area of each proposed lot in square feet or acres, to the nearest tenth. Each proposed parcel on the tentative map shall be assigned an individual, consecutive number. A distinctive border shall be provided on the map to show the boundaries of the land to be divided.

        6.     Existing Uses and Structures. All dwellings, buildings, fences, other aboveground or underground structures, wells, septic tanks, and any other improvements, shall be accurately located, identified and drawn to scale. The distance from existing structures to the boundary lines of the new parcels shall be shown. Indicate any existing buildings and structures to be removed.

        7.     Proposed Uses. If more than one land use is proposed for the property, show the parcel or parcels proposed for each use. Also, show details on the type and location of street lighting, tree planting and public areas proposed.

        8.     Streets and Roads. The locations and names of all public or private highways, streets, roads, and ways within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision; and any new street names proposed by the subdivider.

        9.     Easements and Utilities. The locations, purpose and width of all existing and proposed easements and appurtenant utilities.

        10.   Landforms and Vegetation. The approximate location, width and direction of flow of any watercourses, drainage channels, or existing drainage structures.

        a.     Slopes. Lines showing the direction of slope and approximate percent of grade, or sufficient contour lines and elevations to show the general contour of the land.

        b.     Flooding and Other Hazards. Areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, as applicable. The location of any underground structures and/or any other hazards within the subdivision or within two hundred (200) feet of the site.

        11.   Copies of Tentative Map. The application shall be accompanied by the number of copies of the tentative map specified by the city application form. All tentative map applications shall include one reproducible copy of the map, and one copy reduced to eight and one-half by eleven (11) inches.

        C.     Subdivider’s Statements. The following information shall either appear on or be submitted in narrative or list form along with the tentative map:

        1.     Description of Existing Uses. The existing and proposed uses of the property shall be described in detail.

        2.     Improvements. Description of the improvements and public utilities proposed to be made or installed and the proposed timing of completion of such improvements.

        3.     Justification for Variances or Exceptions. A statement and specific justification for any variances requested from the provisions of Title 19 of this code, any exceptions to this title in compliance with Section 18.02.530 of this chapter, or a waiver of parcel map in compliance with Section 18.04.110 of this title.

        D.    Public Hearing Notice Materials. Stamped, number ten envelopes addressed to each owner of property situated within three hundred (300) feet of the property being divided and any contiguous property also owned by the applicant (excluding roads), and each of the public entities that will provide services for the subdivision (e.g., school district, etc.), and a separate list of the names, addresses and assessor’s parcel numbers of the property owners and service providers.

        E.     Additional Documents. The following additional documents shall be filed with the tentative map and application:

        1.     Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions. A copy of any existing or proposed conditions, covenants and restrictions, or a statement that none exist or are proposed.

        2.     Preliminary Grading and Drainage Plan. A proposed plan for collecting and channeling storm water run-off and other drainage onto, within and from the subdivision, prepared by a registered civil engineer. The plan shall also show the cut/fill quantities and preliminary grades for all areas in the proposed subdivision.

        3.     Environmental Assessment Questionnaire. A completed environmental assessment questionnaire, on the forms furnished by the department.

        4.     Landscaping Plan. A subdivision landscaping plan shall be submitted for subdivisions of five or more parcels. The plan shall provide for street trees on each proposed parcel, and the landscaping, irrigation and maintenance of any common areas or other open space areas within the subdivision.

        5.     Mobilehome Park Conversion Report. If the tentative map is for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the application shall also include a report on the impact of the conversion on the displaced residents of the mobilehome park, pursuant to Map Act Section 66427.4.

        6.     Soils Report. A preliminary soils report prepared by a registered civil engineer. This provision may be waived by the city engineer upon receipt of a request if it is determined unnecessary because of previous knowledge about the soil qualities within the subdivision.

        7.     Title Report. Two copies of a preliminary title report concerning the property to be divided, prepared within sixty (60) days of the date of application submittal. In addition to detailing the ownership of the property to be divided, the title report shall also verify the existence of deeded access from the property to be divided to a city road or state highway.

        8.     Other Information. The application shall also include any other information or materials deemed necessary by the director. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.110)

 

18.02.120 Application filing and acceptance.
        Tentative map applications shall be submitted to the department for processing. The department shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before the applications are accepted as being complete and officially filed.

        A.    Determination of Completeness. Within thirty (30) days of submittal, the department shall determine whether an application includes the information required by this title. The applicant shall be informed by a letter either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, must be provided. When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall be in addition to the time within which the determination of completeness must occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by subsection C of this section.

        B.     Appeal of Determination. Where the department has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the information requested by the department is not required by this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance, or the general plan, the applicant may file an administrative appeal as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this chapter.

        C.     Expiration of Application. If a complete application is not submitted by the applicant within one year after the first filing with the department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn. A new application may then be submitted as set forth by this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.120)

 

18.02.130 Referral to affected agencies.
        Review of tentative map applications by the department will include referral to the following agencies, as well as any other city department, state or federal agency, or other individual or group that the department believes may have authority or expertise relevant to the issues raised by the subdivision. The purpose of referral is to enable interested and affected agencies to provide the city with comments and recommendations relative to their areas of responsibility. Referral shall occur within five days of the filing of a tentative map, and agency responses shall be received by the department within twenty (20) days of referral.

        A.    Caltrans. The state Department of Transportation shall be referred any tentative map or conditional certificate of compliance involving property adjacent to a state highway.

        B.     Fire Department. The city fire department shall be referred any tentative map, conditional certificate of compliance, or lot line adjustment.

        C.     Flood Control District. The flood control district shall be referred any tentative maps, conditional certificates of compliance, and lot line adjustments, that are contiguous to the Santa Ynez River, Thumbelina Creek, Zaca Creek, or Petersen Creek.

        D.    Public Utilities. Public utility companies including, but not limited to, providers of electrical, gas, telephone, cable TV, and other services shall be referred any tentative map or conditional certificate of compliance.

        E.     Public Works. The public works department shall be referred any tentative maps, conditional certificates of compliance, and lot line adjustments.

        F.     School Districts. Tentative maps shall be referred to the governing board of the Buellton School District and Santa Ynez Valley High School District. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.130)

 

18.02.140 Environmental review.
        After acceptance of an application as complete, the department shall complete an environmental review of the project as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), following the procedures and time limits set forth in the city’s environmental review procedures. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.140)

 

18.02.150 Staff report.
        A staff report shall be prepared by the department that evaluates the proposed subdivision as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance and general plan, and the Map Act. The staff report may recommend the approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. The staff report shall be provided to the applicant as set forth in Section 18.02.160 and 18.02.210 of this chapter, as applicable. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.150)

 

18.02.160 Subdivision committee review.
        After completion of the procedures specified by Sections 18.02.100 et seq., the subdivision committee shall:

        A.    Meet to review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance and general plan, and the Map Act. Their evaluation shall be based on the staff report (Section 18.02.150) and information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (Section 18.02.140);

        B.     Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision satisfies all the findings set forth in Section 18.02.220, and shall recommend to the planning commission the approval, approval with specified conditions, or denial of the tentative map application.

        At least three days before a meeting of the subdivision committee to consider a tentative map, the applicant shall be provided a copy of the staff report. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.160)

 

18.02.170 Planning commission review and decision.
        After review of a tentative map application by the subdivision committee (Section 18.02.160 of this chapter), the commission shall be responsible for the following:

        A.    Hearing and Review. The commission shall:

        1.     Conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative map, and shall consider the recommendations of the subdivision committee. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided and the hearing shall be conducted as set forth in Section 18.02.210 of this chapter.

        2.     Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance and general plan, and the Map Act. The commission’s evaluation shall be based on the staff report (Section 18.02.150) and information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (Section 18.02.140), and any public testimony received.

        B.     Recommendations to Council. In the case of a tentative map proposing five or more parcels, the commission shall determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision satisfies all the findings set forth in Section 18.02.220 of this chapter, and shall recommend to the council the approval, approval with specified conditions, or denial of the tentative map application. Any recommended conditions of approval shall be in compliance with Section 18.02.230 of this chapter.

        C.     Approval or Disapproval of Tentative Maps. In the case of a tentative map proposing four or fewer parcels, the commission may approve or disapprove the tentative map as follows:

        1.     Within fifty (50) days after certification of an environmental impact report or adoption of a negative declaration on the tentative map, the commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. The fifty-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the commission.

        2.     Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the commission has first made all findings required by Section 18.02.220. The commission may impose conditions of approval as set forth in Section 18.02.230 of this chapter.

        3.     The decision of the planning commission on a tentative map may be appealed as set forth in Section 18.02.500 et seq. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.170)

 

18.02.180 City council review and decision.
        After receiving a recommendation on a tentative map from the commission, the council shall:

        A.    Conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative map in compliance with Section 18.02.210 of this chapter, and shall consider the recommendations of the commission and any public testimony;

        B.     Within fifty (50) days after certification of an environmental impact report or adoption of a negative declaration on the tentative map, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. Provided that the fifty-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city council.

        Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the city council has first made all findings required by Section 18.02.220 of this chapter. The council may impose conditions of approval as set forth in Section 18.02.230 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.180)

 

18.02.200 Tentative map approval or disapproval.
        A public hearing and the approval or disapproval of a tentative map shall be in compliance with Sections 18.02.210 through 18.02.260 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.200)

 

18.02.210 Public hearings.
        When a public hearing is required by this title for consideration of a tentative map or appeal, public notice shall be given and the public hearing shall be conducted as provided by this section.

        A.    Scheduling of Hearing, Decision. A public hearing on a tentative map or appeal shall be scheduled, and a decision shall be reached, within the following time limits, unless the subdivider and the city mutually agree on an extension:

        1.     Tentative Map.

        a.     Hearing. A hearing on a tentative map by the planning commission shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after completion of the report of the subdivision committee and the filing of the report with the planning commission secretary. A hearing by the city council shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after the filing of the planning commission recommendation on a tentative map with the clerk of the city council.

        b.     Decision on Map. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the tentative map within the thirty (30) days of their receipt of a report and recommendation on a tentative map from the subdivision committee. The city council shall approve or disapprove the tentative map within the thirty (30) days of their receipt of a report and recommendation on a tentative map from the planning commission.

        2.     Appeals. A hearing on an appeal (Section 18.02.510) shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal, and the hearing body shall reach its decision on the appeal within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing.

        B.     Distribution of Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map (Section 18.02.150) shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion (Section 18.06.310)) at least ten days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the planning commission or city council.

        C.     Notice of Hearing. Public notice of all hearings conducted in compliance with this title shall be provided as follows:

        1.     Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include: the date, time and place of the hearing; the name of the hearing body; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the hearing; and, for condominium conversions, notification of the tenant’s right to appear and be heard.

        2.     Distribution of Notice. Notice shall be distributed as follows:

        a.     Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.

        b.     Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days before the hearing to:

        i.      The owner(s) of the property being subdivided or the owners’ duly authorized agent, and the project applicant.

        ii.     Each local agency expected to provide schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide such facilities and services may be significantly affected.

        iii.    All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing. In lieu of utilizing the assessment role, the director may utilize records of the county assessor or finance director that contain more recent information than the assessment role. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed as provided by this subsection (B)(2) is more than one thousand (1,000), the director may choose to provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city, at least ten days before the hearing.

        iv.    Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the director and has paid the fee set by council resolution for such notice.

        c.     In the case of conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative, notice shall be mailed to each tenant of the subject property, at least three days before the hearing.

        3.     Additional Notice. In addition to the notice required by this section, the director may provide any additional notice he or she determines is necessary or desirable. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.210)

 

18.02.220 Findings for approval or denial.
        In order to approve a tentative map and adopt conditions of approval in compliance with Section 18.02.230, or to deny a tentative map, the findings required by this section shall first be made for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels by the planning commission, and for subdivisions of five or more parcels by the city council. In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those titles, policies, and standards in effect at the date the department determined that the application was complete in compliance with Section 18.02.120 of this chapter, except where the city has initiated general plan, specific plan or zoning ordinance changes and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2.

        A.    Required Findings for Approval. The following findings shall be required, at minimum, to enable approval of a tentative map by the planning commission or city council. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6.

        1.     The proposed subdivision, including its design and improvements, is consistent with the Buellton city general plan and any applicable specific plan.

        2.     The site is physically suitable for the type of development proposed.

        3.     The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development.

        4.     The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

        5.     The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not likely cause serious public health problems.

        6.     The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision; or that substantially equivalent alternate easements are provided.

        7.     The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system will not result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board.

        8.     Proposed street names are consistent with the types of names used elsewhere in the community and, where applicable, are logical extensions of those existing in the area of the subdivision.

        9.     The proposed subdivision is consistent with all applicable provisions of this title, and the Buellton zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot area requirements, any other applicable provisions of this code, and the Subdivision Map Act.

        B.     Supplemental Findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a tentative map by subsection A of this section, the following findings are also required when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal.

        1.     It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of road improvements within a specified time after recordation of the parcel map, where road improvements are required (see Section 18.10.400(A)).

        2.     Any findings required by Section 18.06.310 for condominium conversions.

        3.     If the proposed subdivision fronts upon the Santa Ynez River, in an area without available reasonable public access as defined by Chapter 4, Article 3.5 of the Map Act, the proposed subdivision will provide access in compliance with Chapter 4, Article 3.5 of the Map Act.

        C.     Findings for Waiver of Parcel Map. If waiver of a parcel map has been requested with the tentative map application, the approval body shall determine whether the findings required by Section 18.04.110 of this title can also be made.

        D.    Findings Requiring Denial. A tentative map shall be denied if the planning commission or city council (as applicable) makes any of the following findings:

        1.     The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the Buellton city general plan or any applicable specific plan.

        2.     The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development.

        3.     The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

        4.     The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.

        5.     The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the review body finds that alternate easements for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is granted to the review body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.

        6.     The discharge of sewage from the proposed subdivision into the community sewer system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board.

        7.     The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance, any other applicable provisions of this code, and the Subdivision Map Act.

        E.     Findings That May Justify Denial. A tentative map may be denied if the planning commission or city council (as applicable) makes any of the following findings:

        1.     The tentative map is not in conformity with accepted planning or engineering standards.

        2.     The environmental, public services or facilities costs to city taxpayers outweigh the advantages created by the proposed subdivision.

        3.     The proposed development is not compatible with the character of the neighborhood.

        4.     The proposed development is in an area not desirable for the intensive use proposed.

        5.     A preliminary soils report or geological hazard report indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the city engineer, planning commission or city council that such conditions can be corrected in the plan for the development. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.220)

 

18.02.230 Conditions of approval.
        Along with the approval of a tentative map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this section, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act.

        A.    Mandatory Conditions. The review body shall adopt conditions of approval that will:

        1.     Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, sewage disposal systems, storm drainage facilities, solid waste disposal, and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision. Easements for public utilities shall be limited to those needed to provide service to present and future development.

        2.     Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, or require redesign of the subdivision as a prerequisite to the approval of the tentative map.

        3.     Carry out the specific requirements of Chapters 18.08 and 18.10 of this title.

        4.     Secure compliance with the requirements of this title, the Buellton zoning ordinance (Title 19 of this code), and the general plan.

        5.     Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance (Sections 18.06.200, and 18.06.210 of this title, respectively) is obtained before recordation of a final or parcel map, or is further subdivided in compliance with this title.

        B.     Optional Conditions. The review body may also require as conditions of approval:

        1.     The dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both for park or recreation purposes as provided by Section 18.10.610 of this title and the Map Act.

        2.     The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets.

        3.     The dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities, (such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, etc.), sunlight easements, and school sites, as provided by Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3.

        4.     The dedication of access to the Santa Ynez River, as provided by Chapter 4, Article 3.5 of the Map Act.

        5.     The reservation of sites for public facilities such as fire stations, libraries, and other public uses as provided by Chapter 4, Article 4 of the Map Act.

        6.     Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate.

        7.     Any other conditions deemed necessary by the review body to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings, and the community, or to achieve consistency with city ordinances or state law. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.230)

 

18.02.240 Effective date of tentative map approval.
        The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of pursuing recordation, including compliance with conditions of approval, as follows:

        A.    Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels. Approval shall become final on the eleventh day after the decision on a subdivision by the planning commission unless an appeal to the decision is filed before that time, as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this chapter.

        B.     Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels. Approval shall be final immediately after the decision by the city council. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.240)

 

18.02.250 Changes to approved tentative map or conditions.
        A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a parcel or final map as provided by this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to Section 18.04.410 of this title.

        A.    Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes to a tentative map that may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in the number of approved lots), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection D of this section. Other changes shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map.

        B.     Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the department, using the forms furnished by the department, together with the following additional information:

        1.     A statement identifying the tentative map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes.

        2.     Any additional information deemed appropriate by the department.

        C.     Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section.

        D.    Findings for Approval. The review body shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it shall first find that the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by Sections 18.02.220(A) and (B) can still be made:

        1.     There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval.

        2.     There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval.

        3.     A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this title.

        E.     Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 18.02.410 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.250)

 

18.02.260 Completion of subdivision process.
        A.    Compliance with Conditions, Improvement Plans. After approval of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans pursuant to Chapter 18.10 of this title, before constructing any required improvements.

        B.     Parcel or Final Map Preparation, Filing and Recordation.

        1.     A parcel map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Sections 18.04.100 et seq., to complete the subdivision, unless a parcel map has been waived in compliance with Section 18.04.110 of this title.

        2.     A final map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Sections 18.04.200 et seq., to complete the subdivision. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.260)

 

18.02.300 Vesting tentative maps.
        This section establishes procedures to implement the vesting tentative map requirements of state law, Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act.

        A.    Applicability. Whenever this title requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, provided that the vesting tentative map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section.

        1.     A vesting tentative map may be filed for either residential, commercial or industrial developments.

        2.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by this section, the filing of a vesting tentative map is not a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction; however, nothing in this section shall be construed to eliminate the need for a subdivider to obtain subdivision approval in compliance with the other applicable provisions of this title, land use approval in compliance with Title 19 of this code, building, grading or other construction permit approval.

        B.     Procedures for Processing a Vesting Tentative Map. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and, shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this chapter as a tentative map, except as follows:

        1.     Application Content. The vesting tentative map shall include the following information in addition to that required by Sections 18.02.110 et seq.:

        a.     Title. The vesting tentative map shall be prepared with the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face.

        b.     Intended Development. The vesting tentative map application shall include accurately drawn, preliminary floor plans and architectural elevations for all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the property after subdivision.

        2.     Findings for Approval. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted unless the review body first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for tentative map approval by Section 18.02.220 of this chapter.

        C.     Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for tentative maps by Sections 18.02.400 et seq.

        D.    Changes to Approved Map or Conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. Such an amendment request shall be considered and processed as a new application, in compliance with this section.

        E.     Development Rights Vested.

        1.     The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the subdivided lots in substantial compliance with the titles, policies and standards (excluding fees) described in Section 66474.2 of the Map Act.

        2.     If Map Act Section 66474.2 is repealed, approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the titles, policies and standards in effect at the time the map is approved.

        3.     Subsequent land use permits, building permits, extensions of time or other entitlements filed on parcels created by the subdivision may be conditioned or denied if:

        a.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate area in a condition dangerous to health or safety;

        b.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

        4.     Fees charged for building or land use permits, filed after the approval of a vesting tentative map shall be as required at the time the subsequent permit applications are filed, including any related utility or development impact fees (e.g., sewer/water hookup fees, traffic mitigation fees, etc.). Application contents shall be as required by ordinance requirements in effect at the time the subsequent application is filed.

        F.     Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall expire if a parcel map or final map is not approved before the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided by Sections 18.02.400 et seq. of this chapter. If the parcel or final map is approved and recorded, the development rights shall be vested for the following periods of time:

        1.     An initial time period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of recordation of the parcel or final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

        2.     The initial twenty-four (24) months shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date the application is accepted for processing as complete.

        3.     The subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial twenty-four (24) months expires. Application for such an extension shall be submitted to the department and shall be accompanied by the required fee. The planning commission shall approve or deny any such request for extension. If the extension is denied by the planning commission, the subdivider may appeal to the city council as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this chapter.

        4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (F)(1) and (F)(2) of this section, the vested rights shall continue until the expiration of the building permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.300)

 

18.02.400 Tentative map time limits.
        The processing of a tentative map shall be completed, and an approved tentative map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension as provided by Sections 18.02.410 through 18.02.430 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.400)

 

18.02.410 Expiration of approved tentative map.
        An approved tentative map or vesting tentative map is valid for thirty-six (36) months after its effective date (Section 18.02.240). At the end of that time, the approval shall expire and become void unless:

        A.    A parcel or final map, and related bonds and improvement agreements, have been filed with the city engineer in compliance with Chapter 18.04 of this title; or

        B.     An extension of time has been granted as provided by Section 18.02.420 of this chapter.

        A tentative map approval shall be deemed to have expired if a parcel or final map has not been recorded within the time limits established by this section or within an extension of time approved in compliance with Section 18.02.420. Expiration of an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new subdivision application is filed. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.410)

 

18.02.420 Extensions of time for tentative maps.
        When a subdivision has not been completed through the recording of a parcel or final map within the time limits set by Section 18.02.410 of this chapter, one year time extensions may be granted as provided in this section. Extension requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee.

        A.    Tentative Maps. The planning commission may grant a maximum of three, one-year extensions to the initial time limit only after finding that:

        1.     There have been no changes to the provisions of the general plan, zoning ordinance (Title 19 of the Buellton Municipal Code), or this title applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative map.

        2.     There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the general plan or standards of the zoning ordinance or this title apply to the project.

        3.     There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including, but not limited to, water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools such that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project.

        Disapproval of a requested extension by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this chapter.

        B.     Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more than one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) on improvements as specified in Map Act Section 66452.6(a) and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional thirty-six (36) months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. Provided that the total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than ten years from its approval.

        C.     Vesting Tentative Maps. The planning commission may grant a maximum of three, one year extensions to the initial time limit pursuant subsection A of this section. Any rights conferred by Section 18.02.300 of this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved and recorded before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.420)

 

18.02.430 Applications deemed approved.
        Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Section 65956 of the Government Code or Article 2 of Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code Sections 66452 et seq., shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this title, which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or other land use entitlements are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after the automatic approval of the tentative map therefor shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this title and the Map Act, including, but not limited to, Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.430)

18.02.500 Appeals and exceptions.
        Sections 18.02.510 through 18.02.530 establish procedures for appeals to decisions by the subdivision committee and planning commission, and exceptions to the requirements of this title. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.500)

 

18.02.510 Appeal procedures.
        Any decision, determination or requirement of the department, the city engineer, the subdivision committee or the planning commission in compliance with this title may be appealed as provided by this section. Any complaints filed as set forth in Map Act Section 66452.5(d), shall also be processed as provided by this section.

        A.    Processing of Appeals.

        1.     Who May Appeal. An appeal may be filed by the subdivider or any aggrieved person, including any tenant of the subject property, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium or other common interest development.

        2.     Time and Place for Filing. An appeal shall be filed within ten calendar days of the decision that is the subject of the appeal, except that where the decision of the planning commission to deny an extension of time in compliance with Section 18.02.420 of this chapter is appealed, such an appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after the decision. Appeals to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk; other appeals shall be filed with the department.

        3.     Form of Appeal. Appeals shall describe the actions or decisions being appealed, and explaining the reasons for the appeal. Appeals shall be accompanied by the fee set by the city fee resolution.

        4.     Report and Hearing. When an appeal has been filed, the department will prepare a report on the matter, and schedule the appeal for a public hearing in compliance with Section 18.02.210 of this chapter, for consideration by the appeal body determined by subsection B of this section, within thirty (30) days of the date the appeal was filed.

        5.     Action and Findings. After holding a public hearing, the appeal body shall declare its findings within seven days, based upon the testimony and documents produced before it. The appeal body may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any recommendations, rulings, actions or decisions being appealed. The decision of the appeal body shall be described in findings of fact regarding the particular case. The findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the appeal, and verify the compliance or noncompliance of the subject of the appeal with the provisions of this title.

        6.     Withdrawal of Appeal. After an appeal to a decision on a subdivision application has been filed, the appeal shall not be withdrawn except with the consent of the appropriate hearing body.

        B.     Appeal Jurisdiction. An appeal shall be heard and decided by the appeal body identified as follows:

        1.     Appeals to the Planning Commission. The planning commission shall sit as the appeal body to consider any appeals of:

        a.     Department Actions. Determinations by the department on the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this title, which are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff, and any determination that an application or information submitted with an application is incomplete (as provided by Government Code Section 65943).

        b.     Subdivision Committee Decisions. Any action, decision or ruling of the subdivision committee in compliance with this title.

        2.     Appeals to the City Council. Any action, decision or ruling of the planning commission, including adoption of negative declaration findings or certification of an environmental impact report, or an action of the planning commission on an appeal in compliance with this section. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.510)

 

18.02.530 Exceptions.
        An exception to any of the provisions of this title may be requested by a subdivider as provided by this section.

        A.    Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the department together with the required filing fee. The application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider believes the exception is justified.

        B.     Filing and Processing. An application for an exception may be filed along with the tentative map application to which it applies, or after approval of the tentative map. An exception request shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the tentative map for which the exception is being requested, concurrently with the tentative map if the exception request was filed at the same time. An exception shall not be considered as tentative map approval and shall not extend the time limits for expiration of the map established by Section 18.02.410 of this chapter. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act.

        C.     Approval of Exception. The planning commission or city council shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made:

        1.     There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings.

        2.     Such exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions are not due to any action of the subdivider subsequent to the enactment of this title.

        3.     The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision.

        4.     Granting the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located.

        5.     The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the general plan.

        In granting an exception, the review body shall secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.02.530)

Chapter 18.04 PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS
18.04.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of parcel and final maps, consistent with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.010)

 

18.04.100 Parcel maps.
        As required by Sections 18.01.030 and 18.02.260 of this title, a parcel map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in Section 18.04.110 of this chapter. A parcel map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 18.04.120 through 18.04.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.100)

 

18.04.110 Waiver of parcel map.
        A subdivider may request waiver of a parcel map, and the commission may grant the waiver as provided by this section.

        A.    When Waiver is Allowed. Waiver of a parcel map may be requested by a subdivider and granted by the commission for a subdivision that results in the creation of only two parcels, and the boundaries of the original parcel have been previously surveyed and a map recorded, and are certain as to location.

        B.     Application Processing and Approval. A request for waiver of parcel map shall be submitted with the tentative map application, together with the required filing fee. The waiver request shall be processed and acted upon concurrently with the tentative map application. The commission may grant a requested waiver if:

        1.     The proposed tentative map satisfies all findings required for approval by Section 18.02.220.

        2.     The proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements of the Map Act and this title as to lot area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection.

        C.     Expiration of Waiver. An approved waiver of parcel map shall be subject to the same time limits and opportunities for extension of time as the accompanying tentative map, in compliance with Sections 18.02.410 and 18.02.420 of this title, and subsection D of this section, following.

        D.    Completion of Subdivision. A subdivision for which a parcel map has been waived shall be completed by the subdivider satisfying all conditions of approval, and by then filing and obtaining approval of a certificate of completion in compliance with this section.

        1.     Preparation and Filing of Certificate. The subdivider shall submit an application for a certificate of completion to the city engineer for review and approval, including the following information:

        a.     A diagram or exhibit illustrating the configuration and dimensions of the parcels described in the legal descriptions submitted with the certificate of completion.

        b.     A statement signed by the subdivider under penalty of perjury that no change in the ownership of the subject property has occurred since the submittal of the title report with the tentative map application. If such a change in ownership has occurred, the subdivider shall submit a new title report issued within sixty (60) days before the filing of the certificate of completion application.

        c.     A statement by a registered civil engineer, licensed land surveyor, or title company verifying that any required access easements extend to a publicly maintained road.

        d.     A certificate of completion in the form required by the city engineer, prepared for recording, including:

        i.      A list of all requirements imposed as conditions of approval of the tentative map, including, but not limited to, any requirements for the construction of offsite and onsite improvements.

        ii.     A statement signed by the owner under penalty of perjury attesting that all of the conditions of approval of the tentative map have been met or provided for under the terms of an acceptable subdivision agreement secured by appropriate surety as prescribed by the Map Act.

        iii.    A legal description of each parcel created in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

        e.     Any required recordation fees.

        2.     Review and Approval of Certificate. The city engineer shall review, approve or disapprove, and complete the processing of a certificate of completion by examining the materials submitted and performing other investigations as necessary to ensure that:

        a.     All record title owners have consented to the subdivision.

        b.     The certificate of completion accurately describes the conditions of approval, and that the conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed.

        c.     The legal descriptions on the certificate are accurate, and are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map.

        If the city engineer is satisfied that the certificate of completion and materials submitted with it comply with the above requirements, the city engineer shall place an endorsed approval upon the face of the certificate and shall file it with the county recorder. Upon recording, the subdivision shall be deemed completed, and the parcels created by the subdivision may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.110)

 

18.04.120 Parcel map form and content.
        The preparation and content of parcel maps, and information required to be submitted with parcel maps, shall be as provided by this section.

        A.    Preparation and Form.

        1.     The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California.

        2.     The parcel map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced to guarantee a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

        3.     The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end, provided that the minimum scale shall be one inch equals one hundred (100) feet. The scale may be increased to one inch equals two hundred (200) feet when each new parcel will have a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more; and a scale of one inch equals four hundred (400) feet may be approved at the discretion of the city engineer.

        4.     Every sheet comprising the parcel map shall contain the scale, north point, legend, the particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map, and the number assigned to the map by the city engineer by which the map is to be referred to. Below the number shall appear a general description of all the property being divided by reference to recorded deeds or to maps which have been previously filed or by reference to the plat of the United States Survey. If more than two sheets are necessary for the parcel map, a key or index map shall appear on the first sheet.

        B.     Parcel Map Content. A parcel map shall be prepared so as to contain the following data and information:

        1.     Proposed Parcels.

        a.     The location of each parcel being created and abutting streets, with all dimensions, boundaries, bearings and courses clearly shown and defined.

        b.     Each parcel shall be numbered consecutively by unit throughout the subdivision with no omissions or duplications. Block designations shall not be used.

        c.     The net acreage of each parcel shall be shown to the nearest one hundredth.

        d.     Each parcel shall be entirely shown on at least one sheet of the map.

        e.     If the map includes a “designated remainder” parcel or similar parcel of five acres or more, the remainder need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel.

        2.     Survey Data for New Parcels. All information, data, and monuments necessary to locate and retrace any and all exterior boundaries, block and lot lines. It shall show bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii, central angle, and arc length, or chord bearing and length for all curved lines. Where streets intersect on curves, center line lengths, radii, and central angles to center line intersection points shall be shown.

        3.     Existing Survey Features. Show clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence were found on the ground to determine the boundaries of the tract. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block number, tract designation and place or record; or by section, township, and range; or other proper designation. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision and its relation to surrounding surveys, and ownership and deed references for all adjoining properties used in the preparation of the parcel map.

        4.     Streets and Easements. The map shall show the location and width of all proposed streets within the subdivision, the lines, widths and names of adjacent streets, easements of record and easements to be recorded. If any easement is not definitely located by record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drains, sewers, public utilities and other purposes shall be clearly defined. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by an easement must be so shown that the map will indicate clearly the actual length of the lot lines. The width of the easement and the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown.

        5.     Street Center Line Data. Wherever the city engineer has established the center of a street within or adjacent to the subdivision, the data shall be shown on the final map, indicating all monuments found and making reference to a field book or map. Points reset by ties, shall be so noted.

        6.     Approved Street Names. Streets on the parcel map shall be identified with their approved names. If any streets are designated by numbers, they shall be spelled out completely, using hyphens in such forms as “Twenty-Third Street.” The words “Avenue,” “Boulevard,” “Place,” etc., shall be spelled out in full. Street names shown on the parcel map shall be the same as those approved with the tentative map.

        7.     Reference to Supplemental Sheet. A notation referencing survey and map information contained in a supplemental information sheet, as required by Section 18.04.300 of this chapter and subsection C of this section.

        8.     Certificates and Statements. All certifications and statements required by Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Map Act shall appear on the parcel map.

        C.     Other Information and Materials Required. The following information and materials shall accompany the parcel map when submitted to the city engineer for checking:

        1.     Dedications. When dedications or offers of dedication are required, they may be made either by certificate on the parcel map, or by separate instrument. If by separate instrument, such dedications or offers of dedication shall be recorded concurrently with, or prior to, the parcel or tract map being filed for record. Separate instruments shall be referenced on the parcel or tract map. The dedications or offers of dedication, whether by certificate or separate instrument, shall be signed by the same parties and in the same manner as set forth for final maps.

        2.     Filing Fee. The parcel map filing fee required by the city fee resolution.

        3.     Improvement Agreement. Three copies of an executed subdivision improvement agreement in a form acceptable to the city attorney and in conformance with the provisions of this title and the Map Act, when required.

        4.     Improvement Plans and Checking Fee. Subdivision improvement plans approved by all appropriate agencies and city officials, when required; and the improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection fee established by the city fee resolution, when required.

        5.     Improvement Surety. Three copies of the surety provided to secure the subdivision improvement agreement, when required.

        6.     Mobilehome Park Conversion Report. If the parcel map is for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, the application shall also include a report on the impact of the conversion on the displaced residents of the mobilehome park, in compliance with Map Act Section 66427.4.

        7.     Responsible Agency Approval. When approval of the tentative map was conditioned upon the approval of a government agency or official, a statement of a responsible official of such agency stating that those conditions for which he/she is responsible to review have been provided for under the terms of an acceptable subdivision improvement agreement secured by appropriate surety as prescribed by state law.

        8.     Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. Two copies of a final soils report or geological hazards report, if they were required.

        9.     Survey Records. Copies of all maps and deeds used and/or referenced to complete the survey.

        10.   Tax and Assessment Liens Certificates. Certificates from the finance director and assessor showing that, according to the records of each office, there are no liens against the parcel division or any part thereof for unpaid state, city, municipal, or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable.

        11.   Title Report. A preliminary title report issued within sixty (60) days of submission to the city engineer, including copies of all documents listed in the title report as well as copies of the vesting deeds to the property.

        12.   Traverse Sheets. A traverse sheet or sheets in a form approved by the city engineer, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, showing mathematical closure of the boundary of the subdivision, lots or parcels, and center lines of the streets therein.

        13.   Utility Company Letters. When utility easements have been required as a condition of approval of the tentative map, or when the land to be divided is subject to existing public utility easements, a letter from each of the affected utility companies stating their satisfaction with the easements shown on the parcel map.

        14.   Other Reports or Information. A copy of any other report, document, letter, or approval to satisfy and condition for approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.120)

 

18.04.130 Filing and processing of parcel maps.
        A.    Filing with the City Engineer. The parcel map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 18.04.120 of this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer. The parcel map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

        B.     Review of Parcel Map. Within fifty (50) days after receiving the parcel map and accompanying materials, the city engineer shall:

        1.     Determine whether all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

        2.     Obtain verification from the department that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

        If the parcel map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data. The fifty-day time limit shall not include any time needed by the subdivider to make any necessary changes. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.130)

 

18.04.140 Parcel map approval.
        After determining that the parcel map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 18.04.130 of this chapter, the city engineer shall approve the parcel map and forward the map to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Section 66450 of the Map Act, except as follows:

        A.    Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the parcel map, the city engineer shall forward the parcel map to the council. The map shall then be placed on the city council consent agenda for final acceptance. After action by the council, the city engineer shall transmit the parcel map to the county recorder for filing.

        B.     Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this title, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed, the map shall not be approved by the city engineer unless the council first authorizes deferred completion of the improvements by approving an agreement with the subdivider for posting security to guarantee the improvements, in compliance with Section 18.10.500 of this title.

        C.     Effect of Recorded Map. When a properly endorsed parcel map has been filed for record, the subdivision shall be deemed complete, and the new parcels may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. The recordation of the map shall have the effect of eliminating any lot lines that existed within the boundaries of the subdivision before approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.140)

 

18.04.200 Final maps.
        As required by Section 18.01.030 of this title, a final map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A final map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 18.04.210 through 18.04.230. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.200)

 

18.04.210 Final map form and content.
        A final map shall be prepared in the same manner, and with the same form and content as required for parcel maps by Section 18.04.120 of this chapter, except that the following additional requirements shall apply to final maps:

        A.    Title Sheet Required. A final map shall be prepared with a title sheet or first sheet, that shall contain affidavits, acknowledgements, endorsements, offers and acceptances of dedication and notarial certificates. No portion of the map shall appear on the title sheet, except for an index map, where more than one sheet is necessary for the map itself.

        B.     Reversions to Acreage. If the final map is filed to revert subdivided parcels to acreage, the words “The Purpose of This Map is a Reversion to Acreage” shall appear conspicuously with the map number on the title sheet and subsequent sheets.

        C.     Certificates. All certificates required by Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Map Act.

        D.    Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title or letter from a title company certifying that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided and all acknowledgments thereto appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the final map, both as to consents as to the subdivision itself, and affidavits of dedication where necessary. The guarantee shall be issued for the benefit of the city and protection of the council and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording.

        E.     Tax Bond. A tax bond as required by the Map Act. If a cash deposit has been made in lieu of a bond, the original receipt or a certified copy thereof, issued by the city shall be submitted. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.210)

 

18.04.220 Filing and processing of final maps.
        A.    Filing with City Engineer. The final map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 18.04.210 of this chapter shall be submitted to the city engineer. The final map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act.

        B.     Review of Final Map. The city engineer shall review the final map and all accompanying materials, and shall:

        1.     Determine whether all applicable provisions of this title and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

        2.     Obtain verification from the department that the final map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed.

        If the final map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data. The fifty-day time limit in Section 18.04.230 of this chapter shall not include any time needed by the subdivider to make any necessary changes.

        C.     Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final maps on the approved tentative map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the director approved such a request. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.220)

 

18.04.230 Final map approval.
        After determining that the final map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 18.04.130 of this chapter, the city engineer shall execute the city engineer’s certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final map to the council for action, as follows:

        A.    Review and Approval by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final map at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map, but in no event longer than fifty (50) days after the city engineer receives the final map from the subdivider, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the city engineer and the subdivider.

        1.     Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final map by resolution if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this title that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map.

        2.     Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this title or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, when the council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council does not materially affect the validity of the map.

        3.     Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map.

        B.     Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the final map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the final map.

        C.     Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this title, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the final map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 18.10.500 of this title, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map.

        D.    Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the city clerk shall transmit the final map to county recorder for filing.

        E.     Effect of Recorded Map. When a properly endorsed final map has been filed for record, the major subdivision or reversion to acreage shall be deemed complete, and the new parcels may be conveyed or otherwise transferred. The recordation of the map shall have the effect of eliminating any lot lines that existed within the boundaries of the subdivision before approval of the tentative map. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.230)

 

18.04.300 Supplemental information sheets.
        In addition to the information required to be included in parcel maps and final maps (Sections 18.04.120 and 18.04.210, respectively), additional information shall be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a final map as required by this section.

        A.    Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the director determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other document. The additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by Section 18.04.120(A) of this chapter.

        B.     Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information:

        1.     Title. A title, including the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map by the city engineer, the words “Supplemental Information Sheet.”

        2.     Explanatory Statement. A statement following the title that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information being recorded with the parcel or final map is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest.

        3.     Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city.

        4.     Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water.

        5.     Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report.

        6.     Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the approval body to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.300)

 

18.04.400 Recordation of maps.
        A.    At the time of filing of a parcel or final map with the county recorder, the subdivider shall present to the county recorder evidence that, at the time of filing the map, the parties consenting to such filing are all parties having vested fee interest in the property being subdivided and are parties required to sign the certificate described in Map Act Section 66445(e).

        B.     The county recorder will review and act upon parcel and final maps filed with that office as set forth in Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act and other applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.400)

 

18.04.410 Amendments to recorded maps.
        A recorded parcel or final map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as set forth in this section.

        A.    Corrections. In the event that errors in a parcel or final map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, such corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, as provided by Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. For the purposes of this section, “errors” include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the parcel or final map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map error or omission as approved by the city engineer that does not affect any property right, including, but not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed.

        B.     Changes to Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including, but not limited to, the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 18.10.500 of this title, a new tentative and parcel or final map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 18.01.030 of this title. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.04.410)

Chapter 18.06 CERTIFICATES, ADJUSTMENTS, AND OTHER PROCEDURES
18.06.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter establishes requirements for special-purpose procedures related to subdivisions, including lot line adjustments, certificates and conditional certificates of compliance, condominiums and condominium conversions. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.010)

 

18.06.100 Lot line adjustment.
        A.    Purpose of Process. As provided by Map Act Section 66412(d), the lot line adjustment procedure is for the purpose of relocating lot lines between two or more adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. A lot line adjustment shall be processed as provided by Sections 18.06.110 through 18.06.130 of this chapter.

        B.     Allowed Use of Lot Line Adjustments. For the purposes of this section, an “adjacent parcel” is one that directly touches all other parcels involved in the adjustment. A proposed lot line adjustment which includes any parcel that does not have at least one common point on a boundary with all other parcels in the adjustment shall be considered a resubdivision, and shall instead be processed as a new subdivision in compliance with Section 18.01.030 of this title. Lots combined by encumbrances or encroachments of existing structures shall be considered a single original parcel for purposes of an adjustment in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.100)

 

18.06.110 Adjustment application and processing.
        A lot line adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed as provided by this section.

        A.    Application Content. The application shall include the form provided by the department, the required filing fee, and the following materials and information:

        1.     Lot Line Adjustment Plan. A lot line adjustment plan shall be accurately drawn to scale, and shall include the following information:

        a.     Size and Scale. The lot line adjustment plan shall be prepared on paper with a maximum sheet size of eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or other scale as necessary to show all details clearly.

        b.     Record Data. All exterior and interior lot lines shall be shown on the plan and shall be identified by course and bearing descriptions, based on survey data, calculated data, or information of record. If a survey is done, any monuments established must be shown on a record of survey or a parcel map.

        c.     Lot Lines. Proposed lot lines and lot lines to be eliminated shall be so identified in written notation or by legend. Lines to be eliminated shall be dashed or otherwise drawn so as to be clearly distinguishable from, and subordinate to remaining and new lot lines.

        d.     Lot Areas. Areas of existing and proposed parcels.

        e.     Structures. All existing structures and any other improvements existing on the site. Also show the distance between structures and the distances from existing structures to the boundary lines of existing and proposed parcels. When deemed necessary by the department, such distances shall be determined through survey by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

        f.      Easements. The locations, purpose and width of all existing and proposed easements, streets and appurtenant utilities.

        g.     Land Forms. The approximate location of any water courses, drainage channels, existing drainage structures, and major topographic or built features.

        h.     Flood Hazard. Areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow.

        i.      Other Information. Legal descriptions and assessor’s parcel numbers of the parcels included within the adjustment, a north arrow and scale, a vicinity map, and the names, addresses and phone numbers of affected property owners and their agents.

        2.     Legal Descriptions. A legal description of each proposed parcel, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

        3.     Justification. The application shall contain any additional information necessary to explain the request. Statements may also be submitted to show how the required findings are met by the proposed adjustment.

        B.     Processing.

        1.     Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed according to the procedures specified by Section 18.02.100 of this title. No environmental review in compliance with Section 18.02.140 of this title shall be required, in compliance with Section 15305 of the CEQA Guidelines.

        2.     The director shall schedule the lot line adjustment for review by the subdivision committee. The committee shall review the proposed adjustment for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and will recommend that the commission approve or disapprove the proposed adjustment in compliance with Section 18.06.120 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.110)

 

18.06.120 Approval or disapproval of adjustment.
        After a public hearing (Section 18.02.210), the commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the lot line adjustment as set forth in this section. Decisions made by the commission may be appealed to the council as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this title.

        A.    Required Findings. The commission shall deny a proposed lot line adjustment if it finds any of the following:

        1.     The lot line adjustment does not maintain a position with respect to general plan consistency, parcel design, minimum lot area, environmental quality, and public health and safety criteria as specified in this title and other applicable municipal code and state law provisions relating to real property divisions, which is equal to or better than the position of the existing lots before adjustment.

        2.     The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than are buildable in compliance with applicable provisions of this title, or the zoning ordinance (Title 19 of this code) than exist before adjustment.

        3.     Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with applicable regulations in the zoning ordinance.

        4.     The adjustment will result in an increase in the number of nonconforming parcels.

        An adjustment for which the above findings are made may instead be resubmitted as a subdivision in compliance with Section 18.01.030 of this title.

        B.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the commission shall adopt conditions as necessary to conform to the requirements of this title and the zoning ordinance, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.120)

 

18.06.130 Completion of adjustment.
        Within twenty-four (24) months after approval of a lot line adjustment, the adjustment process shall be completed as set forth in this section through the recordation of a deed or record of survey, after all conditions of approval have been satisfied.

        A.    Completion by Deed. A lot line adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until either a grant deed or a quit claim deed signed by the record owners has been recorded. The applicant shall submit deeds to the city engineer for review and approval as set forth in subsection C of this section before recordation of the grant deed or quit claim deed. The legal descriptions provided in the deeds shall be prepared by a qualified registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor licensed or registered in California.

        B.     Completion by Record of Survey. If required by Section 8762 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code, a lot line adjustment shall not be considered legally completed until a record of survey has been checked by the city engineer and sent to the county recorder for recordation. Where not required, a lot line adjustment may also be completed by record of survey in compliance with this subsection at the option of the applicant.

        C.     Review and Approval by City Engineer. The city engineer shall:

        1.     Examine the deeds to ensure that all record title owners have consented to the adjustment.

        2.     Verify that all conditions of approval have been satisfactorily completed and that the deeds are in substantial compliance with the lot line adjustment as approved by the subdivision committee.

        3.     If satisfied that the deeds comply with the above requirements, place an endorsed approval upon the deeds.

        4.     After approval of the legal descriptions, assemble the deeds and return them to the applicant for recordation.

        D.    Expiration. The approval of a lot line adjustment shall expire and become void if the adjustment has not been completed as required by this section within twenty-four (24) months of approval. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.130)

 

18.06.200 Certificates of compliance.
        Certificate of compliance applications are filed to establish a legal record where the city officially recognizes an existing parcel that was not created by approved subdivision map as a legal lot. A conditional certificate of compliance (Section 18.06.210) is used to validate a parcel where the property was not divided legally. Section 66499.35 of the Map Act makes approval of certificates mandatory. Any person owning real property, or a vendee of that person in compliance with a contract of sale of the property, may request a certificate of compliance. The preparation, filing and processing of certificate applications shall occur as follows:

        A.    Application. A certificate of compliance application shall include the form provided by the department, the required filing fee, and a chain of title, consisting of copies of all deeds beginning prior to the division and thereafter, unless the parcels were created through a recorded subdivision map.

        B.     Review and Approval. The department shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in accordance with the Map Act, this title, and other applicable provisions of this code. Upon making the determination, the department shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. In the event that the department determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act or this title, the application shall instead be processed as a conditional certificate of compliance (Section 18.06.210).

        C.     Form of Certificate. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this title.

        D.    Effective Date of Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.200)

 

18.06.210 Conditional certificates.
        A conditional certificate of compliance is used to validate a parcel that was not legally divided. If the current owners are the original dividers, conditions may be based on current standards. The preparation, filing and processing of a conditional certificate of compliance application shall occur as set forth in this section.

        A.    Application. An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall be prepared and include the same materials as a certificate of compliance (Section 18.06.200).

        B.     Review and Approval. The processing, review and approval of the application shall occur as follows:

        1.     Staff Report. The department shall prepare a staff report that:

        a.     Describes the history of the land division;

        b.     Determines whether the property was legally divided, as set forth in Section 18.06.200(B) of this chapter;

        c.     References provisions of state law and city (or earlier county) ordinances applicable to the subdivision at the time the division in question occurred;

        d.     Recommends appropriate conditions of approval.

        2.     Review by Subdivision Committee. The director shall schedule the conditional certificate of compliance for review by the subdivision committee. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Map Act or this title, the committee shall grant a conditional certificate of compliance, imposing conditions as provided by subsection C of this section.

        C.     Conditions of Approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the subdivision committee may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, as provided by the Map Act and this title, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the subdivision committee may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was illegally divided.

        D.    Appeal. The conditions imposed by the subdivision committee may be appealed to the commission as set forth in Section 18.02.510 of this title.

        E.     Completion of Process. Following expiration of the ten-day appeal period after the subdivision committee has made their determination and imposed conditions, the department shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property.

        F.     Effective Date of Certificate. A conditional certificate of compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.210)

 

18.06.300 Condominiums.
        A tentative map for a condominium or other common interest development (including a community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, as provided by California Civil Code Section 1351), shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth by this title in Sections 18.02.100 et seq. for tentative maps. Sections 18.04.100 et seq. and 18.04.200 et seq., determine whether a parcel or final map must also be filed. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.300)

 

18.06.310 Condominium conversions.
        A condominium conversion is the conversion of real property to a common interest development as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code. A conversion shall require the approval of a tentative map, and parcel or final map, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived for the conversion of a mobilehome park as provided by Map Act 66428(b). If a parcel map is waived for conversion of a mobilehome park in compliance with Map Act 66428(b), a tentative map shall still be required.

        A tentative map for a condominium conversion shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and shall be processed, approved or disapproved in the same manner as set forth in Sections 18.02.100 et seq. and, where applicable, Sections 18.04.100 et seq. or 18.04.200 et seq., with the following exceptions:

        A.    Application Contents. Condominium conversion applications shall include the same information and materials as tentative map applications, except for conversions of residential projects, as follows:

        1.     Tentative Map. The tentative map for a condominium, community apartment project, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative need not show the buildings or the manner in which the airspace above the property shown on the map are to be divided. However, the applicant shall provide an illustration of how division will occur to enable verification of the accuracy of the legal descriptions on deeds for the transfer of ownership of the units.

        2.     Public Notice Materials. In addition to the public notice materials required by Section 18.02.210(C) of this title, submit stamped, Number 10 envelopes addressed to each tenant of the property being converted.

        3.     Verification of Stock Cooperative Vote. If the development being converted to a condominium is a stock cooperative, the application shall also include verification of the vote required by Map Act Section 66452.10.

        B.     Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map for the condominium conversion (Section 18.02.150) shall be served upon the subdivider and each tenant of the subject property at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission or council.

        C.     Public Notice. The following notice shall be provided in addition to that required by Section 18.02.210 of this title:

        1.     Tenant Notice. The subdivider shall give notice to all existing or prospective tenants as set forth in Map Act Sections 66452.8 and 66452.9, and shall provide the department satisfactory proof that such notice was given.

        2.     Public Hearing Notice. Notice of the public hearing(s) on the tentative map shall be provided to all tenants of the subject property, as required by Map Act Section 66451.3.

        D.    Approval of Conversion, Required Findings.

        1.     Time Limit, Stock Cooperatives. The approval or disapproval of the conversion of an existing building to a stock cooperative shall occur within one hundred twenty (120) days of the application being found complete in compliance with Section 18.02.120(A) of this title. The one hundred twenty-day time limit may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city.

        2.     Conversion Findings, Residential Projects. Approval of a tentative or final map for a subdivision to be created from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative shall not be granted unless the findings set forth in Map Act Section 66427.1 are first made.

        E.     Completion of Conversion. The filing, approval and recordation of a parcel map or final map in compliance with Chapter 18.04 of this title shall be required to complete the subdivision process, except where a parcel map, or tentative and final map are waived for the conversion of a mobilehome park in compliance with Map Act Section 66428(b). (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.06.310)

Chapter 18.08 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
18.08.010 Purpose and applicability of chapter.
        A.    Purpose. This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions. The standards include, but are not limited to requirements for the minimum dimensions of new parcels and blocks, the relationship of proposed parcels to the driveways, and streets that provide access to them. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new parcels that are compatible with existing neighborhoods, the natural environment, the health and safety of city residents, and are consistent with the policies of the general plan.

        B.     Applicability of Design Standards. The requirements of this chapter apply to subdivisions, and conditional certificates of compliance, in addition to all applicable requirements of the Buellton zoning ordinance (Title 19 of this code). In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this title and the provisions of the zoning ordinance, or any other applicable provision of this code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.08.010)

 

18.08.020 Lot and block design and configuration.
        The size, shape and arrangement of new parcels shall conform to the provisions of this section, or with any general plan policy, zoning regulation (Title 19 of this code), or other city ordinance applicable to a proposed subdivision.

        A.    Minimum Lot Area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by the zoning ordinance, except as otherwise provided by this section.

        1.     Calculation of Area for Smaller Parcels. When calculating the area of a lot or parcel to determine compliance with this section, the zoning ordinance or general plan, the following shall be deducted from the gross area of any parcel:

        a.     An easement for the purpose of access, whether vehicular or non-vehicular, through the lot; however, the area of an easement, exclusively for the purpose of constructing and maintaining construction slopes, may be included when calculating lot area.

        b.     An easement for an open drainage course, whether a ditch, natural channel or floodway.

        2.     Specific Minimum Lot Area Requirements—Condominiums. The minimum lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance shall not apply to condominiums and condominium conversions, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the condominium or conversion.

        B.     Size and Shape. The size and shape of new parcels shall be as required by the zoning ordinance, except as otherwise provided by the following.

        1.     Lot Width. New parcels shall be designed to have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet, except that each parcel on a turnaround, cul-de-sac or curved street, where the side lot lines are diverging from the front to the rear of the parcel, shall have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet, or the width required by the zoning ordinance, whichever is greater, measured at the front setback line required for the main building by the zoning ordinance.

        2.     Lot Depth. No new parcel shall have a depth less than eighty (80) feet, or a depth greater than three times the average width of the lot when the lot has a width of less than two hundred fifty (250) feet.

        3.     Location of Lot Lines.

        a.     Orientation to Streets. The side lot lines of all parcels shall be at right angles to the center line of the street, and radial or approximately radial to curved streets.

        b.     City Limits. No parcel shall be designed so as to be divided by the city’s corporate boundary.

        c.     Relationship to Easements. Lots shall be designed so that lot lines conform to existing or planned easements unless such easements are relocated to conform with the proposed lot pattern.

        4.     Flag Lots. Flag lots or parcels with access to the abutting street by a strip or segment that is part of the lot or parcel may be approved when necessitated by topography or other special condition, provided that the main portion of the lot shall satisfy the provisions of this section for length, depth, area and design. In no case shall the access strip be less than twenty (20) feet in width nor more than six hundred (600) feet in depth. Improvements shall be constructed within the strip as provided by Chapter 18.10 of this title.

        C.     Parcel Configuration. The layout of proposed parcels and streets shall be designed to use land efficiently, mitigate environmental impacts, and minimize site disturbance in terms of cuts and fills, the removal of significant vegetation.

        1.     Double-Frontage Lots. Parcels with streets along both the front and rear lot lines shall be prohibited, except when necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions or where access from one of the roads is prohibited.

        2.     Block Length. Blocks shall be no longer than one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet, unless existing conditions warrant an exception (Section 18.02.530). (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.08.020)

 

18.08.030 Access and circulation.
        Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a city street. Street systems to be constructed with new subdivisions shall be designed as provided by this section.

        A.    Access to Subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a city street. Access shall be provided by:

        1.     The subdivision abutting a street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this section and Section 18.10.150 of this title; or

        2.     The subdivision being connected to a city street by a nonexclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility, and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be:

        a.     Offered for dedication;

        b.     Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and

        c.     Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section and Section 18.10.150 of this title.

        Private roads are allowed only as provided by subsection D of this section.

        B.     Access to New Parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows:

        1.     City Street Access Required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved as provided by subsection C of this section and Section 18.10.150 of this title, or to a private road if allowed by subsection D of this section.

        2.     Access Denial. When a state highway or a street classified as a major arterial in the circulation element of the general plan passes through or abuts a proposed subdivision, direct access to the highway or arterial shall not be permitted from proposed parcels. Reservation strips shall be dedicated to the state or city, as appropriate, where required to control access over certain lot lines over the ends of street stubs.

        3.     Frontage Roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway, the review body may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway.

        4.     Alleys. When parcels are proposed in areas zoned commercial or industrial, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve alleys at least twenty (20) feet wide at the rear of the parcels.

        C.     Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed as follows, and as provided by Section 18.10.150 of this title:

        1.     Alignment. The alignment of streets shown on a tentative map shall be:

        a.     Consistent with the circulation element of the general plan, where applicable; and

        b.     Located so as to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation of their centerlines, or by adjustments by curves; and

        c.     As required by the city engineer.

        2.     Right-Of-Way and Surfaced Width. The width of the right-of-way and improved surface of streets shown on a tentative map shall be as required by Section 18.10.150 of this title.

        3.     Access to Unsubdivided Property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the general plan for future subdivision and development, the review body may require that streets to be constructed with the proposed subdivision be extended to the boundary of the property to provide access to the future development.

        4.     Improvements to Existing Streets. When an existing city street provides access to, passes through, or is contiguous with a proposed subdivision, the review body may require dedication of additional right-of-way and/or improvements to be made to the city street if they determine that the proposed subdivision will create the need for such improvements, or where the subdivider otherwise agrees to the improvements.

        5.     Length of Loop and Dead-End Streets. The maximum length of a loop street shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. A proposed subdivision shall not be designed with a dead-end street having a length from the first intersecting through street greater than six hundred (600) feet, except for private roads. The maximum length of a private dead-end road, including all dead-end roads accessed from that dead-end road, shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet, regardless of the number of parcels served. Maximum length shall be measured from the edge of the roadway surface at the intersection that begins the road, to the end of the road surface at its farthest point.

        6.     Street Names. All streets within a proposed subdivision shall be named, and the names shall be approved by the review body. Duplication of existing names within the same area shall not be allowed in a new subdivision unless the street is an obvious extension of an existing street.

        D.    Private Roads. Private roads are allowed as provided in this section. Private roads shall not be permitted except where the council determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision.

        1.     Maintenance Requirements. Provisions satisfactory to the city attorney shall be made for lot owners association or other organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance of private roads and ownership of the street right-of-ways of any major or parcel subdivision.

        2.     Design and Improvement Standards. Private roads shall be designed and improved as set forth in subsections B and C and Section 18.10.150 of this title for a city-maintained road.

        3.     Security and Conditions. The commission and/or council may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this title pertaining to private roads. Private roads and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the parcel map.

        E.     Alternative Circulation Systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the circulation element of the general plan, where the review body determines that the alignment of such systems shown in the general plan can be feasibly accommodated within the subdivision, and that such a system is needed because of the characteristics of the proposed subdivision. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.08.030)

 

18.08.040 Energy conservation.
        All proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide for future passive natural heating or cooling opportunities as provided by this section, where determined by the review body to be feasible, except for condominium projects that consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added.

        A.    Heating. Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure.

        B.     Cooling. Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include the design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of available shade or prevailing breezes.

        In determining the feasibility of providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in subdivision design, the review body shall give consideration to local climate, terrain, the configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design and improvement requirements required by this title. Providing such heating or cooling opportunities shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure pursuant to the zoning regulations applicable at the time the tentative map is filed. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.08.040)

Chapter 18.10 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS, DEDICATIONS AND AGREEMENTS
18.10.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter establishes improvement standards for subdivisions, and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and requirements for dedications of land or payment in lieu of fees, and the placement of survey monuments within subdivisions. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.010)

 

18.10.020 Subdivision improvement and dedication requirements.
        A.    Conditions of Approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this chapter and any other improvements and dedications required by the review body in compliance with Sections 18.02.200 et seq. of this title shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved tentative map.

        B.     Oversizing of Improvements. At the discretion of the review body, improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may also be required to provide supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and may be required to be dedicated to the city, as provided by Article 6, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.020)

 

18.10.100 Improvement standards.
        A.    Applicability of Improvement Standards. Where required by the conditions of approval of a tentative map, the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this title, the design, construction or installation of physical improvements in subdivisions, including drainage facilities and easements, grading, erosion and sedimentation control, landscaping, public utilities and utility easements, streets, sewage disposal facilities, street lighting, and water supply facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer.

        B.     Extent of Improvements Required. As required by Article 1, Chapter 1 of the Map Act, improvements required for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and the construction of reasonable offsite and onsite improvements for the parcels being created. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.100)

 

18.10.110 Drainage and watercourses.
        A.    Drainage Systems Required. Subdivisions shall be provided storm drainage facilities as required by this section, and as required by Section 18.10.150 of this chapter.

        1.     Performance and Capacity. Subdivisions shall be designed to provide drainage systems to carry storm run-off both tributary to and originating within the subdivision to approved points of discharge, determined to be necessary by the city engineer on the basis of information and recommendations provided by the engineer for the subdivider. Drainage facilities shall be designed for a flood frequency of ten years with no head. Drainage system design shall avoid unnatural concentrations of storm water runoff and maintain existing drainage courses wherever possible.

        2.     Culverts. The minimum culvert size placed beneath a public street shall be eighteen (18) inches. Culverts shall be made of reinforced concrete, and placed at the grade of the drainage channel whenever practical. Minimum allowable culvert grade shall be two percent under normal circumstances. Minimum allowable open ditch grade shall be 0.5 percent.

        3.     Location of Facilities. Drainage facilities shall be located within a street right-of-way or within public drainage easements.

        4.     Timing of Installation. Any drainage structures required for the individual parcels of a subdivision shall be installed at the same time as drainage structures within street rights-of-way and other subdivision improvements.

        B.     Drainage Easements. Required drainage systems shall be located within drainage easements delineated on the final map or parcel map, and the easements shall satisfy the following standards. Drainage easements to be dedicated to the Santa Barbara County flood control district, shall instead comply with the standards of that agency.

        1.     Offer of Dedication. Drainage easements shall be offered for dedication.

        2.     Alignment of Easements. The alignment of drainage easements shall conform to the meandering of the natural watercourse or to the alignment approved for the drainage system.

        3.     Width of Easements.

        a.     Natural Channels. The width of drainage easements for natural channels shall be sufficient to include the high water marks, plus five feet on either side, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet.

        b.     Constructed Channels. The minimum width of any drainage easement for a closed conduit system shall be ten feet and the minimum width for any open system shall be twenty (20) feet.

        c.     Service Roads. For any conduit exceeding thirty (30) inches in diameter, or any open ditch with a top width exceeding twelve (12) feet, a twelve-foot service road shall be improved within the drainage easement.

        4.     Natural Watercourses. Drainage easements shall be provided for all natural watercourses.

        5.     Downstream Property. Where a subdivision causes an increase in and the unnatural concentration of surface waters onto adjacent private or public property, the subdivider shall obtain an easement for drainage purposes across such property of sufficient width and shall improve the easement in a manner adequate to convey the runoff to an approved point of disposal. If the owner of the affected property agrees to accept the increased run-off concentration of surface water and such agreement has been recorded, an easement shall not be required. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.110)

 

18.10.120 Grading, erosion and sedimentation control.
        New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures as well as conforms to all other applicable provisions of the city of Buellton Grading Ordinance, in Title 8 of this code. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.120)

 

18.10.130 Landscaping materials.
        Residential subdivisions shall be provided landscaping in the form of street trees on each proposed parcel, and landscaping with irrigation facilities for any common areas or other open space areas within the subdivision. The improvements may be deferred until the development of the subdivided lots through the provisions of Section 18.10.500 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.130)

 

18.10.140 Public utilities and utility easements.
        Public utilities including electricity, gas, and communication services, shall be installed as part of the improvements within all subdivisions as provided by this section. The installation of utilities may be waived by the review body through the exception process (Section 18.02.530) if the review body finds not installing the utilities as part of the subdivision improvements to be in the public interest.

        A.    Underground Utilities Required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows:

        1.     When Undergrounding is Required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including, but not limited to, electric, communication and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

        The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for the installation of said facilities. The review body may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical.

        2.     Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along any lot line. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer.

        3.     Timing of Installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines, and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

        B.     Utility Easements.

        1.     Minimum Width. The minimum width of easements for public or private utilities, sanitary sewers, or water distribution systems shall be fifteen (15) feet.

        2.     Overhead Lines. Easements for overhead utility lines shall be located at the rear of lots where practical, and along the side of lots where necessary. Where practical, the poles supporting overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alley, or easement designated exclusively for drainage purposes. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.140)

18.10.150 Road improvements.
        Public and private road improvements shall be provided in new subdivisions in compliance with the requirements of the city engineer. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.150)

 

18.10.160 Sewage disposal.
        A proposed subdivision shall be designed to provide for connection to the city’s sewage collection, treatment and disposal system. If any part of the system is to be installed within a street right-of-way, the system location and construction specifications shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.160)

 

18.10.170 Street lighting.
        A proposed subdivision shall incorporate street lighting facilities designed and constructed to the standards established by the local electricity provider. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.170)

 

18.10.180 Water supply.
        Water mains and services shall be installed to serve each lot in a proposed subdivision and connected to the city’s water system. If any part of the water system is to be installed within a street right-of-way, the system location, including valve boxes, meter boxes, and fire hydrants and the system construction specifications shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, and the location of fire hydrants shall also be approved by the city fire department. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.180)

 

18.10.300 Improvement plans.
        After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any work necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city as follows:

        A.    Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include the following information:

        1.     Any drawings, specifications, calculations, design reports and other information required by the city engineer.

        2.     Drainage plans for the entire subdivision.

        3.     The improvement plan/specification checking and construction inspection fees required by the city fee resolution.

        B.     Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection C of this section, the subdivider shall also submit a detailed cost estimate of all improvements to the city engineer, which shall include a fifteen (15) percent contingency factor.

        C.     Review and Approval.

        1.     Responsibility for Review. The responsibility for the review and approval of improvement plans is assigned to the city engineer.

        2.     Time Limits. Improvement plans shall be acted on within sixty (60) working days of submittal, except that at least fifteen (15) working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty (60) working day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plans are returned to the subdivider for correction, has been subject to review by an agency other than a city department or, following such review, has been returned to the subdivider for correction. The time limits established by this section may be extended by the mutual consent of the city engineer and the subdivider.

        D.    Effect of Approval. The approval of improvement plans shall be required before approval of a final or parcel map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.300)

 

18.10.400 Installation of improvements.
        Subdivision improvements required as conditions of approval of tentative maps in compliance with this chapter (see Section 18.10.020) shall be installed as provided by this section.

        A.    Timing of Improvements. Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed only after the approval of improvement plans as provided by Section 18.10.300 of this chapter, and before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with Sections 18.04.140 or 18.04.230 of this title, except where:

        1.     Improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 18.10.500 of this chapter; or

        2.     Improvements are required as conditions on the approval of a subdivision of four or fewer lots, in which case construction of the improvements shall be required:

        a.     Only when a permit for development of an affected parcel is issued by the department; or

        b.     At the time the construction of the improvements is required in compliance with an agreement between the subdivider and the city, as set forth in Section 18.10.500 of this chapter; or

        c.     At the time set forth in a condition of approval, when the review body finds that fulfillment of the construction requirements by such time is necessary for public health and safety, or because the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

        B.     Inspection of Improvements. The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall occur as follows:

        1.     Supervision. Before starting any work, the contractor engaged by the subdivider shall designate in writing an authorized representative who shall have the authority to represent and act for the contractor in contacts with the city. The designated representative shall be present at the work site at all times while work is in progress. At times when work is suspended, arrangements acceptable to the city engineer shall be made for any emergency work that may be required.

        2.     Inspection Procedures.

        a.     Access to Site and Materials. The city engineer shall have access to the work site at all times during construction, and shall be furnished with every reasonable facility for verifying that the materials and workmanship are in accordance with the approved improvement plans.

        b.     Authority for Approval. The work done and all materials furnished shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city engineer. The inspection of the work or materials shall not relieve the contractor of any obligations to fulfill the work as prescribed.

        c.     Improper Work or Materials. Work or materials not meeting the requirements of the approved plans and specifications may be rejected, regardless of whether the work or materials were previously inspected by the city engineer. In the event that the city engineer determines that subdivision improvements are not being constructed as required by the approved plans and specifications, he or she shall order the work stopped and shall inform the contractor of the reasons for stopping work and the corrective measures necessary to resume work. Any work done after issuance of a stop-work order shall be a violation of this title.

        3.     Notification for Required Inspections. The city engineer shall make such inspections as he or she deems necessary and shall be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any required inspection. The minimum required inspections are as follows:

        a.     The inspection of clearing and grubbing work before grading operations are started in any cut or fill areas;

        b.     The inspection and compaction testing of subgrade before the placing of road sub-base, base, and surfacing;

        c.     The inspection of storm drain, sewer pipe and water pipe installation and backfill, including compaction testing;

        d.     The inspection and compaction testing of sub-base and base before paving;

        e.     The inspection of all penetration treatment, seal coat, and paving while the work is in progress;

        f.      The inspection of concrete forms;

        g.     The inspection of concrete while being placed; and

        h.     Final inspection. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.400)

 

18.10.500 Improvement agreements and security.
        A subdivider may file a final map or parcel map before completion of all the improvements required by this title and conditions of approval of the tentative map, only when the subdivider first obtains council approval of a subdivision improvement agreement executed and submitted for council review by the subdivider, and provides the city performance security as required by this section. Improvement agreements and required security shall also comply with Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

        A.    Contents of Improvement Agreement. A subdivision improvement agreement shall be submitted on a form provided by the city engineer and approved by city attorney and shall include the following provisions:

        1.     Description of Improvements. A description of all improvements to be completed by the subdivider, with reference to the approved subdivision improvement plans.

        2.     Time Limit for Construction. The period within which all required improvements will be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

        3.     Completion by City. Provide that if the subdivider fails to complete all required improvements within the specified time, the city may elect to complete the improvements and recover the full cost and expenses thereof from the subdivider or the surety, including any attorney and legal fees associated with enforcement of the agreement. Such costs and expenses may be recorded as a lien against all parcels within the subdivision.

        4.     Surety Requirement. Require the subdivider to secure the agreement by furnishing security to insure full and faithful performance, as specified in subsection B of this section. The amount of surety shall be based on an engineer’s cost estimate submitted by the subdivider as provided by Section 18.10.300(B) of this chapter and approved by the city engineer. The total cost of improvements to be guaranteed shall be as provided in the approved engineer’s cost estimate.

        5.     Phased Construction. Provisions for the construction of improvements in units, at the option of the subdivider.

        6.     Time Extensions. Provisions for an extension of time under conditions specified therein, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection E of this section.

        7.     Progress Payments or Partial Release. Provide for progress payments from surety deposits or partial release of agreement surety, at the option of the subdivider, consistent with the requirements of subsection D of this section; provided that no progress payment or partial release shall be construed to be acceptance by the city of any portion of the required improvements or any defective work or improper materials.

        B.     Security Required to Guarantee Improvements. A subdivision improvement agreement or a subdivision road maintenance and repair agreement shall be secured by adequate surety in a form approved as to form and sufficiency by the city attorney, as follows:

        1.     Type of Security. Subdivision improvements agreements shall be secured by all of the following:

        a.     A guarantee for “Faithful Performance,” in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the engineer’s estimate.

        b.     A guarantee for “Materials and Labor,” in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the engineer’s estimate.

        2.     Form of Security. The required surety shall be in one of the following forms:

        a.     Bond or bonds executed by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties.

        b.     A cash deposit, cashiers check, or certified check deposited with the city.

        c.     An instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment.

        C.     Release of Security. The security furnished by the subdivider shall be released as provided by Chapter 5 of the Map Act.

        D.    Progress Payments or Partial Release. No progress payment or partial release of surety shall be made except when the city engineer has certified that the work required to qualify for such payment or release has been satisfactorily completed and the payment or release has also been approved by the council by at least four-fifths vote. No certificate given, progress payment made, or release of surety, except the final certificate of acceptance, shall be considered as any evidence of the performance of the agreement either wholly or in part. There will be no partial acceptance of any improvements.

        E.     Time Extensions. An extension of time for completion of improvements under a subdivision improvement agreement pursuant shall be granted by the council only as follows:

        1.     Public Works Report. The city engineer notifies the council that the subdivider is proceeding to do the work required with reasonable diligence and has given satisfactory evidence of being able and willing to complete all required work within the time of the requested extension.

        2.     Agreement by Sureties. The sureties agree in writing to extend for the additional period of time at the original amount of the bond or other surety, or if recommended by the city engineer, at an increased amount.

        3.     Council Action. The council approves the extension by at least a four-fifths vote. As a condition of granting a time extension, the council may impose whatever additional requirements the council deems reasonable to protect the public interest.

        F.     Acceptance of Improvements. Before acceptance for maintenance or final approval by the council of subdivision improvements, the city engineer shall verify that the improvement work has been completed in substantial compliance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.500)

 

18.10.600 Required dedications and exactions.
        A proposed subdivision shall be required to comply with the requirements of following Section 18.10.610 of this chapter regarding the dedication of land or payment of fees in lieu of dedication for the purposes specified, in addition to any dedication required for the subdivision improvements specified by Sections 18.10.100 et seq. of this chapter. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.600)

 

18.10.610 Parkland dedication.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees to the city for park and recreational purposes as a condition of the approval of a tentative map. This section is enacted as authorized by the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 4 of the Map Act, also known as the “Quimby Act.”

        B.     Applicability.

        1.     Land Dedication and/or Fee Payment Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate land and/or pay a fee as required by this section for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreation facilities to serve the subdivision.

        2.     Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to industrial or commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added, or to any other subdivisions exempted by Map Act Section 66477.

        C.     Amount of Parkland Required. Based on the policies of the parks and recreation element of the general plan, it is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety, and welfare require that .0132 acres of property per dwelling unit be devoted to neighborhood and community park and recreational purposes, exclusive of and in addition to school lands used cooperatively for recreational purposes. The acres per dwelling unit factor is based on five required park and recreation acres per one thousand (1,000) persons, in accordance with the general plan, and the average city population density of 2.63 persons per dwelling unit as determined by the 1990 Census.

        D.    Land Dedication Formula. The amount of acreage required to be dedicated by a residential subdivider for park and recreational purposes shall be based upon the number of dwelling units expected in the subdivision and shall be computed on the basis of 0.132 acres required per dwelling unit.

        E.     Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land. When a fee is to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of the fee shall be based on the projected cost of developing the amount of land required by subsection D of this section for recreational purposes. The council shall, from time to time, determine the current average cost of developing one acre of parkland within the city.

        The subdivider shall pay a fee determined by multiplying the cost, by the number of dwellings in the subdivision, by .0132.

        The fee amount required in lieu of land dedication shall be based on the fee schedule in effect when the subdivider: applies for building permits for subdivisions creating five or more parcels; or records the parcel or final map for subdivisions creating four or fewer parcels.

        F.     Criteria for Requiring Dedication and Fees. In subdivisions of over fifty (50) lots, the city may require the subdivider to dedicate both land and pay a fee, as follows:

        1.     Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

        a.     The parks and recreation element of the general plan and any applicable specific plans, and the compatibility of dedication with such plans.

        b.     Topography, geology, access, size, shape and the location of land in the subdivision available for dedication.

        c.     Feasibility of dedication.

        d.     Availability of previously acquired park property.

        2.     Fees Only. Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions of fifty (50) parcels or less.

        3.     Procedure for Determining Land or Fee. The review body shall determine whether the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay in-lieu fees, or provide a combination of both, at the time of tentative map approval. The determination of the review body shall be based on a report and recommendation from the director. The recommendation by the director and the action of the review body shall consider the factors in subsection (F)(1) of this section, and shall include the following:

        a.     The amount of land required.

        b.     Whether a fee shall be charged in lieu of land.

        c.     Whether land and a fee shall be required, and/or that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities.

        d.     The location of the park land to be dedicated or use of in-lieu fees.

        e.     The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

        The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive.

        4.     Formula for Land and Fees. When both land dedication and fee payment are required, they shall be subject to the following formula:

        a.     When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the parks and recreation element or applicable specific plan as the site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed as provided by subsection E of this section shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated by subsection D of this section.

        b.     When a major part of the local park or recreational site has been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, the remaining portion shall be dedicated, and a fee computed as provided by subsection E of this section shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land that would otherwise have been required to be dedicated by subsection D of this section. Such fees shall be used for the improvement of the existing park or recreational facility serving the subdivision.

        5.     Credit for Improvements. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements on dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any installed equipment shall be a credit against the required fees or land.

        6.     Credit for Private Recreation or Open Space. Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision, and will be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the review body finds in writing that all the following standards are met:

        a.     That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of the private open space.

        b.     That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyances, or restrictions.

        c.     That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants, which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city.

        d.     That the proposed private open space is usable for active recreation.

        e.     That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial compliance with the provisions of the parks and recreation element.

        G.    Conveyance of Land, Payment of Fees. Real property being dedicated for park purposes shall be conveyed by grant deed in fee simple absolute to the city by the subdivider, free and clear of all encumbrances except those which, in the opinion of city attorney, will not interfere with use of the property for park and recreational purposes, and which the city agrees to accept. Required deeds for the dedication of land and/or the amount of required fees shall be deposited with the city at the time of submittal of a parcel or final map. The deeds and/or fees shall be held by the city until the map is recorded, withdrawn by the subdivider, or the time for recordation expires. The subdivider shall provide all fees and instruments required to convey the land, and title insurance in favor of the city in an amount equal to the value of the land.

        H.    Use of Collected Fees. Fees collected in compliance with this section shall be used only for the purpose of providing new or rehabilitating existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the proposed subdivision. Any fees collected shall be committed within five years after payment, or issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.610)

 

18.10.620 Right-of-way dedications.
        A.    Offers of Dedication Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication in fee simple of all land within the subdivision that is determined by the review body to be needed for public streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; drainage; public greenways; scenic easements, public utility easements; and any other necessary public easements.

        B.     Improvements. The subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights; and drainage, public utility and other public easements in accordance with design and improvement standards within this chapter or as may be adopted by resolution of the council.

        C.     Rights-of-Way, Generally. Rights-of-way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right-of-way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility. Dedications on remainder parcels that are not at the smallest lot area allowed under present zoning will not be required unless necessary for orderly development of the area or public health and safety.

        D.    Bicycle Paths. If the subdivision, as shown on the final map, contains two hundred (200) or more parcels, any subdivider who is required to dedicate roadways to the public, shall dedicate additional land for bicycle paths for the use and safety of the residents of the subdivision.

        E.     Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision will be required for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if:

        1.     The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred (200) dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the general plan; and

        2.     The review body finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision.

        F.     Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the general plan, applicable specific plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate such land as is necessary and feasible to provide for such ways. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.620)

 

18.10.700 Monuments.
        Survey monuments shall be set for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map by the engineer or surveyor, as set forth in this section. All such monuments shall conform with the provisions of Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act, the California Land Surveyors Act and the following standards:

        A.    Location of Monuments. Permanent ferrous survey monuments shall be set in the following locations:

        1.     At all angle points on the exterior boundary of the subdivision.

        2.     At all parcel and lot corners and at the beginning and ending of all property line curves, except that in a parcel subdivision or minor subdivision creating parcels each with a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more, a permanent ferrous monument shall be set at the major parcel corners and at the intersection of all property lines with the side lines of all street easements.

        3.     When concrete curb and gutters are proposed or required to be constructed as part of the subdivision improvements, a permanent survey monument approved by the city engineer shall be set at the intersection of all street centerlines.

        4.     If the exterior boundary of the subdivision or any lot or parcel line is at a location where setting a monument is impractical, a reference monument shall be set in a manner and location satisfactory to the city engineer.

        5.     All tract boundary corners shall be two-inch diameter pipe with cap and set in concrete.

        B.     Timing of Monument Installation. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be completely monumented or referenced before the final map or parcel map is submitted to the city engineer for filing. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the final map or parcel map is filed if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that the monuments will be set on or before a specified later date, and if the subdivider furnishes the city a bond, instrument of credit, or cash deposit in a sufficient amount to guarantee payment of the cost of setting the monuments in accordance with Section 66496 of the Map Act.

        C.     Notice of Completion. Within five days after the final setting of all monuments has been completed, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and the city engineer that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Map Act. The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer’s estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 18.10.500(B)(1) of this chapter. If requested, this amount of the bond may be released upon verification of the setting of the monuments by the city engineer. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.10.700)

Chapter 18.12 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
18.12.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter defines penalties for violations of the provisions of this title or the Map Act, and establishes a procedure for recording notices of violation against the title of parcels that were illegally subdivided, as provided by the Map Act. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.12.010)

 

18.12.020 Penalty for violation.
        A.    Violations of This Title. Any sale, lease or financing of real property contrary to the provisions of this title shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Sections 1.01.200 et seq. of the Buellton Municipal Code.

        B.     Violations of the Map Act. As provided by Map Act Section 66499.31, each violation of the Map Act by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the violation shall be punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or by both that fine and imprisonment.

        C.     Other Remedies. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to bar any legal equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other local agency or person, firm, corporation or partnership may otherwise be entitled, including, but not limited to, the remedies described in Article 2, Chapter 7 of the Map Act, and the city or other public agency or such person, firm, corporation or partnership may file suit in the superior court of the county of Santa Barbara to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed division or sale, lease or financing in violation of this title. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.12.020)

 

18.12.030 Notice of violation.
        Whenever a city officer, department or employee has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Map Act or this title, they shall notify the planning department, and the department shall process a notice of violation as set forth in this section.

        A.    Notice of Intention. The department shall prepare and serve a notice of intention to record a notice of violation, as follows:

        1.     Content of Notice. The notice of intention shall:

        a.     Describe the real property in detail, naming all current owners.

        b.     Specify the time, date and place for a meeting where the owner may present evidence to the subdivision committee why the notice should not be recorded.

        c.     Describe the violations of this title and explain why the subject parcel is not lawful, as set forth in Map Act Sections 66412.6(a) and (b).

        2.     Service of Notice. The notice of intention shall be mailed by certified mail to the current owner of record of the property.

        3.     Response to Notice of Intention by Owner. If the owner wishes to object to the recording of a notice of violation, he or she shall inform the department of their objection in writing within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of intention, or the subdivision committee shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder.

        B.     Meeting of Subdivision Committee. The subdivision committee shall schedule a meeting to review the matter no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than sixty (60) days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention. At the meeting, the committee shall review the information provided by the department in the notice of intention to record a notice of violation, any evidence presented by the owner of the subject property, and determine whether the property was illegally divided.

        C.     Clearance Letter. If the committee determines that there has been no violation, the subdivision committee shall mail a clearance letter to the current owner of record.

        D.    Notice of Violation. If the subdivision committee determines that the property was divided illegally, the committee shall direct that the department record a notice of violation with the county recorder. When recorded, the notice of violation shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property.

        E.     Release of Notice. At such time as the subdivider has corrected the violation by either filing and receiving approval of a tentative map, and parcel or final map as required by Section 18.01.030 of this title, or obtaining a conditional certificate of compliance as provided by Section 18.06.310 of this title, the subdivider may file a request with the department for release of the notice of violation. The request shall be accompanied by the fee required by the city fee resolution for the release of a notice of violation. If the director determines that a parcel or final map has been recorded or a conditional certificate of compliance has been issued and all conditions have been completed, director shall record a release of notice of violation with the county recorder, referencing the recorder’s book and page of the notice of violation being released. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.12.030)

Chapter 18.20 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS
18.20.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter defines terms and phrases used in this title that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage, and provides rules for the interpretation of the provisions and language of this title. The definitions of this chapter apply to the terms and phrases used in this title in addition to the definitions in Article 2, Chapter 1 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.20.010)

 

18.20.020 Rules of interpretation.
        It shall be the responsibility of the planning director to interpret the provisions of this title, subject to the following requirements:

        A.    Effect of Provisions.

        1.     Minimum Requirements. The regulations and standards set forth in this title shall be considered minimum requirements, which are binding upon all persons and bodies charged with administering or enforcing this title.

        2.     Effect Upon Private Agreements. It is not intended that these regulations are to interfere with or annul any easements, covenants or other agreement between parties. When these regulations impose a greater restriction upon the subdivision, development or use of land than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by covenants, easements or agreements, these regulations shall control.

        B.     Language.

        1.     Word Construction. When used in this title, the words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The words “should” or “may” are permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

        2.     Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or in any condition of approval or notice issued or given in compliance with this title, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar days. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.20.020)

 

18.20.030 Subdivision ordinance definitions.
        The following definitions of the terms and phrases used in this title are arranged in alphabetical order.

        “Approval” includes both approval and approval with conditions.

        “Block” means a group of lots surrounded by streets or roads.

        “Block length” means the longest dimension of a block along a street or road.

        “City council” or “council” means the city council of the city of Buellton.

        “Common interest development” means and includes a condominium, community apartment project, planned development or stock cooperative, as provided by California Civil Code Section 1351.

        “Community apartment project” means a development in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon; as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 1351(d) of the Civil Code.

        “Condominium” means, as defined by Civil Code Section 1351(f), a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support.

        “Department.” See “planning department.”

        “Design” means (1) street alignments, grades and widths; (2) drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including their alignments and grades; (3) location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; (4) lot size and configuration; (5) traffic access; (6) grading; (7) land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and (8) other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of an entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

        “Director.” See “planning director.”

        “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

        “Final map” means a final map prepared in compliance with Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Map Act and approved in compliance with Article 4, Chapter 3 of the Map Act.

        “General plan” means the city of Buellton general plan.

        “Improvement” means any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. Improvement also refers to any other improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.

        “Lot.” See “parcel.”

        “Map Act.” See “Subdivision Map Act.”

        “Nonconforming parcel or lot” means a parcel that was created in compliance with provisions of the Map Act, and the Santa Barbara County Code or city of Buellton Municipal Code that were applicable at the time of subdivision, but that no longer conforms with such provisions because of subsequent amendments to the Map Act, the Buellton general plan, and Buellton Municipal Code.

        “Original parcel” means a contiguous area of land under one ownership at the time of division, which is proposed for division under this title.

        “Parcel map” means the map described by Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, which is required by this title to complete subdivision of four or fewer lots.

        “Parcel or lot” means:

        1.     A parcel of real property shown on a subdivision or plat map, required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title to be recorded before sale of parcels shown on the map or plat, at the time the map was recorded;

        2.     A parcel of real property that has been issued a certificate of compliance as provided by Government Code Section 66499.35 and Section 18.06.200 et seq. of this title; or

        3.     A parcel of real property not described in (1) or (2) of this definition, provided the parcel resulted from a separate conveyance or from a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction which was record before the requirement of the filing of the subdivision map by the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

        “Parks and recreation element” means the parks and recreation element of the city general plan.

        “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

        “Planned development” means as defined by Civil Code Section 1351(k), a development (other than a community apartment project, condominium or stock cooperative) having either or both of the following features: (1) The common area is owned either by an association or in common by the owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area; (2) A power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the separately owned lot, parcel, or area in accordance with Civil Code Section 1367.

        “Planning department,” or “department” means the planning department of the city.

        “Planning director,” or “director” means the director of the city planning department.

        “Proposed parcel(s)” means each separate parcel shown on a tentative map or lot line adjustment, as proposed by an applicant.

        “Public road” means a street or highway owned and maintained by the city, or the state of California.

        “Public works” or “public works department” means the city public works department.

        “Public works director” means the city public works director or designee of the director.

        “Review body” means the city planning commission serves as the review body assigned the authority for approval or disapproval of subdivisions proposing four or fewer lots, and the Buellton city council serves as the review body with the authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions of five or more lots, except as otherwise provided by this title.

        “Stock cooperative” means a development defined by Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code and Section 1351(m) of the Civil Code, where a corporation is formed to hold title to improved real property and the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property.

        “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or the grantor to any such agency, entity, utility or subsidiary, who proposes to subdivide for him or herself or for others, except employees and consultants or such persons or entities acting in such capacity.

        “Subdivision Map Act,” or “Map Act” means Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments thereto.

        “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized Santa Barbara County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this title, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

        “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it.

        “This code” means the city of Buellton Municipal Code.

        “Vesting tentative map” means a map that is filed and processed in the same manner as a tentative map except as otherwise provided by this title or the Subdivision Map Act. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have the words “Vesting Tentative Map” printed conspicuously on its face.

        “Zoning ordinance” means the zoning title of the city of Buellton, Title 19 of the Buellton Municipal Code. (Ord. 94-16, 1994; prior code § 18.20.030)

Title 19 ZONING

Note
Chapter 19.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF ZONING TITLE
Chapter 19.02 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWABLE LAND USES
Chapter 19.04 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 19.06 SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 19.08 LAND USE PERMIT PROCEDURES
Chapter 19.10 ZONING ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 19.12 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 19.14 ADULT USE ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 19.16 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Chapter 19.18 MIXED USE REGULATIONS

Note
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 93-09, 93-11 and 94-05.

Chapter 19.01 PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF ZONING TITLE
19.01.010 Title and purpose.
        This is the zoning ordinance of the city, Title 19 of the Buellton Municipal Code, hereafter referred to as “this title.” This title serves to carry out the policies of the Buellton general plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land, buildings, and structures within the corporate boundaries of the city. This title is adopted to protect and to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the purposes of this title are to:

        A.    Provide standards for the orderly growth and development of the city;

        B.     Encourage the most appropriate uses of land;

        C.     Maintain and protect the value of property;

        D.    Conserve and protect the natural resources of the city;

        E.     Protect the character, and social and economic stability of residential, commercial, industrial and agricultural areas; and

        F.     Create a comprehensive and stable pattern of land uses upon which to plan transportation, water supply, sewerage and other facilities and public utilities. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.010)

 

19.01.020 Applicability of zoning ordinance.
        This title applies to all land uses and development within the city as provided by this section.

        A.    New Land Uses and Changes to Existing Uses. It is unlawful, and a violation of the Buellton Municipal Code, for any person or public agency to establish, construct, reconstruct, alter or replace any use of land, building or structure, unless:

        1.     The proposed use of land is allowed by Chapter 19.02 of this title within the zone that applies to the site; and

        2.     The proposed use of land, building or structure, or division of land satisfies all applicable requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, minimum lot area, height limits, required setbacks, parking standards, residential density, sign standards, specific use requirements; and

        3.     Any land use permit or other approval required by Chapter 19.02 of this title is first obtained as provided by Chapter 19.08 of this title, and any applicable conditions of approval are first satisfied.

        B.     Issuance of Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the building department unless the proposed land use and construction satisfy the requirements of subsection A of this section.

        C.     Subdivision of Land. Any subdivision of land within the city occurring after the effective date of this title shall be consistent with the minimum lot size requirements of Chapter 19.02 of this title, all other applicable requirements of this title, and all applicable requirements of the Buellton subdivision ordinance, Title 18 of this code.

        D.    Continuation of an Existing Use. It is unlawful and a violation of the Buellton Municipal Code for anyone to operate or maintain a use of land in any manner that violates any provision of this title. However, the requirements of this title are not retroactive in their effect on a use of land that was lawfully established before this title or any applicable amendment became effective, except where an alteration, expansion or modification to an existing land use is proposed, and except as provided by Sections 19.10.200, et seq.

        E.     Effect of Zoning Ordinance Changes on Projects in Progress. The enactment of this title or amendments to its requirements may have the effect of imposing different standards on development or new land uses than those that applied to existing development (e.g., this title or a future amendment could require more off-street parking spaces for a particular land use than former zoning ordinance provisions). This subsection determines how the requirements of this title apply to development projects in progress at the time requirements are changed.

        1.     Projects with Pending Applications. All land use permit applications that have been determined by the department to be complete as provided by Government Code Section 65943 before the effective date of this title or any amendment, will be processed according to the regulations and requirements in effect at the time the application was accepted as complete. Applications for land use permit extensions of time shall be consistent with the requirements of this title that are in effect when the application for time extension is accepted as complete.

        2.     Approved Projects not yet Under Construction. Any land use authorized by a zoning clearance, development plan, conditional use permit or variance, for which construction has not begun as of the effective date of this title or amendment may still be constructed as provided by the approved permit, as long as construction is completed and the approved use is established before the expiration of the permit or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension (see Chapter 19.08 of this title).

        3.     Projects Under Construction. A building or structure that is under construction on the effective date of this title or any amendment, need not be changed to satisfy any new or different requirements of this title as long as construction is beyond the completion of foundations on the effective date of this title or amendment.

        F.     Other Requirements May Apply. Nothing in this title shall eliminate the need for obtaining any other required permits, including, but not limited to, building permits, plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permits, grading permits, the approval of a parcel or final map, or any permit, approval or entitlement required by other chapters of this code or the regulations of any city department or other public agency, such as authority to construct or permit to operate from the Santa Barbara County Air Pollution Control District, or streambed alteration permits from the California Department of Fish and Game.

        G.    Exceptions. The provisions of this title shall not apply to the following:

        1.     Development by the federal government on leased or federally owned land.

        2.     Development by the city.

        3.     Development by the state of California or an agency of the state acting in its sovereign (governmental) capacity. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.020)

 

19.01.030 Prior zoning ordinances and development plans.
        All the sections of zoning ordinances previously adopted which added development plans and zone district text provisions applicable to particular property by amendments to Title IV of Ordinance 661 of the County of Santa Barbara, the Santa Barbara County Zoning Ordinance (Article III of Chapter 35 of the Santa Barbara County Code as adopted by Ordinance 3347, and all amendments thereto that were effective before February 1, 1992), and Development Plans and Precise Plans previously adopted pursuant to Ordinances 661 and Article III of Chapter 35, are incorporated by reference into this section and shall have the same force and effect as if the provisions of such ordinances and plans were fully set forth here. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.030)

 

19.01.040 Responsibility for administration.
        This title shall be administered by the planning director (hereafter referred to as the director), the Buellton planning department (hereafter referred to as the department), city council (hereafter referred to as the council), planning commission (hereafter referred to as the commission), and zoning administrator, as provided in Sections 19.10.010 et seq. of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.040)

 

19.01.050 Interpretation.
        The director is assigned the responsibility and authority to interpret the requirements of this title. Questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this title are to be resolved as provided by this section.

        A.    Language.

        1.     Terminology. When used in this title, the word “shall” is always mandatory and “may” is discretionary. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise.

        2.     Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, except that such time limits shall extend to the following working day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or holiday.

        3.     Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this title, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits for buildings and structures, building coverage, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are maximums, not minimums).

        4.     Rounding. Except or unless otherwise specified in this title, when calculating the number of permitted or required items (i.e., residential density computations, number of required parking spaces, etc.), any fractional numbers shall be rounded up to the next highest whole integer.

        B.     Map Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists about the location of any zoning district boundary shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall be used to resolve the uncertainty:

        1.     Where district boundaries approximately follow lot, alley, or street lines, such lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be construed as the district boundaries.

        2.     If a district boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the zoning map, the location of the boundary will be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map.

        3.     Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the property that was formerly in the street or alley will be included within the zone or zones of the adjoining property on either side of the centerline of the vacated or abandoned street or alley.

        C.     Allowable Uses of Land. If a proposed use of land is not specifically listed in Chapter 19.02 of this title, the use shall not be allowed, except as follows:

        1.     The director may determine that a proposed use not listed in Chapter 19.02 of this title is allowable if the director finds all of the following:

        a.     The characteristics of, and activities associated with the proposed use are substantially similar to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zoning district as allowable, and will not involve a higher level of activity or population density than the uses listed in the district.

        b.     The proposed use will meet the purpose and intent of the district in which the use is proposed to be located.

        c.     The proposed use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan.

        2.     Upon a determination by the director that a proposed unlisted use is equivalent to a listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where it is allowed, what permits are required and what other standards and requirements of this title apply.

        3.     Determinations that specific unlisted uses are equivalent to listed uses will be recorded by the department, and will be incorporated into the land use definitions of the zoning ordinance when amendments to the ordinance are next considered.

        4.     The director may forward questions about equivalent uses directly to the commission for determination at a public hearing.

        D.    Conflicting Provisions.

        1.     Other Code Provisions. If conflicts occur between different requirements of this title, or between this title and other requirements of the Buellton Municipal Code, the most restrictive shall apply.

        2.     Specific Plans. When conflicts occur between the provisions of this title and standards adopted as part of any specific plan, the provisions of the specific plan shall apply.

        3.     Private Agreements. It is not intended that the requirements of this title are to interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement that was in effect when this title became effective. Where this title imposes a greater restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private requirement, the provisions of this title shall apply. Where a covenant or private agreement imposes a greater restriction than this title, the provisions of this title shall still apply (without diminishing any private agreements or restrictions). The city will not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

        E.     Appeal and Referral. Any interpretations of the zoning ordinance by the director may be appealed as provided by Section 19.10.130 of this title. The director may refer any interpretation of this title to the commission for a decision. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(J)(3), 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.050)

 

19.01.060 Fees—Established by resolution.
        The council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees for processing the various applications required by this title. All required fees shall be paid at the time of filing the application with the department and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.060)

 

19.01.070 Partial invalidation of zoning ordinance.
        If any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this title is for any reason held to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. It is declared that this title and each chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more of such portions of the ordinance be declared invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.01.070)

 

 

19.01.080 Administration of the jurisdiction of zoning.
        If, in the discretion of the planning director, the promotion of efficient and sound planning principals or protection of the public welfare and safety require that the city council exercise final decision jurisdiction for the review and approval of any one or more applications for a proposed private or public project subject to the title, the planning director, notwithstanding any provision in the title, may submit the project applications for review and decision as follows:

        A.    To the planning commission for a recommendation of approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council, with final decision by the city council; or

        B.     Directly to the city council for final decision on the project and all related applications. (Ord. 01-04 § 3, 2002)

Chapter 19.02 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ALLOWABLE LAND USES
19.02.010 Zoning districts established.
        In order to classify and regulate the use of land, buildings and structures, and to establish appropriate minimum regulations and standards for the development of land within the city that will consistently implement the general plan, the city shall be divided into the following zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map (Section 19.02.020).

 

A.

Residential districts

Map symbol

 

Single-family residential

RS

 

Multifamily residential

RM

 

Planned residential district

PRD

 

Mobilehome park

MHP

B.

Commercial/industrial districts

 

Neighborhood commercial

CN

 

General commercial

CR

 

Service commercial

CS

 

Industrial/manufacturing

M

C.

Special-purpose districts

 

Recreation

REC

 

Open space

OS

 

Public/quasi-public

PQP

D.

Overlay districts

 

Affordable housing

-H

(Ord. 96-02 § 2, 1996; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.010)

 

19.02.020 Zoning map adopted.
        The boundaries of the zoning and combining districts established by Section 19.02.010 shall be shown upon the map designated as the city zoning map, on file in the city planning department. The city zoning map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, district boundaries, district map codes, and other information thereon shall be adopted by the city council pursuant to Government Code Sections 65800 et seq., and are hereby incorporated into this title by reference as though they were fully set forth here. Any changes to the city zoning map after its adoption shall occur as set forth in Section 19.10.110 of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.020)

 

19.02.030 Allowable land uses and permit requirements.
        A.    Restriction on New Land Uses. No use of land, buildings or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered or replaced unless:

        1.     The land use is listed in Sections 19.02.110, 19.02.210, or 19.02.310 of this chapter as being allowable in the zoning district applicable to the site; and

        2.     Any land use permit required by this title is obtained before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is identified by subsection B of this section as not needing a land use permit. (The land use permit requirements of this title are established by Sections 19.02.110, 19.02.210, or 19.02.310 of this chapter); and

        3.     The use satisfies all other applicable requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter 19.04 and 19.06 of this title.

        B.     Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements. The land use permit requirements of this title do not apply to the following activities, uses of land and structures, provided that activities which are exempt from land use permit requirements shall comply with all other applicable regulations of this title including, but not limited to, use, setback, and height, except as otherwise specified.

        1.     Decks, Walks and Driveways. Decks, platforms, walks, and driveways which do not require a grading permit pursuant to the Uniform Building Code and are not over thirty (30) inches above finish grade and not over any basement or story below.

        2.     Fences. Fences and walls of six feet or less and gateposts of eight feet or less in height located within front yard setback areas. Fences and walls of eight feet or less in height and gateposts of ten feet or less in height located outside of front yard setback areas and not closer than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line of any street. (Section 19.04.100 contains land use permit requirements for fences and walls that are not exempted from a permit by this section.)

        3.     Film and Theater Productions. Structures and related development required for temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery, and still photographic sessions, provided that such development does not require alterations of the natural environment such as removal of vegetation, grading or earthwork. The director may require the payment of a performance security (bond or other instrument) to insure the removal of such structures and related development and the restoration of a site used for film or theater production.

        4.     Governmental Activities. Activities of the federal government on leased or federally owned land; activities of the state of California or an agency of the state acting in its sovereign (governmental) capacity; and activities of the city.

        5.     Irrigation. The installation of irrigation lines.

        6.     Remodelling.

        a.     Interior Changes. Interior alternations that do not result in an increase in the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure, or a change in the permitted use of the structure.

        b.     Minor Exterior Changes. The installation of skylights, windows, and doors; and window awnings that are supported by an exterior wall and project no more than fifty-four (54) inches from such exterior wall.

        7.     Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if the work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or building, or the addition to, enlargement or expansion of the building.

        8.     Retaining Walls. Retaining walls (retaining earth only) which are not over four feet in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall and do not require a grading permit pursuant to the Uniform Building Code.

        9.     School Facilities. Certain school facilities as provided by Government Code Sections 53091 et seq.

        10.   Small Accessory Buildings. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, gazebos, pergolas and similar uses, provided such buildings do not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, the roof area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet, and no plumbing or electrical work is required.

        11.   Solar Collectors. The addition of solar collection systems to the roofs of existing buildings or structures.

        12.   Spas, hot tubs, and fish ponds that do not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in total development, including related equipment, or contain more than two thousand (2,000) gallons of water, or exceed thirty-six (36) inches in depth.

        13.   Utilities. Poles, wires, and underground gas pipelines less than twelve (12) inches in diameter (see Section 19.06.120), and similar installations erected, installed, or maintained by public agencies.

        14.   Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. As specified in Section 19.06.280. Includes readiness measures taken for the future installation of charging stations such as the installation of a raceway and panel capacity. Regulations applied shall be limited to health and safety standards.

        C.     Temporary Uses. Requirements for establishing a temporary use are in Sections 19.06.020 and 19.06.190 of this title.

        D.    Other Permits May Still be Required. A land use that has been authorized by a land use permit or is not required by this title to have a land use permit may still be required to obtain other permits before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this title shall eliminate the need to obtain building, grading or other construction permits, a business license, or subdivision approval if they are required by other provisions of this code, or any permit required by the county health department, air pollution control district, state or federal agency. All other necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing a new land use. (Ord. 20-05 § 2, 2020; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.030)

 

19.02.040 Zoning district regulations.
        A.    Purpose. Sections 19.02.100 through 19.02.330 of this chapter determine what land uses are allowed in each zone, what land use permit is required to establish each use, and the basic development standards that apply to allowed land uses in each of the zoning districts established by Section 19.02.010 of this chapter.

        B.     Applicability, Additional Requirements. The requirements of Sections 19.02.110 through 19.02.330 of this chapter apply to proposed land uses in addition to any applicable provisions of Chapter 19.04, Chapter 19.06 or any other applicable provisions of this title.

        C.     Conflicts Between Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the following zoning district regulations and Chapters 19.04 or 19.06, the provisions of 19.04 and 19.06 shall control.

        D.    Measurement of Setback and Height Standards. Explanations of how height limits and setback requirements apply to sites and projects are in Sections 19.04.110 and 19.04.160 of this title, respectively. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.040)

 

19.02.100 Residential zones.
        Sections 19.02.110 through 19.02.160 of this chapter provide regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the residential zones established by Section 19.02.010 of this chapter. The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts are as follows:

        A.    RS (Single-Family Residential). The RS zoning district is intended to reserve appropriately located areas for family living in detached dwelling units at a reasonable range of population densities, consistent with sound standards of public health, safety, and welfare. The RS zoning district is consistent with the low density residential designation of the general plan.

        B.     RM (Multifamily Residential). The RM zoning district provides areas for duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, condominiums, other multiple-family dwellings, and detached single-family dwellings at higher densities than found in the RS zone, and is intended to allow flexibility and encourage innovation and diversity in the design of residential developments. A wide range of densities and housing types are allowed, while requiring developments to incorporate substantial amounts of open space. The RM zoning district is consistent with the medium density residential and multifamily residential designations of the general plan. Mixed-use projects with a commercial component are permitted subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 19.18 of this title.

        C.     PRD (Planned Residential Development). The PRD zoning district is applied to areas designated by the general plan for residential use that have sensitive environmental, visual, or other characteristics which can be benefited by flexible and innovative design, so that a development can provide for desirable aesthetic and efficient use of space, and preserve significant natural, scenic, and cultural site resources. This district is also intended to: encourage clustering of structures to preserve a maximum amount of open space; allow for a diversity of housing types; and provide recreational opportunities for both site residents and the public. The PRD zoning district is consistent with the low density residential, medium density residential, and multifamily residential designations of the general plan.

        D.    MHP (Mobilehome Park). The MHP district provides areas for mobilehomes on nonpermanent foundations in planned developments such as mobilehome rental parks and mobilehome condominiums. The intent is to provide affordable housing opportunities, and to ensure a safe and attractive residential environment by promoting high standards of site planning, architecture, and landscaping design. The MHP zoning district is consistent with the medium density residential designation of the general plan. (Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.100)

 

19.02.110 Residential zone allowable land use and permit requirements.
        The uses of land allowed by this title in each residential zone are identified in the following tables as being:

        A.    Allowed subject to zoning clearance (“A” uses on the tables) (see Section 19.08.100); or

        B.     Allowable subject to approval of a minor use permit (“MUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        C.     Allowable subject to approval of a conditional use permit (“CUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        D.    Allowable subject to approval of a Development Plan (“DP”) (Section 19.08.120).

        Land uses that are not listed on the tables or are not shown in a particular zone are not allowed, except where otherwise provided by Section 19.02.030(B) of this chapter.

 

 


RESIDENTIAL ZONES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

LAND USE TYPES

PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY ZONE

 

RS

RM

PRD

MHP

See Section

Agricultural, Resource and Open Space Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 Agricultural accessory structures

A

 

 

 

19.06.010

 Animal raising and keeping

A

A

A

A

19.06.020

 Animal keeping, more than permitted by zone

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

19.06.020

 Crop production

A

A

 

 

 

 Equestrian facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Grazing

A

 

 

 

 

 Greenhouses, 300 sq. ft. or less

A

DP, A

 

 

 

 Greenhouses, larger than 300 sq. ft.

MUP

 

 

 

 

Recreation, Education and Public Assembly Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 Churches

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Community centers

A

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

 Libraries and museums

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Parks, playgrounds, golf courses

A

DP, A

DP, A

CUP

 

 Schools — College and university

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Schools — Elementary

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Schools — Secondary

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Schools — Specialized education and training

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)

A

A

A

 

19.06.180

 Agricultural employee housing, 6 or fewer persons

A

A

A

A

19.02.140

 Agricultural employee housing, 7 or fewer persons

MUP

MUP

MUP

DP

19.02.140

 Caretaker housing

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

19.06.220

 Condominiums, stock cooperatives, community apartments

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

19.06.060

 Duplexes

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

 Emergency shelters

 

CUP

 

 

 

 Farm employee housing

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 Home occupations

A

A

A

A

19.06.100

 Mobilehome parks

 

 

 

DP

19.06.120

 Mobilehomes

A

DP, A

DP, A

A

19.06.110

 Multifamily dwellings

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

 Residential accessory uses

A

A

A

A

 

 Residential care homes, 6 or fewer clients

A

A

A

A

 

 Residential care homes, 7 or more clients

MUP

MUP

MUP

DP

 

 Shared living arrangements

A

A

A

A

19.02.140

 Short-term lodging

 

 

 

 

19.02.150

 Single-family dwellings

A

A

A

 

 

 Special needs housing

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.02.140

 Temporary dwelling

A

A

A

A

19.06.200

 Transitional housing

A

A

 

 

 

Service Uses

 

 

 

 

 

 Cemeteries, columbariums and mortuaries

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.06.130

 Child day care, centers

MUP

MUP

DP, A

MUP

19.06.050

 Child day care, family care homes

A

A

A

 

19.06.050

 Medical services — Hospitals and extended care

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 Public utility facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Temporary real estate offices

A

A

A

A

19.06.210

Transportation and Communications

 

 

 

 

 

 Airfields and landing strips

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, non-CPUC regulated

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, CPUC regulated

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, more than 50 ft. high

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Heliports

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Pipelines and transmission lines

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.06.150

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Mixed use

 

DP

 

 

Ch. 19.18

 

KEY TO PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

Allowed use, zoning clearance required

A

19.08.100

Minor use permit required

MUP

19.08.110

Conditional use permit required

CUP

19.08.110

Development plan required

DP

19.08.120

Use not allowed

 

 

 

Note: See Section 19.01.050(C) regarding uses not listed; see Chapter 19.12 for definitions of listed uses.

 

(Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 15-03 § 3, 2015; Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-10 § 2(E)(1), 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.110)

 

19.02.120 Residential zone general development standards.
        A.    Site Development Standards. The following minimum requirements apply to development within the residential zoning districts. Additional standards are in Chapters 19.04 and 19.06 of this title. Refer to Chapter 19.18 for additional standards relating to mixed-use projects.

 

 

 

 

REQUIREMENT BY ZONING DISTRICT

Development Feature

RS

RM

PRD

MHP

Minimum lot area

See 19.02.120(B)

10,000 sq. ft.

None required

See 19.06.100

Residential density  (maximum allowed)

1 dwelling per lot

See 19.02.120(C)

Per General Plan

7 mobilehomes per gross acre

Setbacks

See 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, these setback requirements

 

Front

20 ft. minimum

Determined by Development Plan

As required by Section 19.06.120 (Mobilehome Parks)

 

Side

10% of lot width

10 ft. minimum

5 ft. minimum

10 ft. max. required

 

Street Side

See Section 19.04.160(B)

 

Rear

25 ft. minimum

10 ft. minimum

15 ft. if rear yard abuts street with access denied

 

Interior

5 ft. minimum between a habitable building and any other building

 

Parking areas

Same as front, side, and rear required above

15 ft. min. from streets

5 ft. min. from other property lines

Site coverage

No maximum

30% of net site area for dwellings

30% of net site area for dwellings; 50% of net site area for all buildings

Open space

None required

40% of net site area

40% of gross site area

Height limits

30 ft. max. on lots less than 20,000 sq. ft.

35 ft. maximum

25 ft. maximum

35 ft. max on lots of 20,000 + sq. ft.

Parking

See Section 19.04.140 (parking and loading)

Landscaping

See Section 19.04.120 (landscaping requirements)

See 19.06.100

 

        B.     Minimum Lot Size for New Subdivisions, RS Zone. The minimum area and width of lots proposed in new residential subdivisions is determined by the following table, based on a suffix to the zoning map symbol (e.g., RS-6, RS-7, RM-10, etc.), as follows:

 

 

Zoning

Minimum Lot Area (net)

Minimum Lot Width

RS-6

6,500 sq. ft.

65 feet

RS-7

7,000 sq. ft.

65 feet

RS-8

8,000 sq. ft.

75 feet

RS-10

10,000 sq. ft.

80 feet

RS-12

12,000 sq. ft.

80 feet

RS-15

15,000 sq. ft.

90 feet

RS-20

20,000 sq. ft.

100 feet

RS-40

40,000 sq. ft.

120 feet

 

        C.     Residential Density, RM Zone. The maximum density for each lot zoned RM shall be specified by a number following the RM on the city zoning map. The number represents the number of dwelling units per gross acre permitted on the lot, as follows:

 

Zoning

Maximum Dwellings per Gross Acre

Gross Land Area per Dwelling (sq. ft.)

RM-4

4

10,890

RM-6

6

7,260

RM-8

8

5,445

RM-9

9

4,840

RM-12

12

3,630

RM-14

14

3,111

RM-16

16

2,722

 

        D.    Community Design Guidelines. Every proposal shall be reviewed using the community design guidelines.

        E.     Multifamily Infill Projects. Applications for development of multifamily dwellings on property zoned RM shall be processed as follows:

        1.     Zoning Clearance. Residential projects. as defined in Section 19.16.012 and conforming to the following criteria. shall be allowed by zoning clearance under the jurisdiction of the planning director as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.100 of this code: (a) the residential project qualifies for a categorical exemption under the California Environmental Quality Act as defined in Title 14. Chapter 3. Section 15332 of the California Code of Regulations: and (b) the physical attributes of design conform to the development standards of the underlying RM zone district (i.e., building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city.

        2.     Development Plan Approval. Residential projects which do not otherwise qualify for a zoning clearance may be allowed by development plan approval under the jurisdiction of the planning commission as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.120 of the Buellton Municipal Code. The physical attributes of design shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e., building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city except or unless a modification is granted under the provisions of Section 19.08.120(G)(1) of this code.

        F.     Residential Density, Single-Family Projects. The maximum number of dwellings that may be allowed as part of a single-family project, not constructed as part of a mixed-use or AHOZ development (as described in Sections 19.02.220(C) and 19.16.013, respectively), shall be adjusted for number of bedrooms per the table entitled Density Equivalents Large Unit Preference.

        1.     By way of example. and for illustrative purposes only, where parcel size is two gross acres and the underlying zone designation is RS-6 (the equivalent of seven du/acre), the maximum number of dwellings that may be permitted in a stand alone single-family project is computed as follows:

        a.     For Studio Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 1.00 times two gross acres equals fourteen (14) units.

        b.     For One Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.85 times two gross acres equals sixteen (16) units.

        c.     For Two Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.75 times two gross acres equals nineteen (19) units.

        d.     For Three or More Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.65 times two gross acres equals twenty-two (22) units.

        2.     The maximums illustrated above are listed for each individual category of unit type independent of each other category. In no event may the cumulative number of all dwellings within a single project exceed fifty (50) percent of the base density. By way of further example, and utilizing the assumptions above, where a single-family project includes a combination of dwelling sizes, the maximum number of dwellings that may be permitted in a single project is computed as follows:

        a.     For Studio Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 1.00 times two gross acres times zero percent equals zero units.

        b.     For One Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.85 times two gross acres times zero percent equals zero units.

        c.     For Two Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.75 times two gross acres times fifty (50) percent equals nine units.

        d.     For Three or More Bedroom Units. Seven units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.65 times two gross acres times fifty (50) percent equals eleven (11) units.

        3.     Maximum Allowable Project Size. Seven units per gross acre times a factor of 1.5 times two gross acres equals twenty-one (21) units

        4.     Project Size Calculation. Zero studio units plus zero one-bedroom units plus nine two-bedroom units plus eleven (11) three-bedroom units equals twenty (20) units.

 

Density Equivalents Large Unit Preference (Illustrated Example)

Unit Size

Proposed Project

No. of Units

% of Total Units

Studio

0

0%

One bedroom

0

0%

Two bedroom

7

50%

Three or more bedroom

7

50%

Total

14

100%

 

(Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(B)(3) and (E)(2), 2006; Ord. 06-02 § 3, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.120)

 

19.02.130 Planned residential development (PRD) zoning standards.
        The requirements of this section apply to development within the PRD zoning district in addition to the general development standards in Section 19.02.120(A) of this chapter.

        A.    Findings Required for Rezoning. No property shall be rezoned to the PRD zoning district unless the council first finds that:

        1.     The site is of the type and character that is appropriate for a planned residential development in accordance with the purpose of the PRD zoning district described in Section 19.02.100(C) of this chapter;

        2.     The overall estimated population density which will result upon full development of the property under the planned residential development district in accordance with the development plan is appropriate for the site and will not have a detrimental effect upon surrounding areas nor exceed the capacity of city service and utility facilities;

        3.     The proposed development as shown on the development plan is in conformance with all applicable policies of the general plan, and the requirements of this title.

        B.     Permit Requirement. Development plan approval (Section 19.08.120) is required before any subdivision or development within the PRD zoning district, and the development plan application shall be submitted with the application for rezoning to the PRD zoning district.

        C.     Findings Required for Development Plan Approval. In addition to the findings required for the approval of development plans by Section 19.08.120 of this title, no development plan shall be approved for property zoned or to be rezoned to PRD unless all of the following findings are made:

        1.     That the density and type of the proposed development is in conformance with the PRD district and applicable general plan policies.

        2.     That adequate provisions have been made within the proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions to establish permanent care and maintenance of public and common open spaces and recreational areas and facilities.

        3.     That the buildings and structures are clustered to the maximum extent feasible to provide the maximum amount of contiguous open space.

        4.     That the proposed development is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        D.    Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements. See Section 19.02.110 of this chapter.

        E.     Minimum Lot Area and Residential Density. No minimum lot size. The maximum density allowed for in the PRD zone is as specified for the site by the land use element of the Buellton general plan.

        F.     Site Development Standards. The following standards are in addition to the general development requirements in Section 19.02.120(A) of this chapter, and shall apply to all development in the PRD zone, except where otherwise provided by Chapters 19.04 or 19.06 of this title for a particular situation or land use.

        1.     Setbacks. There are no standard setback requirements for this district. Setbacks shall be proposed on the development plan and approved by the commission to protect and preserve sensitive site characteristics, and ensure compatibility between different uses. The siting of structures shall also be based on privacy, access to light and air, solar exposure, building configuration, and aesthetics.

        2.     Parking. Parking shall be provided in compliance with Section 19.04.140 of this title and the following requirements:

        a.     Parking areas shall be arranged to prevent through traffic to other parking areas.

        b.     Uncovered parking areas shall be screened from the street and adjacent residences to a height of at least four feet with hedges, dense plantings, or walls.

        3.     Streets. Streets may be public or private; however, all private streets shall be constructed to city standards and adequate provisions shall be made in the CC&Rs to ensure their maintenance. The standards for any on-site improvements (streets, walks, drainage, and utilities) may be modified for a PRD by the city upon recommendation from the engineering or planning departments. Street design shall relate to the function of the street and, particularly in hillside areas, where no on-street parking is necessary or permitted, street widths may be reduced. Innovation in street and walkway design, use of cul-de-sacs and loop streets, and reduction of grading for streets is encouraged. Vehicular access to individual lots or units shall generally be only from project streets.

        4.     Open Space. Proposed development projects in the PRD zone shall be designed to provide permanent open space areas as follows:

        a.     Amount. The city shall specify the required amount of public and/or common open space in a planned residential development at the time of approval of the development plan but in no case shall the total amount of public and/or common open space be less than forty (40) percent of the gross acreage. Determination of the appropriate amount of public and/or common open space shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

        i.      The need to protect for public use areas historically used by the public such as trails;

        ii.     The avoidance of siting of structures in hazardous areas or on steep slopes;

        iii.    The protection of sensitive habitats and archaeological sites; and

        iv.    Protection of scenic areas of the site.

        Lands to be preserved as open space may be dedicated in fee to the city or other public agency or may remain in private ownership with dedication of only appropriate scenic and/or open space easements. For lands counted as public open space that remain in private ownership, the city shall require granting of an easement guaranteeing the public’s right of access and use of such open space.

        b.     Maintenance of Public Open Space. The city may require the applicant to maintain all public open spaces and related facilities for a period specified by land use permit condition of approval after occupancy of the PRD (and may require that bonding or other security in a form approved by the city attorney be posted with the city to guarantee maintenance), or may require payment of an in-lieu fee if the city maintains the public open space and related facilities. If the applicant is to maintain public open spaces, prior to the issuance of any permits for construction, a bond or other approved security shall be posted guaranteeing such maintenance.

        c.     Maintenance of Common Open Space. The common open space shall be deeded to the Homeowners’ Association and held in undivided ownership by the owners of the PRD. Preservation and maintenance of all common open space and communal recreational facilities shall be guaranteed by a restrictive covenant describing the open space and its maintenance and improvements and running with the land as described in the approved development plan.

        5.     Landscaping. Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved development plan. Along each side or rear yard of the PRD district abutting property zoned other than PRD an adequate buffer consisting of fencing, walls, plant materials, or any combination thereof shall be installed and maintained to protect adjacent properties from impacts of noise or lighting and to provide separation between different uses. The buffer shall be shown on the development plan.

        G.    Homeowners’ Association. At the time of submittal of the development plan application, the applicant shall file a description of the proposed organization of the Homeowners’ Association including conditions, covenants, and restrictions that will govern the association. Such description shall be reviewed by the city attorney, who shall make a recommendation to the commission. Required provisions shall include but are not limited to the following:

        1.     The Homeowners’ Association shall be established before the homes are sold.

        2.     Membership shall be mandatory for each home buyer and any successive buyer.

 

        3.     The association shall be responsible for liability insurance, property taxes, and maintenance of common open space and recreational and other common facilities.

        4.     Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of all costs of the association and the assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the property.

        5.     The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs. (Ord. 06-02 § 4, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.130)

 

19.02.140 Special housing types.
        A.    Agricultural Employee Housing.

        1.     Agricultural employee housing serving six or fewer persons and conforming to the following criteria, shall be allowed by zoning clearance under the jurisdiction of the planning director as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.100 of this code:

        a.     Persons having the right to occupy employee housing shall be restricted to individuals engaged in agricultural occupations consistent with the standards and limitations prescribed in the Employee Housing Act and its implementing regulations;

        b.     The physical attributes of design shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e., building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city; and

        c.     Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each habitable room, two of which must be covered.

        2.     Agricultural employee housing serving seven or more persons, or projects which do not do otherwise qualify for a zoning clearance, may be allowed by minor use permit under the jurisdiction of the planning commission as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.110 of the Buellton Municipal Code.

        B.     Shared Living Arrangements. Shared living arrangements, including supported living (e.g., in-home supportive services) and licensed community care facilities, may be occupied without regard to familial status, disability or other population segment stipulated in fair housing statutes (e.g., individuals with Alzheimer’s, AIDS/HIV, and homeless).

        C.     Special Needs Housing. Special needs housing, as defined in Section 19.16.012, are allowed by conditional use permit in all zone districts. The development standards for projects requiring a conditional use permit shall be those that are specified for the underlying zone district where the project is located, provided, however, that such development standards may be modified or waived by development plan (as provided in Section 19.08.120(G)(1)).

        D.    Non-Discrimination. No project shall be denied nor shall any condition be imposed on a project over which the city has discretionary approval (as codified in Chapter 19.08) with regard to familial status, disability or other population segment stipulated in fair housing statutes (e.g., individuals with Alzheimer’s, AIDS/HIV, and homeless). (Ord. 06-10 § 2(E)(3), 2006)

 

19.02.150 Short-term lodging.
        A.    The city council finds that visitors and tourists who rent short-term lodging units in residential zoning districts can increase the demand for city services and law enforcement and create adverse impacts, including excessive noise, disorderly conduct, vandalism, overcrowding, traffic and parking congestion, and accumulations of refuse. The city council finds, therefore, that short-term lodging in residential zoning districts presents a threat to the public welfare. The restrictions in this section are necessary to prevent the burden on city services and adverse impacts on residential neighborhoods that result from short-term lodgings.

        B.     Definitions.

        1.     “Lodging unit” means any structure, building, or dwelling or portion of any structure, building, or dwelling that is rented, leased, or subleased for occupancy, dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes or overnight stays.

        2.     “Short-term” means occupancy of a lodging unit for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less.

        C.     Short-term lodging units are prohibited in all residential zoning districts.

        D.    Property owners, renters, lessees, subtenants, property managers, and people or entities in charge of a property are responsible for complying with this section. (Ord. 15-03 § 3, 2015)

 

19.02.200 Commercial and industrial zones.
        Sections 19.02.210 through 19.02.260 of this chapter provide regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the commercial and industrial zones established by Section 19.02.010 of this chapter. The purposes of the commercial and industrial zoning districts are as follows:

        A.    CN (Neighborhood Commercial). The CN zoning district provides areas for retail sales and personal services for the convenience of surrounding residential areas, and only secondarily to provide shopping opportunities for the city as a whole. This district is intended to accommodate the development of retail centers that are compatible with, and do not detract from, the character of surrounding residential neighborhoods. Typical land uses may include a small grocery or convenience store, drug store, laundromat, barber, or video rental store provided that the maximum floor area of individual tenant spaces in a development does not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet, as required by the general plan. The CN zoning district is consistent with the neighborhood commercial designation of the general plan. Mixed use projects with a residential and/or industrial component are permitted subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 19.18 of this title.

        B.     CR (General Commercial). The CR zoning district provides areas to serve community retail business and commercial needs including stores, shops, and offices on individual lots and in shopping centers, supplying commodities or performing services for the residents of the entire community. The CR zoning district is consistent with the general commercial designation of the Buellton general plan. Mixed use projects with a residential and/or industrial component are permitted subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 19.18 of this title.

        C.     CS (Service Commercial). The CS zoning district provides areas for commercial establishments that involve extensive outdoor activities or the sale of large products. Such uses can include lumber yards and appliance sales, in addition to wholesale service and business facilities with ancillary offices and inside storage areas. The intent is to provide for more intensive commercial uses, while ensuring compatibility with and the protection of neighboring land uses from undesirable noise, odor, lighting, traffic, or visual impacts. The CS zoning district is consistent with the service commercial designation of the general plan. Mixed use projects with a residential and/or industrial component are permitted subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 19.18 of this title.

        D.    M (Industrial/Manufacturing). The M zoning district provides areas exclusively for light industrial and manufacturing uses. The intent is to encourage sound industrial development in appropriate areas and provide development standards to protect nearby residential, commercial, and industrial uses from hazards, noise, and other disturbances. The M zoning district is consistent with the industrial designation of the general plan. Mixed use projects with a residential and/or commercial component are permitted subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 19.18 of this title. (Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.200)

 

 

19.02.210 Commercial and industrial zone allowable land use and permit requirements.
        The uses of land allowed by this title in the commercial and industrial/manufacturing zoning districts are identified in the following tables as being:

        A.    Allowed subject to zoning clearance (“A” uses on the tables) (see Section 19.08.100); or

        B.     Allowable subject to approval of a Minor Use Permit (“MUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        C.     Allowable subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit (“CUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        D.    Allowable subject to approval of a development plan (“DP”) (Section 19.08.120).

        Land uses not listed on the tables or not shown in a particular zone are not allowed, except where otherwise provided by Section 19.02.030(B) of this chapter.


COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL ZONES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

LAND USE TYPES

PERMIT REQUIREMENT BY ZONE

 

CN

CR

CS

M

See Section

Agricultural, Resource and Open Space Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural support uses

 

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Equestrian facilities

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Plant nurseries

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

Manufacturing and Processing Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Chemical products

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Clothing products

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Concrete, gypsum and plaster products

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Electrical and electronic equipment, instruments

 

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Food products

 

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Furniture and fixtures manufacturing

 

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Glass products

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Handicraft industries and small-scale manufacturing

 

MUP

MUP

DP, A

19.06.090

Lumber and wood products

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Machinery manufacturing

 

 

 

CUP

 

Metal manufacturing industries

 

 

 

CUP

 

Metal products fabrication, machine and welding shops

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Motor vehicles and transportation equipment

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Paper products

 

 

 

CUP

 

Paving materials

 

 

 

CUP

 

Plastics and rubber products

 

 

 

CUP

 

Printing and publishing

CUP

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Recycling collection stations

MUP

MUP

CUP

DP, A

 

Recycling, scrap and wrecking yards

 

 

 

CUP

 

Slaughterhouses and rendering plants

 

 

 

CUP

 

Stone and cut stone products

 

 

 

CUP

 

Structural clay and pottery products

 

 

 

CUP

 

Textile and leather products

 

 

 

CUP

 

Wholesaling and distribution

CUP

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Recreation, Education and Public Assembly Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Churches

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Community centers

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Golf courses and driving ranges

 

A-DP

CUP

CUP

 

Libraries and museums

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Membership organization facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Outdoor commercial recreation

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

Parks and playgrounds

 

DP, A

 

 

 

Recreation and fitness centers

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

MUP

 

Recreational vehicle parks and camping

 

DP, A

CUP

 

 

Schools — College and university

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Schools — Elementary and secondary, private

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Schools — Specialized education and training

DP, A

DP, A

CUP

CUP

 

Sport facilities and outdoor public assembly

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Temporary events

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

A

19.06.030

Theaters and meeting halls

CUP

DP, A

 

 

 

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Caretaker and employee housing

 

 

MUP

MUP

 

Dwellings

CUP

CUP

 

 

19.02.220(C)

Dwellings — Mixed use

DP

DP

DP

DP

Ch. 19.18

Emergency shelters

 

A

CUP

CUP

 

Farm employee housing

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Home occupations

CUP

CUP

 

 

19.06.100

Residential accessory uses

DP

DP

DP

DP

Ch. 19.18

Special needs housing

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.02.140

Retail Trade

 

 

 

 

 

Auto, mobilehome, vehicle sales

 

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Auto parts sales

MUP

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Building material stores

 

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Certified farmers’ markets

 

MUP

 

MUP

19.06.040

Drive-in and drive-thru sales

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Farm equipment and supplies sales

 

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Fuel and ice dealers

 

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores

 

MUP

DP, A

 

 

Grocery and liquor stores, and indoor/outdoor farmers markets, 5,000 sq. ft. or less

DP, A

DP, A

MUP

 

 

Grocery and liquor stores, and indoor/outdoor farmers markets, more than 5,000 sq. ft.

 

DP, A

CUP

 

 

Mail order and vending

 

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Parking lot sales

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

19.06.140

Restaurants and bars

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Restaurants, fast food

MUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Retail stores, general merchandise

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

Secondhand stores

MUP

CUP

CUP

MUP

 

Shopping centers

CUP

DP, A

CUP

 

 

Transitional housing

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

Service Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Banks and financial services

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

 

Business support services

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Cannabis testing laboratories

 

 

 

CUP

19.20.030

Cemeteries, columbariums and mortuaries

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.06.130

Child day care, centers

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

19.06.050

Construction contractors

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Drive-in and drive-thru services

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

19.06.070

Hotels and motels

 

DP, A

 

 

 

Kennels and animal boarding

 

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Laundries and dry cleaning plants

CUP

CUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Medical services — Clinics and laboratories

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Medical services — Hospitals and extended care

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Medical services — Veterinary clinics and hospitals

CUP

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Offices

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Offices, temporary

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

19.06.210

Personal services

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

 

Public safety facilities

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

A

 

Public utility facilities

CUP

CUP

DP, A

DP, A

 

Repair and maintenance — Accessory to sales

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Repair and maintenance — Consumer products

MUP

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Repair and maintenance — Vehicle, indoor

 

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Repair and maintenance — Vehicle, outdoor

 

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Service stations

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Storage, accessory

A-DP

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

Storage of petroleum products for on-site use

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Storage yards and sales lots

 

 

 

DP, A

 

Warehousing

 

 

DP, A

DP, A

 

Transportation and Communications

 

 

 

 

 

Airfields and landing strips

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Antennas, communication facilities, non-CPUC regulated

MUP

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

Antennas, communication facilities, CPUC regulated

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Broadcasting studios

 

DP, A

 

 

 

Heliports

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Pipelines and transmission lines

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.06.150

Transit stations and terminals

CUP

CUP

 

DP, A

 

Truck stops

 

 

MUP

DP, A

 

Vehicle and freight terminals

 

 

MUP

DP, A

 

Vehicle storage

 

DP, A

DP, A

DP, A

 

 

KEY TO PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

Allowed use, zoning clearance required

A

19.08.100

Minor use permit required

MUP

19.08.110

Conditional use permit required

CUP

19.08.110

Development plan required

DP

19.08.120

Development plan for the first development of a vacant site or any exterior alteration of an existing building that requires a building permit; zoning clearance for reuse of an existing building with no changes in appearance

DP, A

19.08.120

Use not allowed

 

 

 

Note: See Section 19.01.050(C) regarding uses not listed. See Chapter 19.12 for definitions of listed uses.

 

(Ord. 19-02 § 3, 2019; Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 11-06 § 4, 2011; Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-12 § 3, 2006; Ord. 06-10 § 2(E)(4), 2006; Ord. 97-02 § II(2), 1997; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.210)

 

19.02.220 Commercial/industrial zone general development standards.
        A.    Site Development Standards. The following minimum requirements apply to development within the commercial and industrial zoning districts. Additional standards are in Chapters 19.04 and 19.06 of this title. Refer to Chapter 19.18 of this title for additional standards relating to mixed-use projects.

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

CN

CR

CS

M

Minimum lot area

No minimum for new subdivisions or uses

Residential density (maximum allowed)

10 dwellings per acre (See Section 19.02.220(C))

1 employee unit per site

None allowed

Setbacks

See Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to setback requirements

 

Front

10 ft. minimum

None required

10 ft. minimum

20 ft. minimum

 

Side

None required, except per Section 19.04.160

None required,

3 ft. minimum if setbacks proposed

10 ft. minimum street side, none otherwise

 

Rear

None required, except per Section 19.04.160

10% of lot depth, to 10 ft. maximum; 25 ft. minimum adjacent to residential zoning;

50 ft. for a shopping center adjacent to residential zoning

50 ft. minimum adjacent to residential zoning, none otherwise

 

Interior

None, unless required by the Uniform Building Code (UBC)

5 ft. minimum for residential structures, none otherwise

None, unless required by the Uniform Building Code (UBC)

Site coverage

40% maximum

No maximum

50% maximum

Floor area

5,000 sq. ft. max. per establishment

No maximum

Height limit

35 ft. maximum

45 ft. maximum

 

See Section 19.04.110 for exceptions to height limits

Parking

See Section 19.04.140 (parking and loading)

Landscaping

See Section 19.04.120 (landscaping requirements)

 

        B.     Limitation on Floor Area, CN District. The maximum floor area of individual tenant spaces in a commercial development shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.

        C.     Mixed-Use Projects. Residences may be constructed in conjunction with commercial development as mixed-use projects in the CN and CR zoning districts subject to the density provisions and the standards contained in Chapter 18 of this title.

        1.     Residential Density. The maximum number of dwellings that may be allowed as part of a mixed-use project shall be fifteen (15) dwellings per gross acre, adjusted for number of bedrooms per the table entitled “Density Equivalents Small Unit Preference.” By way of example, and for illustrative purposes only, where parcel size is two gross acres, the maximum number of dwellings that may be permitted in a mixed-use project is computed as follows.

        a.     For Studio Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.65 times 2 gross acres = 46 units.

        b.     For One Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.75 times 2 gross acres = 40 units.

        c.     For Two Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.85 times 2 gross acres = 35 units.

        d.     For Three or More Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 1.00 times 2 gross acres = 30 units.

        2.     The maximums illustrated above are listed for each individual category of unit type independent of each other category. In no event may the cumulative number of all dwellings within a single project exceed fifty (50) percent of the base density. By way of further example, and utilizing the assumptions above, where a mixed-use project includes a combination of dwelling sizes, the maximum number of dwellings that may be permitted in a single project is computed as follows:

        a.     For Studio Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.65 times 2 gross acres times 50% = 23 units.

        b.     For One Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.75 times 2 gross acres times 25% = 10 units.

        c.     For Two Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 0.85 times 2 gross acres times 25% = 9 units.

        d.     For Three or More Bedroom Units. 15 units per gross acre divided by a factor of 1.00 times 2 gross acres times 0% = 0 units.

        e.     Maximum Allowable Project Size. 15 units per gross acre times a factor of 1.5 times 2 gross acres = 45 units.

        f.      Project Size Calculation. 23 studio units plus 10 one bedroom units plus 9 two bedroom units plus 0 three bedroom units = 42 units.

 

Density Equivalents Small Unit Preference

Unit Size

Factor

Studio

0.65

One bedroom

0.75

Two Bedroom

0.85

Three or more bedroom

1.0

 

Density Equivalents Small Unit Preference (Illustrative Example

Unit Size

Proposed Project

No. of Units

% of Total Units

Studio

23

50%

One bedroom

10

25%

Two bedroom

9

25%

Three or more bedroom

0

0%

Total

42

100%

 

        D.    Outdoor Storage, Trash Collection Areas. Areas for trash or outdoor storage shall be enclosed and screened to conceal all trash or stored material from public view.

 

        E.     Performance Standards for Industrial and Manufacturing Uses. Proposed development and land uses within the M (Industrial/Manufacturing) zoning district shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to comply with the following standards:

        1.     General Requirement. All activities shall be conducted in such a manner so as not to be injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood by reason of danger to life or property.

        2.     Gases, Odors. No offensive odors or fumes, noxious gases, or liquids, heat, glare, or radiation generated by or resulting from any use, other than motor vehicles or lighting fixtures, operated on any lot shall be detectable at any point along the boundary of or outside of the lot upon which such use is located.

        3.     Noise. Noise standards are contained in Section 8.04.030(G) of the municipal code.

        4.     Smoke, Dust. Except for the heating of buildings, there shall be no smoke or dust generated by or resulting from any use, other than motor vehicles, located upon the lot.

        5.     Vibration. Any ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated by or resulting from any use, other than motor vehicles, operated on any lot shall not be perceptible without instruments at any point along the boundary of or outside of the lot upon which such use is located.

        F.     Community Design Guidelines. Every proposal shall be reviewed using the community design guidelines.

        G.    Variable Height Limit. The maximum building height allowed in the CN or CR zoning district for property with frontage along Avenue of Flags may be increased to a maximum of forty-five (45) feet on a case-by-case basis in conjunction with development plan approval under the jurisdiction of the planning commission as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.05.120 of the Buellton Municipal Code. The determination of maximum building height shall take into account the variable topographic conditions along Avenue of Flags including: (1) the change of grade elevations from intersection Jonata Road to the intersection of Highway 246; and (2) the change of grade elevations from street frontage to rear of lot for properties located along the easterly side of Avenue of Flags. (Ord. 12-03 § 3, 2012; Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 06-10 § 2(A), 2006; Ord. 06-02 § 5, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.220)

 

19.02.300 Special purpose zones.
        Sections 19.02.310 through 19.02.330 provide regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the various special purpose zones established by Section 19.02.010 of this chapter. The purposes of the special purpose zoning districts are as follows:

        A.    REC (Recreation) Zoning District. This district provides for publicly or privately-owned open space for various forms of outdoor recreation. The intent is to encourage outdoor recreational uses that will protect and enhance areas with both active and passive recreation potential because of their beauty and natural features. Development should offer recreational uses that compliment and are appropriate to the area because of these features. The REC zoning district is consistent with the Open Space/Parks and Recreation designation of the general plan, which sets a goal of providing a ratio of five acres of parkland per one thousand (1,000) population in Buellton.

        B.     OS (Open Space) Zoning District. The purpose of this district is to ensure protection of lands that are unsuited for intensive development and have slopes in excess of forty (40) percent, and/or areas with outstanding resource values, such as environmentally sensitive habitat areas, creeks, and hillsides. The OS zoning district is consistent with the open space/parks and recreation designation of the general plan.

        C.     PQP (Public/Quasi-Public) Zoning District. This district is intended to accommodate public service facilities operated by government agencies, or quasi-public entities such as school districts and churches. This zoning district can accommodate a wide range of educational, office, storage, maintenance, and infrastructure operating facilities. The PQP zoning district is consistent with the public/quasi public designation of the general plan. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.300)

 

19.02.310 Special purpose zone allowable land use and permit requirements.
        The uses of land allowed by this title in the special purpose zones are identified in the following tables as being:

        A.    Allowed subject to zoning clearance (“A” uses on the tables) (see Section 19.08.100); or

        B.     Allowable subject to approval of a minor use permit (“MUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        C.     Allowable subject to approval of a conditional use permit (“CUP”) (Section 19.08.110); or

        D.    Allowable subject to approval of a development plan (“DP”) (Section 19.08.120).

        Land uses that are not listed on the tables or are not shown in a particular zone are not allowed, except where otherwise provided by Section 19.02.030(B) of this chapter.

 

SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

LAND USE TYPES

PERMIT REQUIREMENT

 

OS

REC

PQP

See Section

Agricultural, Resource and Open Space Uses

 

 

 

 

 Agricultural accessory structures

DP, A

 

 

19.06.010

 Agricultural support uses

DP, A

 

 

 

 Animal keeping

DP, A

 

 

 

 Animal keeping, more than permitted by zone

MUP

 

 

 

 Crop production

CUP

 

 

 

 Equestrian facilities

CUP

CUP

 

 

 Grazing

A

 

 

 

Recreation, Education and Public Assembly Uses

 

 

 

 

 Churches

 

CUP

 

 

 Golf courses and driving ranges

CUP

CUP

 

 

 Libraries and museums

 

CUP

 

 

 Membership organization facilities

 

CUP

 

 

 Parks and playgrounds

CUP

DP, A

 

 

 Recreational vehicle parks and camping

 

DP, A

 

 

 Schools — College and university

 

CUP

 

 

 Schools — Elementary

 

CUP

 

 

 Schools — Secondary

 

CUP

 

 

 Schools — Specialized education and training

 

CUP

 

 

 Sports activities and outdoor public assembly

MUP

 

 

 

Residential Uses

 

 

 

 

 Caretaker and employee housing

 

CUP

 

19.06.220

 Farm employee housing

A

CUP

CUP

 

 Home occupations

 

MUP

 

19.06.080

 Residential accessory uses

 

MUP

 

 

Retail Trade

 

 

 

 

 Restaurants and bars

 

CUP

 

 

 Roadside stands for agricultural products

MUP

 

 

19.06.130

Service Uses

 

 

 

 

 Cemeteries, columbariums and mortuaries

 

 

CUP

19.06.100

 Medical services — Hospitals and extended care

 

 

CUP

 

 Offices, temporary

 

MUP

MUP

19.06.190

 Public safety facilities

A

A

A

 

 Public utility facilities

CUP

CUP

DP, A

 

 Storage, accessory

 

 

A

 

Transportation and Communications

 

 

 

 

 Airfields and landing strips

 

CUP

CUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, non-CPUC regulated

MUP

MUP

MUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, CPUC regulated

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Antennas, communication facilities, more than 50 feet high

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 Heliports

 

CUP

CUP

 

 Pipelines and transmission lines

CUP

CUP

CUP

19.06.130

 

KEY TO PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

 Allowed use, zoning clearance required

A

19.08.100

 Minor use permit required

MUP

19.08.110

 Conditional use permit required

CUP

19.08.110

 Development plan required

DP

19.08.120

 Use not allowed

 

 

 

Note: See Section 19.01.050(C) regarding uses not listed; see Chapter 19.12 for definitions of listed uses.

 

(Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010; Ord. 97-02 § II(3), 1997; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.310)

 

19.02.330 Special purpose zone general development standards.
        A.    General Development Standards. Development within the special purpose zoning districts shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following minimum requirements. Additional standards for development are in Chapters 19.04 and 19.06 of this title.

 

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

REC

OS

PQP

Minimum lot area

1 acre

None required

None required for public facilities

 

 

 

1 acre for quasi-public facilities

Setbacks

See Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to setback requirements

Front

20 ft. minimum

 

 

Side

10 ft. minimum

None required

None required, 3 ft. minimum when side setbacks are proposed

25 ft. from residential zoning

Rear

10 ft. minimum,

None required

25 ft. minimum from residential zoning, none required otherwise

25 ft. from residential zoning

Interior

None required

5 ft. minimum between buildings

 

Site coverage

20% maximum

None required

None required

Height limit

25 ft. maximum

 

35 ft. maximum

Parking

See Section 19.04.140 (parking and loading)

Landscaping

See Section 19.04.120 (landscaping requirements)

 

        B.     REC District, Findings Required for Rezoning. Except for existing public or private outdoor recreational areas as shown by the land use element of the general plan, no property shall be rezoned to the REC district unless the council first makes the following findings:

        1.     The level of facility development is in conformance with the environmental carrying capacity of the area to be rezoned, i.e., the proposed recreational activities are of the kind, intensity, and location to ensure protection of environmentally sensitive habitat resources.

        2.     The proposal conforms with all applicable policies of the general plan.

        3.     The proposed recreational activities are compatible with land uses on adjacent parcels.

        C.     OS District, Conditional Use Permit Findings. In addition to the findings required for approval of a conditional use permit in Section 19.08.110(D) no conditional use permit shall be approved within the OS zoning district unless the commission or zoning administrator also makes all of the following findings:

        1.     The project will not require extensive alteration of the topography.

        2.     The project will not cause erosion, sedimentation, runoff, siltation, or an identified significant adverse impact to downstream watercourses or water bodies.

        3.     The project will not cause any significant adverse effect on environmentally sensitive habitat areas, plant species, or biological resources.

        D.    Community Design Guidelines. Every proposal shall be reviewed using the community design guidelines. (Ord. 06-02 § 6, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.02.330)

 

19.02.400 Overlay zoning districts.
        A.    Purpose. Overlay zoning districts are established by the zoning ordinance to identify particular sites, neighborhoods, or other areas of the city where conditions or circumstances exist that require special consideration in site planning, project design, or project implementation.

        B.     Applicability. Overlay zoning districts are applied to properties within the city through the rezoning process (Section 19.10.110), and shall be indicated on the zoning map (Section 19.02.020) by means of the overlay zoning district map symbol being added to the primary zoning district map symbol as a suffix. (For example, where the affordable housing (-H) overlay zone is applied to property within the multifamily residential (RM) zoning district, the zoning map will show the site as “RM-H”.) (Ord. 96-02 § 3, 1996)

 
Chapter 19.04 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
19.04.010 Purpose and applicability of chapter.
        A.    Purpose. This chapter provides general regulations to guide the location, design and development of new land uses and the alteration of existing uses. This chapter supplements and works with the requirements for development in each zone established by Chapter 19.02 of this title.

        B.     Applicability. No land use permit shall be approved as provided by Chapter 19.08 of this title, no zoning clearance shall be granted pursuant to Section 19.08.100 of this title, and no subdivision of land shall be approved pursuant to Title 18 of this code, no construction shall be commenced, and no new land use shall be established unless the proposed land use, construction, or subdivision satisfies all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.010)

 

19.04.100 Fencing and screening.
        Development in a commercial or industrial zoning district shall be fenced and screened as follows:

        A.    Abutting Residential Zoning. A six-foot high decorative masonry wall shall be provided along each side or rear property line abutting a residential zone, extending to within twenty (20) feet of the right-of-way of existing or proposed streets. A row of trees or other plant material shall also be provided, of a type approved by the department which will provide continuous screening to an approximate height of not less than twenty (20) feet nor more than forty (40) feet when mature.

        B.     Across Street from Residential. Where property on the opposite side of an existing or proposed street is zoned for residential use, a decorative masonry wall of at least three feet in height shall be provided along the street property line, except at access points, and except for the front property line of a service station. The wall shall be set back at least three feet from the property line, with the setback area landscaped. These conditions may be modified by the director or commission if they determine that the street width or other conditions will make the screening wall and landscaping ineffective or unnecessary.

        C.     Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of any street by a wall or fence six feet in height. The wall or fence shall be located not closer than five feet to the street right-of-way. The space between the wall or fence and the street shall be landscaped. Areas where stored materials or equipment exceed a height of six feet shall be landscaped by a row of trees or other screening plant materials of a type approved by the director to provide continuous screening to an approximate height of not less than twenty (20) feet nor more than forty (40) feet when mature. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.100)

 

19.04.102 Fence, wall, and gatepost height limits.
        A.    Height Limits and Permit Requirements. In all districts, fences, walls and gateposts may be located in conformance with the following chart, except that corner lots must meet the vision clearance requirements of Section 19.04.110(C).

 

Location of fence, wall or gatepost

Maximum height for exemption from land use permit

If not exempt from land use permit, type of permit required in all zones

At or beyond front setback line

Fences and walls 6 ft. or less in height

Minor use permit for fences and walls more than 6 ft. or gateposts more than 8 ft. in height

Gateposts less than 8 ft.

Between front yard setback line (or street side of corner lot) and street property line

6 ft. at setback line, decreasing in height to a maximum of 3 ft. at street property line (see illustration)

Minor use permit for fences and walls that exceed these standards

Side or rear setback

Fences and walls 8 ft. or less in height

Minor use permit for fences and walls more than 8 ft. or gateposts more than 10 ft. in height, or closer than 20 ft. to the right-of-way of any street

Gateposts 10 ft. or less in height that are not closer than 20 ft. to the right-of-way of any street

Outside of setbacks

Fences and walls 8 ft. or less in height

Zoning clearance for fences and walls more than 8 ft. or gateposts more than 10 ft. in height

Gateposts 10 ft. or less in height

 

        B.     Exceptions to Fence Height Limits. A maximum of ten percent of the total linear length of a wall or fence may be allowed to exceed the maximum height specified for exemption from a land use permit, where topographic or other unavoidable conditions will destroy its architectural integrity if held to the maximum height specified for its entire length.

        C.     Measurement of Fence Height. The height of walls, fences, or gateposts shall be determined by measurement from the natural grade at the lower side of the fence, wall, or gatepost. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.102)

 



 

19.04.110 Height measurement and height limit exceptions.
        The following height limit requirements override the height limits established by Chapter 19.02 of this title for each zoning district.

        A.    Measurement of Height. The height limits for buildings and structures established by Chapter 19.02 for each zone, or other height limits in this title, shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the structure to the average of the highest and lowest points where the exterior walls touch the natural grade, as shown in the following figure.



 

        B.     Exceptions to Zoning Height Limits. Chimneys; elevator and stair housings; television receiving antennae for individual receiving sets; flagpoles; monuments; oil and gas derricks; church spires; wind turbines; and similar architectural features and similar structures may be fifty (50) feet in height in all zones.

        C.     Vision Clearance. A vision clearance of not less than ten feet shall be provided on all corner lots in all zoning districts.

 



 

(Ord. 06-12 § 11, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.110)

 

19.04.120 Landscaping requirements.
        Proposed development shall include the installation and maintenance of landscaping as required by this section, and Sections 19.04.100 and 19.04.144 of this chapter.

        A.    Multifamily Residential Development. Multifamily dwelling projects in the RM zone shall be provided with landscaping and open space as follows:

        1.     Not less than forty (40) percent of the net area of the property shall be devoted to common open space.

        2.     Any driveway or uncovered parking area shall be separated from property lines by a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width.

        3.     In the case of cluster development the perimeter of the development shall be landscaped with a minimum strip of ten feet.

        B.     Commercial Zones. Proposed development in the CN, CR and CS zones shall be landscaped as follows; a landscape plan shall be submitted to and approved by the department for all developments within these zoning districts.

        1.     Not less than five percent of the net lot area shall be landscaped.

        2.     All portions of any setback areas fronting on streets shall be landscaped.

        C.     Industrial Zone. Proposed development in the M zone shall be designed and constructed to provide landscaping as follows:

        1.     Not less than ten percent of the net lot area shall be landscaped.

        2.     All landscaping shall be in conformance with the approved development plan.

        3.     The side and rear property lines shall be landscaped with a minimum of a five-foot wide planted area and the front property line shall be landscaped with a minimum of a ten-foot wide planted area.

        4.     Where any portion of a lot abuts a lot in a residential or commercial district, in addition to the five-foot wide planted area, a masonry wall not less than six feet in height shall be provided along such abutting portion.

        5.     Installation and maintenance of required landscaping shall be guaranteed by performance securities as set forth in Section 19.04.173(E) of this chapter.

        D.    Maintenance Required. All plant materials required by this title shall be permanently maintained. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.120)

 

19.04.124 Landscaping plans.
        Where the provisions of this title require a landscape plan in conjunction with proposed development the following shall apply:

        A.    The department shall review the landscape plan and may approve or conditionally approve the plan.

        B.     Prior to the issuance of a land use permit for the development, a performance security, in an amount to be determined by the department to guarantee the installation of plantings, walls, and fences, in accordance with the approved landscape plan, and adequate maintenance of the planting shall be filed with the city, if deemed necessary by the director.

        C.     Performance securities will be released by the city at the time of approval by the department for the installation and the remaining performance security for landscaping maintenance will be released at the end of the designated time period by the city provided the planting has been adequately maintained. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.124)

 

19.04.130 Lighting.
        A.    All exterior lighting shall be hooded and no unobstructed beam of exterior light shall be directed toward any area zoned or developed residentially.

 



 

        B.     Lighting shall be designed so as not to interfere with vehicular traffic on any portion of a street. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.130)

 

19.04.140 Parking and loading.
        A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these parking and loading regulations is to assure the provision and maintenance of safe, adequate, well-designed off-street parking facilities in conjunction with any use or development. The intent is to reduce street congestion and traffic hazards and to promote an attractive environment through design and landscaping standards for parking areas. The standards set forth in this section shall be considered minimums, and more extensive parking provisions may be required by the commission as a condition of project approval.

        B.     Applicability. The parking requirements of this section apply to all affected land uses and development, except where otherwise provided in the specific, applicable zone district.

        C.     Retention of Required Parking Spaces. No parking area or space provided as required by this chapter shall later be eliminated, reduced, or converted in any manner unless other equivalent facilities approved by the city are provided. The permit for the land use for which the parking was provided shall immediately become void upon the failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

        D.    Recalculation of Parking Spaces upon Change of Use. Upon the change of any use, the number of parking spaces to be provided shall be calculated according to the requirements of this chapter for the new use. Any previous parking modifications granted by the commission or the director shall be null and void.

        E.     Type and Location of Parking Required. All approved land uses shall be designed and constructed to provide the type and number of off-street parking spaces required by Section 19.04.142, designed as required by Section 19.04.144. All parking spaces required by this section shall be located on the same site as the use for which parking is required.

        1.     Standard Parking Spaces. Parking spaces designed as provided by Section 19.04.144 of this chapter to accommodate full-sized or compact passenger vehicles shall be provided as required by Section 19.04.142 of this chapter.

        2.     Handicapped Accessible Parking. Nonresidential parking lots shall include the number of handicapped accessible parking spaces as required by Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, and as follows. Such spaces shall be designed as required by Title 24. Handicapped spaces count toward the total number of parking spaces required by Section 19.04.142.

 

 

Total Number of Spaces on Site

Number of Accessible Spaces Required

1 - 40

1

41 - 80

2

81 - 120

3

121 - 160

4

161 - 300

5

301 - 400

6

401 - 500

7

Over 500

1 for each additional 200 spaces

 

        3.     Bicycle Parking Requirements. For all development (other than single-family residential) which is subject to the requirements of a development plan, the commission shall determine if there is a need to provide for bicycle parking. If such a need exists, the commission shall then determine the required number of parking spaces, bike racks, and locking devices that shall be provided.

        F.     Interpretation of Parking Requirements. The requirements in this section and Section 19.04.142 shall be interpreted as follows:

        1.     Area Measured to Determine Parking Space Requirements. For the purposes of this chapter, gross floor area shall be the measure of total square footage for a project; however, stairways and open, unenclosed corridors shall be excluded.

        2.     Fractional Spaces. Where the standards require any fractional space, the next larger whole number shall be the number of spaces required.

        3.     Uses Not Listed. Where the parking requirement for a use is not specifically defined in the applicable zone district or this chapter, the parking requirement shall be determined by the director based upon the requirement for the most comparable use specified herein.

        4.     Mixed Use Developments. In the case of mixed uses the total requirement shall be the sum of the number of spaces required for the individual uses computed separately except at the discretion of the commission.

        5.     Additions to Existing Developments. The number of parking spaces required for expansions of existing developments shall be based on the aggregate total of the floor area and/or number of employees of all existing and proposed buildings or structures on the property.

        G.    Modifications to Parking Requirements. Modifications to the parking requirements may be granted, pursuant to Section 19.08.120 of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.140)

 

19.04.142 Number of parking spaces required.
        The minimum number of parking spaces required by the zoning applicable to a site or specified in this section shall be provided and continuously maintained in conjunction with the related use or development. Refer to Chapter 19.18 for modifications of these parking standards for mixed use projects.

        A.    Agriculture, Resource and Open Space Uses. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Commercial greenhouse, hothouse, or other plan protection structure

2 per acre of land in such use

 

        B.     Manufacturing and Processing Uses. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Research and development, manufacturing and processing

1 for every 1.5 employees, but a minimum of 1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Wholesaling, warehousing, storage

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area,

1 per 4 employees

Other industrial uses

1 per 4 employees

 

        C.     Recreation, Education, and Public Assembly Uses. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Churches, auditoriums, theaters, other places of public assembly

 

 

With fixed seats

1 per 4 fixed seats

 

Without fixed seats

1 per 30 sq. ft. of auditorium floor

Libraries and museums

1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area,

1 per 2 employees

Recreation and fitness centers

 

 

Bowling alleys

8 per lane

 

Dance halls, skating rinks, and other places of amusement without fixed seats

1 per 300 sq. ft. of assembly area

 

Health/fitness, gyms, spas

1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

Tennis/racquetball facility

1.5 per court

 

Spectator seating

1 per 5 seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area, whichever is greater

Schools

 

 

Day school or child care center

1 per 10 students,

1 per 2 employees

 

Elementary and junior high

1.5 per teaching station

 

High school

6 per teaching station

 

Colleges, art, craft, music or dance schools; business, professional or trade schools

1 per 5 students,

1 per 3 employees

 

        D.    Residential Uses. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Single- and two-family dwellings

2 covered spaces per dwelling unit

Multiple dwelling units

 

 

Single bedroom or studio unit

1 per dwelling unit

 

Two bedroom unit

2 per dwelling unit, to be located within 200 feet of the building

 

Three or more bedrooms

2.5 per dwelling unit, to be located within 200 feet of the building

 

Visitor parking

1 for each 5 dwelling units

Guest houses

1 per guest house

Mobilehomes in parks

2 per mobilehome lot (may be in tandem), one shall be covered

1 guest parking space for each 3 mobilehomes

Group housing (fraternities, boarding houses, etc.)

1 for every 4 beds,

1 for each 2 employees

Retirement and special care homes

1 per guest room,

1 for each 2 employees

Accessory dwelling units (ADUs)

See Section 19.06.180

 

        In addition, not more than one bus or nonpassenger motor vehicle or trailer used in commerce may be parked overnight on any lot, provided such bus, motor vehicle, or trailer does not exceed two axles, four tons, or eight feet in height and provided further that this restriction shall not apply to the emergency overnight parking of disabled motor vehicles or trailers and the occasional overnight parking of moving vans, pickup, or delivery or construction vehicles or trailers when such occasional overnight parking is reasonably serving the residential use of a particular lot.

        E.     Retail Trade. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Furniture and appliance stores; heating, ventilating, building supply and hardware; motor vehicle and machinery sales and service

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Restaurants and bars

1 per 300 sq. ft. of area for patrons,

1 per 2 employees

Retail stores, general merchandise

1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

        F.     Service Uses. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Medical services, clinics and labs

1 per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area

Medical services, hospitals

1 per 2 beds,

1 per 3 employees

Medical services, extended care

1 per 3 beds,

1 per 3 employees

Offices, business and professional

1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

 

        G.    Transient Lodging. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the following ratios:

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Hotels and motels

1 per guest room,

1 per 5 employees

 

        H.    Emergency Shelters.

 

Land Use

Number of Parking Spaces Required

Emergency shelters

1 per 7 beds,

1 per employee

 

(Ord. 20-03 § 2, 2020; Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008; Ord. 97-02 § II(4), 1997; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.142)

 

19.04.144 Design and improvement of parking.
        Required parking spaces and areas shall be designed and located on their sites as provided by this section.

        A.    Size of Spaces.

        1.     Residential parking spaces shall be eight and one-half feet wide by sixteen and one-half (16 1/2) feet long.

        2.     Nonresidential parking spaces shall be nine feet wide by sixteen and one-half (16 1/2) feet long.

        3.     Compact Car Spaces. Thirty (30) percent of the required parking for nonresidential uses may be provided as compact car spaces. Compact car spaces shall have a size of eight by fourteen and one-half (14 1/2) feet. Every stall designed to accommodate compact cars shall be clearly marked as a compact car stall.

        B.     Location of Spaces.

        1.     Off-street parking spaces shall not be located in the required front or side setback area unless specifically permitted in the applicable zone district regulations. Provisions shall be made for direct access from the street to each parking space. Such access shall be adequate for standard size automobiles unless the parking area is restricted to compact cars.

        2.     For nonresidential structures or uses, the required parking spaces shall be provided within five hundred (500) feet of the main building or site, if there is no main building, as measured along streets not including alleys.

        C.     Construction and Design.

        1.     All parking areas shall be graded and have drainage provided so as to dispose of all surface water without erosion, flooding, and other inconveniences or hazards.

        2.     Uncovered parking areas and driveways shall be paved with a minimum of two inches of asphalt, concrete, or equivalent on a suitable base.

        3.     Parking spaces shall be marked and access lanes clearly defined. Bumpers and wheel stops shall be installed as necessary.

        4.     Except for residential uses within the RS zone district, parking areas shall be so designed that no vehicle shall be required to encroach into a street or sidewalk when backing out of a parking space.

        5.     The design of parking areas shall not require the moving of any car to gain access to a required parking space unless the applicable zone district regulations specifically permit tandem parking.

        6.     All parking areas serving uses operating at night shall be adequately lighted. Such lighting shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from adjoining residences.

        7.     The design of parking spaces and the maneuvering space in connection therewith shall be in accordance with the requirements illustrated in the Parking Diagram, Figures 1, 2 and 3, and the Parking Table.

        D.    Driveways.

        1.     Driveway to Side or Rear Parking Areas. A driveway used for access to a parking area at the side or rear of a building shall not be less than twelve (12) feet wide in clear distance between any obstruction to vehicular traffic.

        2.     Limitation on number or width of driveways. Upon recommendation of the city engineer or the director or upon their own initiative when considering any project, the commission may place special requirements on an individual building site that will have the effect of reducing or increasing the number or width of driveways or prescribing their location on the building site when the commission determines that such special requirements either reduce or do not create traffic hazards or street parking problems. Such special requirements shall be final subject to appeal to the council as provided in Section 19.10.130 of this title.

 



 

 



 

 

Parking Table 1: One-Way Traffic

(All Dimensions in Feet)

Angle

W1*

W2*

W3*

W4*

θ

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

30°

24.0

25.0

25.0

36.0

38.5

38.5

33.5

36.0

36.0

31.0

33.0

33.0

35°

24.5

26.0

26.0

37.5

40.5

40.5

35.5

38.0

38.0

33.0

35.5

35.5

40°

25.5

26.5

26.5

39.0

42.0

42.0

37.0

40.0

40.0

35.0

37.5

37.5

45°

26.0

27.5

27.5

40.5

43.5

43.5

38.5

41.5

41.5

36.5

39.0

39.0

50°

26.5

28.0

28.0

41.5

45.0

45.0

39.5

43.0

43.0

38.0

41.0

41.0

55°

27.0

29.0

28.5

42.5

46.5

46.0

40.5

44.5

44.0

39.0

42.5

42.0

60°

28.0

31.5

30.0

53.5

49.5

48.0

42.0

47.5

46.5

41.0

46.0

45.0

65°

30.0

34.0

33.0

46.0

52.0

51.0

44.5

51.0

48.5

43.5

49.5

48.0

70°

32.0

36.5

35.0

48.0

54.5

53.0

47.0

53.5

52.0

46.0

52.5

51.0

75°

34.0

38.5

37.5

50.0

56.5

55.5

49.0

56.0

54.5

48.5

55.0

54.0

80°

36.0

41.5

39.5

51.5

58.5

57.5

51.0

58.0

57.0

50.5

57.5

56.5

85°

37.5

44.5

41.5

53.0

60.0

59.0

52.5

60.0

58.5

52.5

59.5

58.5

90°

39.0

44.5

43.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

 

Parking Table 2: Two-Way Traffic

(All Dimensions in Feet)

Angle

W1*

W2*

W3*

W4*

θ

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

8.0′ Stall Width

8.5′ Stall Width

9.0′ Stall Width

30°

32.0

33.0

33.0

44.5

47.0

47.0

42.0

44.5

44.5

39.5

41.5

41.5

35°

33.0

34.0

34.0

46.0

49.0

49.0

44.0

46.0

46.5

41.5

43.5

43.5

40°

33.5

35.0

35.0

47.5

50.5

50.5

45.5

48.0

48.0

43.0

45.5

45.5

45°

34.5

35.5

35.5

48.5

52.0

52.0

47.0

50.0

50.0

45.0

47.5

47.5

50°

35.0

36.5

36.5

50.0

53.0

53.0

48.0

51.0

51.0

46.0

49.0

49.0

55°

35.5

37.0

37.0

50.5

54.0

54.0

49.0

52.5

52.5

47.5

50.5

50.5

60°

35.5

37.0

37.0

51.5

55.0

55.0

50.0

53.5

53.5

48.5

52.0

52.0

65°

35.5

37.5

37.5

51.5

55.5

55.5

50.5

54.0

54.0

49.5

52.5

52.5

70°

36.0

37.5

37.5

51.5

55.5

55.5

51.0

54.5

54.5

50.0

53.5

53.5

75°

36.0

38.5

37.5

51.5

56.5

55.5

51.0

56.0

54.5

50.0

55.0

53.5

80°

36.0

41.5

39.5

51.5

58.5

57.5

51.0

58.0

57.0

50.5

57.5

56.5

85°

37.5

42.5

41.5

53.0

60.0

59.0

52.5

60.0

58.5

52.5

59.5

55.5

90°

39.0

44.5

43.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

54.0

61.5

60.5

* See illustrations on preceding pages.

 

        E.     Landscaping and Screening of Parking Areas. For the purposes of this section, parking area includes the parking spaces and the maneuvering space necessary for use of such spaces.

        1.     Where nonresidential parking areas abut residentially zoned or developed property, a wall of not less than five feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the parking area and the adjoining residentially zoned or developed property.

        2.     Where trees already exist on the property, the design of the parking area should make the best use of this growth and shade.

        3.     Screening shall be provided along each property line consisting of a five-foot wide strip, planted with sufficient shrubbery to effectively screen the parking area, or a solid fence or wall not less than four feet in height. Such fences or walls abutting streets shall be ornamental in texture, pattern, or shadow relief. Planting, fences, or walls abutting streets shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet on either side of entrances or exits to the property. This requirement for screening may be waived or modified by the department if adjacent property already has provided a solid wall not less than four feet high.

        4.     When the total uncovered parking area on the property (including adjoining parcels over which the property has parking privileges) exceeds three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, the following shall be required, in addition to other provisions of this section, as part of a landscape plan:

        a.     Trees, shrubbery, and ground cover shall be provided at suitable intervals in order to break up the continuity of the parking area. Planting islands for such trees and shrubs shall be protected from automobile traffic by either asphalt or concrete curbs.

        b.     All ends or parking lanes shall have landscaped islands.

        c.     Prior to the issuance of a land use permit, performance securities, in amounts to be determined by the department, to guarantee the installation of plantings, walls, and fences in accordance with the approved plan, and adequate maintenance of the planting for two years shall be filed with the city. The performance security portion for installation will be released at the time the department approves the installation. The remaining maintenance performance security portion shall be released at the end of the two-year period provided the planting has been adequately maintained.

 



 

        F.     Off-street Loading Facilities. For every building hereafter erected, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials and merchandise, off-street loading spaces shall be provided as provided by this section.

        1.     Number of Loading Spaces Required:

 

Commercial Uses

Number of Loading Spaces Required

3,000 sq. ft. or more gross floor area

1 loading space

Industrial Uses

 

10,000 to 24,999 sq. ft. of gross floor area

1 loading space

25,000 to 49,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area

2 loading spaces

Each additional 50,000 sq. ft. or fraction

1 loading space

 

        2.     Design of Spaces. Each loading space shall not be less than ten feet in width, thirty (30) feet in length, and with an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet.

        3.     Location of Spaces. Loading spaces shall not be located in any part of any required front or side setback. Such spaces shall be designed so as to not interfere with pedestrian circulation, or vehicular circulation or parking. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.144)

 

19.04.160 Setback requirements.
        Required setbacks describe areas on lots where no buildings, structures, or additions to them may be located, and which thereby become yard areas. Setbacks may be required between buildings, structures and property lines; between structures and road easements; between buildings and structures themselves; between buildings, structures and natural features such as watercourses; or between other features of site development. The setback requirements of this title are established for each zone district by Chapter 19.02 of this title and as provided by this section.

        A.    General Setback Requirements.

        1.     Subdivision Setbacks. Where a setback line is called for or shown on a recorded subdivision or parcel map or on a development plan in the PRD district under Section 19.02.140 of this title, the required setback shall be the setback line shown on the subdivision or parcel map or development plan.

        2.     Setbacks Adjacent to Alley. In computing the depth of a rear yard setback or the width of a side yard setback, if such yard abuts upon an alley, and the owner of the yard owns all or one-half of the underlying fee of such alley, up to one-half the width of such alley may be included in the rear yard or side yard.

        3.     Lots Reduced by Road Widening. On any lot which has been reduced in width or depth below the original dimensions of the lot legally created by a recorded subdivision map or deed prior to October 1, 1960, which reduction was required by Santa Barbara County for road widening purposes, the required yards shall be computed on the basis of the original dimensions of the lot as though such road widening had not occurred.

        4.     Use of Setbacks. Every part of a setback shall be unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this title and except for the ordinary projection of sills, buttresses, cornices, chimneys, eaves, and ornamental features but in no case shall such projections exceed three feet.

        5.     Projections Into Setbacks, Generally. Fire escapes, balconies, and unroofed and unenclosed porches or landings, may extend into the front or rear yard setback four feet and into a side yard setback three feet when constructed and placed so as to not obstruct light or ventilation of buildings or ready use of the yards for ingress or egress, and where allowed by the Uniform Building Code.

        6.     Projections Into Right-Of-Way. In any area where a building can be legally constructed on or closely adjacent to the right-of-way line of a public street, eaves and roof overhangs, sills, belt courses, fire escapes, balconies, and unroofed and unenclosed porches may project into a street right-of-way no more than thirty (30) inches; provided that all such encroachments shall be at least eight feet above any area used by pedestrians, and at least fourteen (14) feet above any area used for vehicular traffic; and provided further, an encroachment permit for such projections is obtained from the city engineer.

        7.     Rear Yard Structures. Trellises and patio covers may be located within the rear yard setback when no closer than fifteen (15) feet to the rear property line, or no closer than ten feet to the rear property line when adjacent to a permanently dedicated open space area.

        8.     Sloping Lot Setback Reductions. Where the elevation of the ground at a point fifty (50) feet from the centerline of any street is seven feet or more below or above the grade of said centerline, the front setback of a private detached garage may be decreased by forty (40) percent and the front setback for a dwelling may be decreased by twenty (20) percent provided the front face of such garage is not closer than ten feet to the abutting street right-of-way.

        B.     Through, Corner, Interior, and Odd-Shaped Lots.

        1.     Through Lots. The side yard setbacks shall extend the full depth of the lot between the street lines and there shall be two front yard setbacks for the purpose of computing setbacks.

        2.     Corner Lots Abutting Two or More Streets.

        a.     If a corner lot is less than one hundred (100) feet in width, the side yard setback on the street side of such lot shall be not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, but in no case shall said side yard setback be less than ten feet.

        b.     If a corner lot is one hundred (100) feet or greater in width, there shall be two front yard setbacks and both shall conform to the front yard setback requirements of the applicable zone district.

        c.     The rear yard setback of a corner lot backing upon a key lot may be reduced to a depth of ten feet, provided the total yard area required on the building site by the applicable district regulations is not thereby reduced.

        3.     Interior Lots. The setback regulations of the applicable zone district shall not apply to an interior lot but any structure located upon such lot shall have a setback of at least ten feet from all property lines and the total setback area shall equal the total area of all setbacks required in the applicable zone district.

        4.     Odd-Shaped Lots. In the case of odd-shaped lots, the director shall determine the required setbacks, which widths and depths shall approximate as closely as possible the required widths and depths of corresponding setbacks on rectangular lots in the applicable zone district.

        C.     Exceptions to Setback Requirements in Commercial and Industrial Zones.

        1.     Projections Into Front Setback, Commercial Zones. Open canopies, porches, roofed or unroofed, and similar accessory structures may encroach not more than twelve (12) feet into the front setback area, provided that in no event shall such structures encroach upon a public street right-of-way.

        2.     Setback Reductions. Upon approval of a minor use permit (MUP), a required rear or side yard setback in the CR, CS, or M zoning districts may be reduced to zero. When approving the minor use permit, the zoning administrator (or the commission or council on appeal) shall make all of the following findings:

        a.     The reduced setback(s) will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the neighborhood and will not be incompatible with the surrounding areas.

        b.     The reduced setback(s) conform with other applicable provisions of this title and with the general plan.

        c.     The reduced setback(s) will not conflict with any easements required for public access through, or the public use of, a portion of the property. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.160)

 



 





19.04.170 Sign title.
        Sections 19.04.170 through 19.04.176 of this title are the Buellton sign title. These sign regulations are based on the city’s responsibility to protect public health, safety and welfare. The sign regulations are intended to promote the economic viability of the city, and to provide minimum standards necessary to maintain the aesthetic appeal of the community.

        A.    Purpose. The purposes of these sign regulations include the following:

        1.     To provide the means for effective business identification;

        2.     To reduce traffic and safety hazards from confusing or distracting signs;

        3.     To foster the ability of the city to maintain existing businesses and attract future economic development;

        4.     To enable fair and consistent sign regulation and enforcement; and

        5.     To improve the aesthetic environment of the community by limiting the type, size, number, location, and design of signs.

        B.     Applicability. These sign regulations apply to all signs installed, constructed, or altered after the effective date of this title, in addition to all applicable provisions of the California Outdoor Advertising Act (Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq.), except for exempt signs as provided by subsection D of this section.

        1.     Whenever discretionary land use permit (minor use permit, conditional use permit, development plan, or variance) approval is requested on a site where nonconforming signs exist, such signs shall be brought into conformance with these sign regulations; provided, however, that:

        a.     Requests for minor structural alterations, interior alterations or customary sign maintenance shall be allowed without requiring nonconforming signs to be made conforming; and

        b.     The director may waive the requirement that existing nonconforming signs be brought into conformity where the land use permit involves a change in use, but not significant alteration to existing structures.

        2.     All signs that are not specifically exempted from the requirements of this title by subsection D of this section, shall require an approved sign permit. Any sign erected without a sign permit may be subject to Section 19.04.176 of this chapter.

        3.     The sign areas and heights authorized by this chapter are intended to be the maximums allowed unless an exemption is approved by the director or the commission as provided by Section 19.04.174(A) of this chapter.

        4.     All sign proposals shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the latest adopted editions of the Uniform Building Code, National Electrical Code, and the Uniform Sign Code.

        C.     Sign Permits Required. No sign (including temporary signs) shall be erected, re-erected, constructed, displayed or altered without a sign permit first being approved pursuant to the zoning clearance procedure in Section 19.08.100 of this title, except as provided in subsection D of this section. A separate sign permit is not required if proposed signs are included in an application for a development project that requires minor use permit, conditional use permit, or development plan approval.

        D.    Exempt Signs. The following signs, when unlighted, do not require a sign permit:

        1.     Agricultural Signs. Agriculturally-zoned properties or properties that are vacant and currently used for farming may have one unlighted, freestanding sign. The sign may have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet, and shall not exceed eight feet in height. The sign shall only identify the agricultural business or farm name, and agricultural products grown, raised or produced on the site.

        2.     Business Directory Signs. Nonresidential sites with two or more tenants may have one wall-mounted or freestanding business directory sign per public street frontage. Aggregate sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height. Director signs shall be located at a business public entrance, and may identify building occupants and occupant space locations.

        3.     Construction Signs. Unlighted, freestanding signs identifying project designers, architects, and contractors are allowed construction signs as follows:

        a.     Construction sites for up to two single-family homes or structures, or nonresidential structures less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in floor area may have one construction sign not exceeding ten square feet in area and six feet in height;

        b.     Construction sites of multifamily structures, or involving the subdivision of three or more lots, or a nonresidential structure of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger may have a construction sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and eight feet in height;

        c.     All construction signs shall be removed within seven days of receiving a certificate of occupancy.

        4.     Garage Sale Signs. Garage sale signs may be installed one day before a garage sale, and must be removed within one day after the garage sale.

        5.     Hazard Signs. Signs warning of hazards, so long as a hazard exists.

        6.     Historical/Memorial Markers. Signs identifying historic sites shall not exceed an aggregate area of ten square feet. The signs must be installed by a public or nonprofit entity.

        7.     Holiday Decorations. Seasonal decorations for a single holiday season or special event, for a maximum period of sixty (60) days.

        8.     Internal Signs. Signs within buildings.

        9.     Miscellaneous Business Information Signs. Nonresidential sites may have miscellaneous business information signs, provided that the aggregate sign area shall not exceed four square feet per tenant. The signs are to be located at a business public entrance, and may include business information such as hours of operation, open or closed, emergency information, and credit cards accepted.

        10.   Official Flags or Signs. Official federal, state, or local government flags, emblems or signs. Other flags not expressly allowed pursuant to the Municipal Code are prohibited. All flags shall be properly maintained and replaced when frayed or otherwise damaged.

        11.   Political Signs. One wall, freestanding, or banner style political sign per street frontage is permitted. Such signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area or six feet in height, except that one billboard political sign per property may be allowed in nonresidential zoning districts, not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet or twelve (12) feet in height. Political signs may be installed up to sixty (60) days before an election, and must be removed within seven days after an election.

        12.   Prohibition Signs. Signs indicating warnings such as, “no trespassing,” “no parking,” “no-smoking,” etc., provided that they do not exceed two square feet individually or an aggregate of ten square feet per site.

        13.   Reader Boards. Motels, hotels, and bed and breakfasts may have one sign with removable copy, identifying amenities such as TV, movies, telephones, pools, etc. Such signs are exempt if the aggregate area is twelve (12) square feet or less. (Such sign area less than twelve (12) square feet will not be included in calculations of aggregate sign area allowed per site.)

        14.   Real Estate Signs. Sites where property or businesses are for sale, lease or rent, may have one, unlighted real estate sale sign per street frontage, with maximum sign areas and heights as follows:

        a.     Signs in Residential Zones. Maximum sign area of four square feet and a height of five feet.

        b.     Signs in Nonresidential Zones. Maximum sign area of eight square feet and a height of five feet.

        c.     Subdivisions, Nonresidential Developments. New subdivisions of three or more lots, or new, city-approved nonresidential developments of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, may have a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet and a height of five feet. Such signs may be in place for up to four months after the subdivision is approved, or in the case of new development, from the time of approval to four months after receiving an approved certificate of occupancy.

        d.     Open House Signs. In addition to the signs permitted in subsections a, b and c, one on-site and two off-site open house signs are allowed on the days the open house is occurring subject to the following restrictions:

        i.      The signs shall be located on private property or on the sidewalk. If they are on the sidewalk, there shall be a minimum of three feet of clear space on the sidewalk for people to pass.

        ii.     The signs are not permitted in the public street or within the Avenue of Flags medians.

        iii.    No attention getting devices, including, but not limited to, flags and balloons, shall be attached to the signs.

        15.   Residential Identification Signs. Sites with three or more homes may have one monument or wall sign per public street frontage, with a maximum aggregate area of fifteen (15) square feet and a height of six feet. Monument signs shall have permanent landscaping integrated at base of sign. Such signs may identify the names of subdivisions and apartment complexes.

        16.   Safety and Directional Signs. Wall or freestanding signs for vehicle traffic guidance or pedestrian orientation, including signs for handicapped parking and facilities, and automatic teller machines. Such signs shall not exceed an aggregate area of five square feet or a height of five feet. Such signs shall not display any commercial logos, product names, services or other commercial advertising.

        17.   New Development Marketing Flags. Decorative flags without words or letters for the purpose of marketing new residential or commercial developments subject to the following restrictions:

        a.     One flag per fifty (50) lineal feet of project frontage with a minimum of one flag and a maximum of ten flags.

        b.     The bottom of the flag shall be a minimum of ten feet from the ground surface and the overall height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet.

        c.     Each flag shall be no larger than (15) square feet.

        d.     The flags may be displayed from the first day of sale or lease of units or spaces and may remain in place for one year or when the last unit or space is sold or leased, which ever occurs first. However, the flags may be displayed for longer than one year subject to review and approval of a zoning clearance.

        e.     All flags shall be properly maintained and replaced when frayed or otherwise damaged.

        f.      The color and design of the flags shall complement the architecture and colors of the building as determined by the planning director.

        g.     The flags shall be displayed in the immediate vicinity of the sales/leasing office and shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

        18.   Flags as Merchandise. Flags that are sold as merchandise on a property may be displayed as long as they are setback a minimum of ten feet from all property lines.

        E.     Prohibited Signs. The following signs are prohibited:

        1.     Animated Signs. Signs that are moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, glaring or revolving, except time and temperature signs.

        2.     Confusing Signs. Signs that simulate by color, shape, function or location, a traffic control device or sign.

        3.     Handbills/Flyers. Announcements or posters attached to utility poles, trees, fence posts, and other fixed structures, or placed on the windshields of parked cars.

        4.     Inflatable Signs. Blimps, balloons, inflatable representations of products, motion picture or television characters, and similar lighter-than-air or inflated advertising devices.

 

        5.     Obscene Signs. Signs that contain indecent or immoral language or graphics, as provided by Section 313 of the California Penal Code.

        6.     Off-Premises Signs. Signs that advertise a business, activity or service that is not offered or sold on the premises, including billboards, except that the following are allowed:

        a.     A private directory, monument sign, identifying several businesses, may be allowed in nonresidential zones, where such businesses are accessed solely or primarily by a dead-end street. The sign shall be for informational purposes only, and shall be subject to the approval of an exemption by the planning commission (Section 19.04.174(A));

        b.     Bus bench signs, with an approved sign permit;

        c.     Political billboard signs, see subsection (D)(11) of this section;

        d.     A community identification sign that identifies Buellton to freeway travelers under the following conditions:

        i.      Only one community identification sign shall be permitted (existing vested billboards do not count against this total).

        ii.     The sign shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of Highway 101 and is only allowed in the CR and M zoning districts.

        iii.    The sign shall be a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet in height and the sign area shall be a maximum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

        iv.    All lighting shall be fully shielded.

        v.     The copy of the sign shall be the identification of Buellton to freeway travelers and for promotion of non-profit events. No commercial advertising is permitted.

        vi.    The sign shall be approved pursuant to the planning commission exemption process identified in Section 19.04.174(A)(2) of this title.

        vii.   The sign shall be owned and controlled by the city of Buellton.

        viii.  Maintenance of the sign shall be in accordance with Section 19.04.174(C) of this title.

        e.     One freestanding sign consistent with Section 19.04.172(B)(1) (Sign standards by zoning district—Commercial zones), when located on a parcel immediately adjacent to the site of the business advertised by the sign. These signs shall be authorized through a planning commission exemption (Section 19.04.174(A)(2)), and shall be designed to share a sign structure with a business on the site of the sign whenever feasible.

        7.     Sandwich Boards. Portable A-framed signs located in the public right-of-way are prohibited. Sandwich boards may be allowed if they are located on private property and have been approved by zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100), are no larger than three feet high and two feet wide, and are located within ten feet of the main entrance to the business.

        F.     Sign Area Measurement. The measurement of sign area shall include the total square footage of a sign face that can be enclosed by single rectangle. Sign area for signs composed of individual letters and/or graphics, shall be the area of the single rectangle that can enclose all the letters and graphics. Calculation of sign area shall have no more than four right angles. If a sign has two faces with duplicated sign copy back-to-back, (e.g., monument or pole sign), the faces will be considered one sign if the distance between them is no more than eighteen (18) inches. (Ord. 16-02 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-02 § 3, 2013; Ord. 07-06 § 3, 2007; Ord. 06-12 §§ 4, 5, 2006; Ord. 95-01 § 1, 1995; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.170)

 

19.04.172 Permitted signs and sign standards.
        A.    General Sign Design Standards for All Zones.

        1.     Sign Copy. All sign messages shall relate to the business activity conducted on the same site. (Exception: See Section 19.04.170(E)(6).)

        2.     Sign Design. All signs shall be of professional graphic and construction quality. Lettering and graphical elements of signs shall be legibly designed and produced. Signs shall be designed with scale and proportion appropriate for the size of the site and buildings. Each sign shall also be compatible and in harmony with the architectural design elements of the structure to which it principally relates, and the surrounding environment. All signs shall comply with the requirements of the community design guidelines.

        3.     Master Sign Program. Proposed developments with two or more tenants shall have an approved master sign program. All signs proposed for a site that requires a master sign program shall conform to the approved program. The planning director shall review all master sign program proposals. The planning director may approve a master sign program with or without conditions of approval. (See the definition of master sign program in Chapter 19.12 of this title.)

        4.     Temporary Signs.

        a.     Temporary business signs, including banners, may be displayed up to four times per calendar year for a cumulative total of sixty (60) days. All temporary business signs require approval of a no-fee zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100) in order to verify that the following criteria are met:

        i.      The temporary sign shall not exceed an area of thirty (30) square feet;

        ii.     The temporary sign shall be affixed to a building;

        iii.    The temporary sign shall not exceed the roof eave line of the building to which it is affixed, but in no case shall the temporary sign be higher than thirty (30) feet; and

        iv.    The temporary sign shall be made of durable material, shall be properly affixed to the building so that wind and other outside elements do not damage or cause the temporary sign to fall into disrepair, and shall be professionally constructed.

        b.     Exceptions. Temporary signs may also be displayed during the following times that do not count towards the time limitations of subsection (4)(a). These signs shall follow the temporary sign criteria of subsection (4)(a)(i) through (iv).

        i.      Temporary business signs may be in place for four days during any of the ten federal holidays, which include New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving, and Christmas.

        ii.     Temporary business signs for the grand opening of a business may be in place for a maximum of thirty (30) continuous days.

        c.     Other temporary signs to announce community or nonprofit events (such as car shows, wine festivals, fundraisers etc.) may be allowed up to four weeks prior to the event and must be removed within two days after the event. These signs may be displayed on a building or displayed as a stand-alone sign subject to property owner approval. If on a building, the temporary signs shall meet the criteria of subsection (4)(a)(i) through (iv). All stand-alone temporary signs shall be adequately staked into the ground so that the sign is readable and so that wind and other elements do not damage or cause the temporary sign to fall into disrepair. A no fee zoning clearance is required.

        5.     Bus Bench Signs. Bus bench signs may be allowed in all zoning districts, with an approved sign permit.

        6.     Information Kiosks. One information kiosk may be allowed per site, in all zoning districts, subject to the approval of an exemption by the planning commission (Section 19.04.174(A)). They may be freestanding or wall-mounted (bulletin board style). Aggregate sign area may not exceed twenty (20) square feet. Such signs may contain handbills, posters, public agendas and general community information for temporary events.

        B.     Sign Design Standards by Zoning District.

        1.     Commercial Zones. The following signs are allowed in commercial zones with a maximum aggregate area per site of one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of the longest street property frontage, except where additional sign area is allowed by this section. For properties with more than one street frontage, one-half square foot of sign area may be allowed per lineal foot of side street frontage. However, any case for which the aggregate sign area exceeds four hundred (400) square feet shall require approval of a minor use permit. In approving the permit, the director (or the planning commission on referral or appeal) may restrict the number, type, location, or design of signs to achieve compatibility of scale and design with the subject property and other buildings and features on the property.

        a.     Wall Signs. Signs may be placed on each building wall facing a street or a parking lot, below the roof line.

        b.     Monument Signs. Each business may have one monument sign per three hundred (300) lineal feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. The maximum height of monument signs shall be eight feet, including the base/support structure. Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a public right-of-way.

        c.     Freestanding Signs, Generally. Each site may have one freestanding pole sign, except for certain properties on Avenue of Flags as provided by subsection (B)(1)(d) of this section. All pole signs larger than one hundred (100) square feet and/or more than thirty (30) feet in height shall be subject to review and approval of a planning commission exemption. In general, the planning commission shall not approve freestanding signs larger or taller than these standards; however, the planning commission may approve such signs if the following findings are made:

        i.      That additional size or height is necessary to make the sign reasonably visible to potential customers given the location, topography, landscaping, orientation, or other circumstances related to the site; and

        ii.     That the sign is compatible with and compliments the architecture, site design and landscaping on the site; and

        iii.    That the sign will not have significant adverse impacts on neighbors, or the community, in general.

        In cases where the planning commission approves a pole sign larger than one hundred (100) square feet or thirty (30) feet in height, the exemption shall not exceed a maximum increase of fifty (50) percent in sign area and/or fifty (50) percent in sign height. The commission shall further limit the additional area or height to the minimum practical to make the sign reasonably readable to potential customers pursuant to the findings in this section.

 



 

 



        d.     Freestanding Signs, Avenue of Flags. New pole signs shall be prohibited on properties with street frontage on Avenue of Flags, except that properties within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the Highway 101 right-of-way may be allowed one such sign, subject to the approval by the planning commission, and provided that it is located on the half of the property nearest to the freeway.

        e.     Suspended or Projecting Signs. Businesses may have one suspended or projecting sign located under a canopy or eave, with a maximum area of ten square feet. The lower edge of such signs must be a minimum of eight feet above any underlying area accessible to pedestrians. Such signs may project a maximum of five feet over a public right-of-way.

        f.      Commercial Shopping Centers. Proposed commercial shopping centers with two or more tenants must have a master sign program. All signs in a shopping center must be consistent with the approved master sign program design.

        g.     Window Signs. Signs painted on or applied to business windows, facing a public street frontage. The aggregate area of such signage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window surface area (e.g., gold leaf lettering).

        h.     Marquee Signs. Performance and entertainment centers may be allowed a marquee sign with minor use permit approval. The area for marquee signs shall be exempt from the aggregate sign area calculation for the site.

        i.      Roof Signs. Any sign located on a roof, mansard or on a wall projecting higher than the building wall shall require approval of a planning commission exemption.

        j.      Tenant Signs. Individual tenant signs may be allowed in addition to the maximum permitted aggregate sign area, on sites with two or more tenant spaces. The aggregate area of such tenant signs shall not exceed ten square feet. (Exception: if tenant locations are set back from the street a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet, the aggregate area of tenant signs may be increased to fifteen (15) square feet.) Tenant signs may be either wall, suspended, or projecting signs. Tenants located in a commercial center with three or more tenants may also have a tenant identification plaque monument sign. Each tenant plaque may be up to five square feet in area.

        2.     Industrial and Office Zones. Each site shall be allowed a maximum aggregate sign area of one-half square foot per lineal foot of property street frontage, with a minimum of sixty (60) square feet, and up to a maximum aggregate area of two hundred (200) square feet. The following sign types are permitted:

        a.     Wall Signs. Each business may have one wall sign on each building wall adjacent to a public street, except where the wall is adjacent to a residential zone.

        b.     Monument Signs. Each business may have one monument sign per three hundred (300) lineal feet of street frontage, or portion thereof. The maximum height of monument signs shall be six feet. Monument signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from a public right-of-way.

        c.     Suspended or Projecting Signs. Businesses may have a suspended or projecting sign located under a canopy or eave, with a maximum area of ten square feet. The lower edge of such signs must be a minimum of eight feet above any underlying area accessible to pedestrians. Such signs may project a maximum of five feet over a public right-of-way.

        d.     Tenant Signs. Individual tenant signs may be allowed in addition to the maximum permitted aggregate sign area, on sites with two or more tenant spaces. The aggregate area of such tenant signs shall not exceed ten square feet. (Exception: if tenant locations are set back from the street a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet, the aggregate area of tenant signs may be increased to fifteen (15) square feet.) Tenant signs may be either wall, suspended, or projecting signs. Tenants located in a commercial center with three or more tenants may also have a tenant identification plaque monument sign. Each tenant plaque may be up to five square feet in area.

        3.     Recreation Zone. All sites located in the recreation zone may have one-half of the aggregate sign area allowed per site, and one-half of the aggregate sign area per sign category, of the commercial zones. (Exception: community identification monument signs located on public property. Such signs may be up to eight feet in height.)

        4.     Other Zones. Signs are prohibited in zones not included in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this section, except for those which are exempt from sign permit requirements pursuant to Section 19.04.170(D) of this chapter. (Ord. 11-09 § 3, 2011; Ord. 06-12 §§ 6, 7, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.172)

 

19.04.174 Sign modifications, construction standards, and maintenance.
        A.    Modifications to Sign Standards. Exemptions from the standards of Section 19.04.172 of this chapter may be granted as follows:

        1.     Exemptions, Director Approval. Exemptions may be granted by the director for minor deviations from the sign standards of Section 19.04.172 to:

        a.     Increase the size or height of a sign by ten percent or less; or

        b.     Extend the time limit of a temporary sign.

        2.     Exemptions, Planning Commission. All sign standard exemptions other than those described in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall be subject to approval by the planning commission, as follows:

        a.     Limit on Exemptions. The commission may approve up to a fifty (50) percent increase in sign area and a fifty (50) percent increase in sign height through this exemption process;

        b.     Notice and Hearing. All planning commission exemptions shall require a public hearing, conducted and with notice provided as set forth in Section 19.10.400 of this chapter. Exemptions by the director may be approved without a public hearing; however, the site shall be posted at least five days prior to the director taking final action on the request;

        c.     Required Findings. Modifications to the sign standards of this chapter may be granted only if it can be found that:

        i.      The existing standards do not allow for effective business identification due to a special (physical) circumstance applicable to the site,

        ii.     All other alternatives within the established sign standards have been examined, and the results would still not provide effective business identification, and

        iii.    The resulting sign proposal is visually compatible with the existing site and surroundings, and meets the intents and purposes of this chapter;

        d.     Conditions of Approval. Exemptions may be subject to conditions of approval;

        e.     Appeals. Decisions on exemptions by the director or the planning commission may be appealed as set forth in Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        B.     Sign Construction Standards.

        1.     Illumination. Signs shall be indirectly lighted by continuous, stationary, shielded light sources, directed only at the sign, or illuminated internally.

        2.     Codes. All signs shall comply with the current Uniform Building Code and National Electrical Code (for illuminated signs). Signs shall also comply with the current Uniform Sign Code, Chapter 4.

        C.     Sign Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, legible condition, and shall not be in a state of disrepair. Sign face messages must be removed from an abandoned sign if a location has been out of business for six months or more; however the sign structure may remain if property owner is actively pursuing a new tenant or buyer. “Disrepair” shall include, but not be limited to, burned out lights, broken sign faces or sign structures, peeling paint, and weathered or discolored sign faces or structures. (Ord. 06-12 § 8, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.174)

 

19.04.180 Undergrounding of utilities.
        Utilities serving new structures shall be installed underground and, where applicable, shall be installed in accordance with California Public Utilities Commission rules and regulations. This requirement applies to electrical service and telecommunications (including cable TV, telephone, and data transmission) connections between utility company distribution lines and all proposed structures on a site, and all new installations that distribute utilities within a site. In the event an above ground electrical transformer is located outdoors on any site, it shall be screened from view with a solid wall or landscaping. If the transformer cannot be screened to the satisfaction of the director, it shall be located in an underground vault. The director may waive any portion of this section if site conditions make the undergrounding unreasonable or impractical. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.04.180)

 

19.04.190 Universal design.
        The following universal design features shall be offered by the developer to prospective purchasers of units in all new single- and multifamily for-sale developments with five or more units, except for custom built homes:

        A.    Lever handles instead of round doorknobs.

        B.     At grade front entrances with a thirty-six (36) inch net clear opening.

        C.     Rocker controlled light switches installed at a lower level.

        D.    Adjustable closet rods, shelves, and countertops.

        E.     One one-half or three-fourths bath on the primary entrance level that complies with the requirements of CBC Chapter 11A.

        F.     Faucets and handles not requiring tight grasping, pinching, or twisting of the wrist and consistent with the requirements of CBC Chapter 11A. (Ord. 07-06 § 3, 2007)

Chapter 19.06 SPECIFIC USE REQUIREMENTS*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 21-01. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


19.06.001 Purpose and applicability of chapter.
        A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this chapter is to establish special standards for certain land uses that may affect adjacent properties, the neighborhood, or the community, even if the uniform zoning standards of Chapters 19.02 and 19.04 of this title are satisfied. It is the intent of this chapter to establish appropriate standards for the location, design and operation of the land uses covered here, to avoid their creating problems and hazards, and to ensure their consistency with the general plan.

        B.     Applicability of Standards. All land uses listed in this chapter shall conform to the minimum standards established by this chapter. Such land uses shall also conform to all other applicable requirements of this title, including, but not limited to, the minimum lot area, setbacks and height limits imposed by the zone applied to the site (Chapter 19.02), or the general development standards of Chapter 19.04 of this title. When a use listed in this chapter is subject to conflicting requirements, the following rules apply:

        1.     If the provisions of this chapter conflict with those of Chapters 19.02 or 19.04 of this title, this chapter shall control, except where this chapter explicitly states otherwise.

        2.     If a site or land use is subject to more than one section of this chapter, the most restrictive standards apply.

        3.     Where a proposed use is required by this chapter to have minor use or conditional use permit approval, the granting authority may impose other and more restrictive requirements, in addition to the provisions of this chapter, as conditions of approval in the interests of public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.001)

 

19.06.010 Accessory and canopy structures.
        All accessory and canopy structures, including agricultural structures, shall conform to criteria set forth in this section and as defined by this title.

        A.    No accessory or canopy structure shall be constructed on a lot until construction of the principal structure has begun, and no accessory or canopy structure shall be used unless the principal structure on the lot is also being used.

        B.     An accessory or canopy structure erected as an integral part of the principal structure shall comply in all respects with the use, yard, and height requirements applicable to the principal structure.

        C.     Accessory structures shall conform to the height requirements and the front and side yard setback regulations of the district. An accessory structure may be located in the required rear yard setback provided that it is located no closer than five feet to the principal structure and that it does not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet.

        D.    No canopy structure shall be located in the front or along the side of a building and shall be effectively screened behind a solid fence, wall or landscaping as approved by the planning director. A canopy structure may be located in the required rear yard setback provided that it is located no closer than five feet to all other structures and that it does not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet.

        E.     The total number of accessory structures and canopy structures shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the required rear yard.

        F.     No accessory structure on a corner lot shall be located closer to the street right-of-way or centerline than the principal building on that lot, nor within any side or front yard setback.

        G.    For a corner lot backing on a key lot, no accessory or canopy structure shall be located closer than ten feet to the rear property line.

        H.    Agricultural accessory structures that serve as a primary place of employment or which are used by the public may include a bathroom and wetbar area, provided that a notice to property owner is recorded by the property owner. For all other accessory structures, plumbing devices shall be limited to toilets and wash basins, and no bathing facilities or wetbars shall be allowed.

        I.      No cooking facilities shall be allowed in accessory or canopy structures.

        J.      Accessory buildings and structures shall not be used for sleeping purposes and shall not be used as guest houses, artist studios, or poolhouses/cabanas, unless specifically permitted for such use.

        K.    On lots of one acre or less, the gross floor area of an accessory structure shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet, excluding garages, barns and stables.

        L.     Canopy structures shall not be used as required covered parking. (Ord. 06-02 § 7, 2006: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.010)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 19.06.020 Animal raising and keeping.
        The keeping of animals in the residential zoning districts is allowed as follows:

 

        A.    No horse, mule, goat, cow, swine, or other similar size animal shall be permitted on any lot that is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross area. One horse, mule, goat, cow, swine, or similar size animal shall be allowed on lots greater than or equal to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross area. In no case shall the animals be kept for commercial purposes;

        1.     Exemption. The planning director, or his or her authorized representative, may allow one sheep, goat, or hog or other suidae that is less than one year old and is part of a controlled, educational animal husbandry project, such as those sponsored by 4H and FFA, on lots that are less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. The keeping of such animals are subject to the following:

        a.     The keeping of the animal will not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood or a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. Any complaints will be investigated through the code compliance process of the city of Buellton.

        b.     Animal enclosures or pens shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from accumulations of manure, urine, stagnant water, used bedding material, or any other filthy or odorous substances.

        c.     The projects are limited to a six-month period.

        d.     Documentation shall be provided as to the specific educational project being undertaken.

        B.     No stable, barn or other large animal enclosure (i.e., paddock) shall be located on a lot, excluding a combination of lots, having a gross area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No portion of a stable or barn shall be located closer than:

        1.     Forty (40) feet to the door or window of any dwelling on another lot,

        2.     Seventy (70) feet to any street centerline and twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way,

        3.     Fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line, and

        4.     Ten feet from the side property lines;

        C.     There shall not be more than three adult dogs and one litter of puppies permitted on any one lot;

        D.    There shall be not more than three adult cats and one litter of kittens permitted on any one lot;

        E.     Small animals (e.g., chickens, birds, ducks, rabbits, bees, etc.) shall be permitted provided that:

        1.     Such small animals are for the domestic use of the residents of the lot only and are not kept for commercial purposes,

        2.     The keeping of such small animals is not injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the neighborhood and does not create offensive noise or odor as determined by the planning director after advice from the county health department and/or county animal control,

        3.     Enclosures for small animals shall be no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any dwelling and shall meet the accessory structure regulations (Section 19.06.010),

        4.     The cumulative number of small animals on any property shall be a maximum of three or one hive in the case of bees;

        F.     Commercial animal breeding operations are prohibited in all residential zoning districts. (Ord. 07-06 § 3, 2007; Ord. 06-12 § 18, 2006: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.020)

 

19.06.030 Carnivals, circuses, and other temporary entertainment events.
        A temporary zoning clearance may be approved by the director for carnivals, circuses, and similar activities, including, but not limited to, art and craft fairs, outdoor shooting galleries, menageries, merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, shooting matches, turkey shoots, tent shows, trained animal shows, amusement parlors, penny arcades, prizefights, and wrestling matches, in any commercial or industrial district but in no other districts, upon written application and provided that:

        A.    They do not continue for more than five consecutive days;

        B.     The director or authorized staff inspects and approves the proposed site of the carnival or circus or other such activity; and

        C.     The applicant shall comply with all provisions of the laws of the city including, but not limited to, the city business license title and any conditions imposed pursuant to this title or any other applicable title.

        D.    The director may impose reasonable conditions upon the operation of a carnival, circus, or other such activity in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.030)

 

19.06.040 Certified farmers’ markets.
        A conditional use permit may be issued for certified farmer’s markets certified by the county agricultural commissioner in accordance with regulations in California Administrative Code Title 3, Chapter 3, Group 4, Article 6.5, Section 1392 et seq. subject to the following additional requirements:

        A.    The use shall be conducted on a fully paved and improved main parking lot on property incidental to a church, school or philanthropic institution, or on a city street where authorized;

        B.     The operation shall be conducted by one or more certified producers, by a nonprofit organization or by a local government agency;

        C.     The producers are authorized by the appropriate county agricultural commissioner to sell directly to consumers nonprocessed products as fresh fruits, vegetables and in-shell nuts that are produced upon the land which the certified producer farms and owns, rents, leases or sharecrops;

        D.    The operator of the market and all involved certified producers secure the necessary licenses, certificates and health permits in order to sell products directly to consumers, including, without limitation, permits from the Santa Barbara County Division of Environmental Health pursuant to Title 17, California Administrative Code, Section 13653;

        E.     The location of a certified farmer’s market, as proposed, will not have a significant adverse effect on adjoining properties or on the immediate neighborhood as to noise and traffic congestion;

        F.     The certified farmer’s market shall be secondary to the principal use. The total hours and days of operation shall not exceed those of the principal use, and all activities shall be conducted during daylight hours only. After eight p.m., the site shall revert to its normal use. Accessory market structures and any signs advertising the market shall be of a strictly temporary nature and shall also be removed at the close of the day;

        G.    Adequate trash containers approved by the city shall be provided during the hours of operation and the operator of the market shall post a two hundred dollar ($200.00) clean-up fee with the city clerk prior to the opening of business. Adequate toilet facilities approved by the Division of Environmental Health Services shall be provided for both sexes;

        H.    There shall be no use of any sound equipment in conjunction with market activities;

        I.      Notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title except that the notice required by Section 19.10.400(A)(2)(a)(iii) shall be mailed to the owners of the affected property and the owners of the property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the exterior boundaries of the affected property. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.040)

 

19.06.050 Child day care.
        A.    Small Family Day Care Homes. Small family day care homes shall be considered a residential use pursuant to this title, provided that the provider has obtained a license or a statement of exemption from licensing requirements from the California State Department of Social Services pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1597.51.

        B.     Large Family Day Care Homes. Large family day care homes shall be considered a residential, provided that prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, the zoning administrator shall make the following findings:

        1.     The provider has obtained a license or a statement of exemption from licensing requirements from the California State Department of Social Services pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1597.51;

        2.     The property is located more than three hundred (300) feet from any other large family day care home and approval will not result in overconcentration;

        3.     The noise level, including noise generated by the children, is consistent with the noise element of the Buellton general plan.

        The approval of large family day care homes pursuant to this section shall be deemed a ministerial action that is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act. Notice shall be given of the proposed use at least ten days prior to the date of the zoning administrator’s decision to all owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed large family day care home. No hearing on the application shall be held unless a hearing is requested by the applicant or other affected person. The zoning administrator’s decision may be appealed to the commission as provided by Section 19.10.130 of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.050)

 

19.06.060 Condominiums, stock cooperatives, community apartments.
        The following requirements may be applied by the commission or council as conditions of approval to condominiums, stock cooperative, or community apartments projects:

        A.    Each dwelling unit shall be provided with at least one hundred eighty (180) cubic feet of weatherproofed, enclosed, lockable, and easily accessible storage space on-site in addition to the usable storage space of closets, cabinets, and pantry within the dwelling units;

        B.     Individual metering for utilities shall be provided for each unit, unless the metering would conflict with an innovative energy-efficient or resource conserving utility system, designed for the project;

        C.     Sufficient space, utility connections, and vents shall be provided in each unit or its garage to allow for the installation of a clothes washer and dryer, and shall be shown on the final development plan;

        D.    Each unit shall include private outdoor patio area in the form of ground level patios or upper story balconies. Private patios shall not be less than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the residence served. Where a required patio area is less than two hundred (200) square feet, the requirements shall be satisfied with one patio or balcony per unit;

        E.     Common open space and recreation areas shall be designed to provide access for the handicapped. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.060)

 

19.06.070 Drive-through facilities.
        In considering an application for such a conditional use permit, in addition to the findings in Section 19.08.110(D), the permit shall be granted only if the drive-through facility is found to have no greater adverse impact upon air quality than the same use without the drive-through facility. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.070)

 

19.06.080 Guest houses, artist studios and pool house/cabanas.
        Guest houses, artist studios, and pool house/cabanas must conform to criteria set forth in this section.

        A.    There shall not be more than one guest house or artist studio on any lot.

        B.     The floor area of such guest house, artist studio, or pool house/cabana shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet; however, such structures may be attached to an accessory structure so that the total area of the combined structures exceeds eight hundred (800) square feet, provided no interior access exists between the guest house, artist studio, or pool house/cabana and the accessory structure.

        C.     All guest houses, artist studios or pool house/cabanas shall be limited to one floor. Such floor may be located over an accessory structure.

        D.    There shall be no kitchen or cooking facilities within a guest house, artist studio or pool house/cabana. However, a wet bar may be provided, limited to the following features:

        1.     The counter area may include a bar sink and an under-counter refrigerator;

        2.     The counter area may include an overhead cupboard area;

        3.     The counter area shall be located against a wall or, if removed from the wall, it shall not create a space more than four feet in depth. The counter shall be in one unit. The intent of this provision is to avoid creation of a kitchen;

        4.     No cooking facilities shall be included in the wet bar area.

        E.     Guest houses and pool house/cabanas may contain bathrooms as defined by title. However, in artist studios, plumbing facilities shall be limited to those required for a wetbar, if provided, and/or a restroom. No bathing facilities shall be permitted in artist studios.

        F.     Guest houses, artist studios, or pool house/cabanas must conform to all of the setback regulations set forth in the applicable zone district for dwellings.

        G.    A guest house shall be used on a temporary basis only by the occupants of the main dwelling or their non-paying guests or servants and is not to be rented or let out, whether the compensation is paid directly or indirectly in money, goods, wares, merchandise, or services. Temporary is defined as occupying the premises for no more than one hundred twenty (120) days in any twelve (12) month period.

        H.    Artist studios and pool house/cabanas shall not be used as temporary sleeping quarters, guest houses, or as a dwelling unit.

        I.      A deed restriction shall be required to be recorded by the property owner prior to issuance of a zoning clearance for any guest house, artist studio or pool house/cabana that identifies the use and locational restrictions pursuant to this section.

        J.      A pool house/cabana may be approved in conjunction with a proposed pool, provided that use of the building is simultaneous with completion of the pool.

        K.    A home occupation permit shall be required for all artist studios. (Ord. 06-12 § 9, 2006: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.080)

 

19.06.090 Handicraft industries.
        A conditional use permit may be issued under the provisions of this section for the manufacture in CR and CS districts of handicraft items, jewelry, notions, and other items on a small scale, and involving no effects on surrounding property which would constitute a greater nuisance than those created by other uses permitted in the district in which such manufacture is allowed. A conditional use permit for such use may only be issued subject to the provisions of this section and to the following conditions and to any further conditions which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator are necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety, and general welfare, to maintain property values in the neighborhood, and to safeguard essential community services and values such as traffic circulation, sewage disposal, water supply, fire protection, and neighborhood character:

        A.    All manufacturing activities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building having a total gross floor area of not to exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

        B.     All storage of materials and equipment shall be screened from view from surrounding properties by a solid fence approved by the zoning administrator;

        C.     No fumes, noxious gases, objectionable odors, heat, glare, or radiation generated by or resulting from such use shall be detectable at any point upon the boundary of the property upon which the use is located;

        D.    The use shall create no objectionable noise or vibration;

        E.     No smoke or dust shall be created except from the heating of buildings. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.090)

 

19.06.100 Home occupations.
        Prior to the commencement of any type of occupation in the home, a home occupation application shall be submitted to the planning department. The planning department shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny such application. Upon approval of such application, a zoning clearance shall be issued for the home occupation.

        A.    Findings Required for Approval. The planning department shall approve a home occupation application only if the proposed occupation meets all of the following criteria:

        1.     A home occupation shall be conducted within not more than one room of the dwelling not including garages, except for artist studios;

        2.     There shall be no structural alterations of the dwelling, and the existence of the home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the premises;

        3.     The home occupation shall be conducted solely by the occupants of the dwelling unit. No employees other than the dwelling occupants shall be permitted on the premises for business purposes;

        4.     No displays, delivery of merchandise, or advertising signs shall be permitted on the premises;

        5.     There shall be no more than five customers, patients, clients, students, or other persons served by the occupation upon the premises at any one time;

        6.     A home occupation shall not create any radio or television interference or create noise audible beyond the boundaries of the premises;

        7.     No smoke or odor shall be emitted that occurs as a result of the home occupation;

        8.     There shall be no outdoor storage of materials related to the home occupation;

        9.     No vehicles or trailers except those incidental to the residential use shall be kept on the premises;

        10.   A home occupation shall be strictly secondary and subordinate to the primary residential use and shall not change or detrimentally affect the residential character of the dwelling, premises, or neighborhood;

        11.   The following uses by their operation or nature may interfere with residential welfare and diminish the convenience intended for commercial zones, and therefore shall not be permitted as home occupations:

        a.     Appliance, radio or television repair,

        b.     Barber or beauty shop,

        c.     Carpentry or cabinet making,

        d.     Child care of more than six children or instruction for more than three school-aged children or adults (not counting residents of the home),

        e.     Gun or ammunition sales, including by mail order,

        f.      Medical offices or clinics,

        g.     Print shop,

        h.     Welding or machining.

        B.     Nonstandard Home Occupations. Home occupations not consistent with all provisions of subsection (A) may be approved through minor use permit (Section 19.08.110); provided, that the approval body first makes the following findings, in addition to those required by Section 19.08.110(D) (Findings required for approval):

        1.     The home occupation will be strictly secondary and subordinate to the primary residential use and will not change or detrimentally affect the residential character of the dwelling, site, or neighborhood; and

        2.     Conditions of approval are being applied to the operation of the proposed home occupation that will mitigate all potentially adverse effects of the home occupation on the dwelling, site and neighborhood.

        C.     Violations of Home Occupation Regulations. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish, cause, permit or maintain any type of business, profession or other commercial occupation (collectively to be referred to as a “home occupation”) in an area zoned for residential use without first securing a zoning clearance from the planning department which approves, and/or conditionally approves such use or activity. It is unlawful for any person to conduct a home occupation for which a home occupation permit has been issued without complying with all conditions attached to such permit. (Ord. 95-01 § 2, 1995; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.100)

 

19.06.110 Mobilehomes on foundations.
        Where permitted in the applicable zone districts, mobilehomes that are certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 5401 et seq.) and constructed on a permanent foundation system, pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18551, shall be subject to the following requirements:

        A.    The mobilehome shall have a roof overhang unless waived by the commission because the absence of a roof overhang would be appropriate and of good design in relation to other structures on the site and in the immediately affected surrounding area;

        B.     Roofing and siding shall be nonreflective; and

        C.     Siding shall extend to the ground level. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.110)

 

19.06.120 Mobilehome parks.
        The provisions of this section apply to all mobilehome parks and the placement of individual mobilehomes within mobilehome parks.

        A.    Minimum Lot Area and Density.

        1.     The minimum area required for a mobilehome park shall be one acre. The minimum individual mobilehome site area shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of eighty (80) feet.

        2.     The maximum density for a mobilehome park shall be seven mobilehome units per gross acre, except as provided by subsection (A)(3) of this section.

        3.     To create opportunities for affordable housing, a maximum of ten percent of mobilehome sites in a park may be developed for single-wide units. The minimum area for single-wide sites shall be two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet with a minimum width of thirty-five (35) feet and a minimum depth of eighty (80) feet. The maximum density for projects which utilize this option shall be eight units per gross acre.

        B.     Site Development Standards.

        1.     Setbacks, Coverage, Height Limit. New buildings and structures and alterations to existing buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to satisfy the following requirements:

 

Development Feature

Requirement

Park perimeter setbacks

Front

20 ft. minimum

 

Side

15 ft. minimum

 

Rear

15 ft. minimum

Setbacks, individual mobilehome sites

Front

10 ft. minimum from the front line of the mobilehome lot

 

Side

5 ft. minimum from the side line of the mobilehome lot

10 ft. minimum from any access road, parking area or walkway

 

Rear

10 ft. minimum from the rear line of the mobilehome lot

 

Interior

10 ft. minimum between mobilehomes

Site coverage, mobilehome lots

60% of the mobilehome lot

 

        To maximize open space on mobilehome lots, the required side yard setback may be modified to locate mobilehomes within one side yard, provided that the remaining side yard is equal to the sum of the two side yards required above. Such modifications shall be subject to state of California approval to waive the minimum setback requirements of Title 25, California Code of Regulations.

        2.     Parking. Parking shall be provided as specified in Section 19.04.140 of this title.

        a.     Individual Lot Parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each mobilehome site. The parking spaces may be permitted on individual sites or one parking space may be provided on the individual sites and the other parking space may be located in common parking areas located throughout the mobilehome development.

        b.     RV Storage. Storage parking facilities for recreational vehicles (travel trailer, camper, etc.) shall be provided within the park at the ratio of one storage space for each five mobilehome sites. Storage areas shall be screened by landscaping and fencing for security purposes. Minimum dimensions for each storage space shall be ten feet by twenty (20) feet.

        c.     Garage Setback. Any garage must be set back fifteen (15) feet from the front line of a mobilehome site.

        d.     Location of Common Parking. Common parking areas shall be located no closer than ten feet to any mobilehome site.

        3.     Open Space and Landscaping. Mobilehome planned developments shall be designed to provide open space and landscaping areas as follows:

        a.     Common Open Space Required. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross area of the mobilehome development shall be in common open space, which shall include a recreational area and facilities for the use of the residents of the development. Such facilities shall generally be provided in a central location and may include lawn and picnic areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, etc. Laundry facilities or other nonrecreational uses shall not be included in the common open space. Improved sidewalks, walkways or paths shall link all mobilehome sites to the recreational facilities. If the mobilehome development is to be developed in phases, the open space/common recreation area must be developed during the first phase of construction.

        b.     Title to Open Space. In a mobilehome condominium development, title to the common open space, common recreational amenities and private streets shall be conveyed to a nonprofit association of all homeowners within the project area, or any other nonprofit individual or entity on such reasonable terms and conditions as the council may prescribe subject to conveying to the city the rights to develop such common open space with anything except open space, noncommercial recreational facilities, common parking areas, and private streets.

        c.     Obligation for Preservation and Maintenance. Preservation and maintenance of all common open space, common recreational facilities, common parking areas, and private streets shall be the obligation of the individual or entity holding title to the areas.

        d.     Perimeter Landscaping Required. Perimeter setback areas which are part of the common open space of the mobilehome development shall be landscaped. Unsightly areas within the development such as common parking areas, trash storage areas, etc., shall be effectively screened by landscaping.

        4.     Additional Requirements:

        a.     All mobilehomes shall be skirted.

        b.     Tool sheds and equipment storage structures shall be permitted on each site but shall not be located in any setback area.

        c.     All development shall be in compliance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Housing and Community Development. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.120)

 

19.06.130 Mortuaries, crematories, and funeral homes.
        Subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, mortuaries, crematories, and funeral homes may be permitted in the following locations:

        A.    Within cemeteries operating under a valid land use permit;

        B.     On any parcel of land abutting such a cemetery; or

        C.     On property zoned to permit multiple family dwellings where the property abuts upon or is directly across the street from property zoned for commercial or industrial purposes. In all such locations, the commission shall impose conditions requiring that the architectural design of all buildings and structures be compatible with neighboring residential buildings, that signs are unobtrusive, and that adequate off-street parking space is provided for funeral procession assembly areas. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.130)

 

19.06.140 Parking lot sales.
        Parking lot and sidewalk sales are allowed in any commercial zoning district in compliance with the following requirements:

        A.    Limitation on Use. Sales shall be conducted only by the merchants of shops served by the parking lot or abutting the sidewalk.

        B.     Permit Requirement. The total number of sales during a calendar year shall not exceed four. Each sale shall last no more than three days. A zoning clearance shall be required for all parking lot sales (Section 19.08.100).

        C.     Location. Sales areas shall be located so that adequate pedestrian access and parking will exist during the proposed sale, as determined by the planning director.

        D.    Encroachment Permit Required. The use of any public sidewalk for a sidewalk sale shall also be authorized by an encroachment permit in compliance with Chapter 12.08 of the municipal code.

        E.     Operational Conditions. The planning director may impose any reasonable conditions on the operation of a parking lot or sidewalk sale to ensure adequate pedestrian and vehicle access, and compatibility with adjacent land uses, during the sale.

        F.     Exception. Outdoor sales and display areas associated with a business that are contained within the eaves of the building and do not block required pedestrian access or have otherwise been approved through a conditional use permit or development plan are not subject to the parking lot sales requirements. (Ord. 06-12 § 10, 2006: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.140)

 

19.06.150 Pipelines.
        A.    Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to:

        1.     All oil transmission and distribution pipelines;

        2.     All gas transmission and distribution lines excluding public utility gas lines less than twelve (12) inches in diameter;

        3.     Wastewater pipelines excluding those incidental to and located within an onshore oil production lease area;

        4.     All pipelines associated with offshore oil and gas production;

        5.     Facilities related to the above pipelines (e.g., pumping stations, etc.).

        B.     Processing. No permits for development including grading shall be issued except in conformance with an approved development plan, as provided in Section 19.08.120 of this title. The following information, in place of that listed in the “required application contents” list furnished by the department must be filed with a development plan application:

        1.     A brief statement describing the project;

        2.     A plot plan showing:

        a.     Property, easement, and pipeline right-of-way boundaries,

        b.     Proposed road construction or modification,

        c.     Area to be used for construction,

        d.     Area to be used for access and maintenance during pipeline operation,

        e.     Existing roads, watercourses and pipelines within the pipeline right-of-way,

        f.      Location and type of existing and proposed structures within fifty (50) feet of the pipeline right-of-way,

        g.     Proposed alteration of surface drainages;

        3.     A contour map showing existing and proposed contours;

        4.     Measures to be used to prevent or reduce nuisance effects, such as noise, dust, odor, smoke, fumes, vibration, glare, and to prevent danger to life and property;

        5.     A revegetation and site restoration plan shall be prepared by the applicant which includes provisions for restoration of any biologically important habitats which will be disturbed by construction or operational procedures. The plan shall be subject to approval by the planning department during project review;

        6.     Any other reasonable information as deemed necessary by the planning department;

        7.     In addition, for oil and gas pipelines, an emergency response plan that addresses the potential consequences and actions to be taken in the event of hydrocarbon leaks or fires shall be submitted. The emergency response plan shall be approved by the city’s emergency services coordinator and fire department unless the plan has received previous approval by the public utilities commission.

        C.     Findings Required for Approval. In addition to the findings for development plans required by Section 19.08.120 of this title, no development plan proposing new pipeline construction outside of industry facilities shall be approved unless the commission also makes the findings that:

        1.     Use of available or planned common carrier and multiple-user pipelines is not feasible; and

        2.     Pipelines will be constructed, operated, and maintained as common carrier or multiple-user pipelines unless the commission determines it is not feasible. Applicants have taken into account the reasonable, foreseeable needs of other potential shippers in the design of their common carrier and multiple-user pipelines. Multiple-user pipelines provide equitable access to all shippers with physically compatible stock on a nondiscriminatory basis; and

        3.     New pipelines are routed in approved corridors that have undergone comprehensive environmental review unless the commission determines that such corridors are not available, safe, technically feasible, or the environmentally preferred route for the proposed new pipeline; and

        4.     When a new pipeline route is proposed, it is environmentally preferable to all feasible alternative routes; and

        5.     When a new pipeline is proposed, the project’s environmental review has analyzed the cumulative impacts that might result from locating additional pipelines in that corridor in future; and

        6.     Concurrent or “shadow” construction has been coordinated with other pipeline projects that are expected to be located in the same corridor where practical.

        D.    Development Standards. The following standards shall apply to all pipeline projects:

        1.     Except in an emergency, no materials, equipment, tools, or pipes shall be delivered to or removed from a pipeline construction site through streets within any residential zone district between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m. of the next day;

        2.     After completion of back-filling and compacting of the pipeline ditch, the site shall be returned to grade where practical and the excess soil shall be removed to an appropriate disposal site;

        3.     During construction of the pipeline, there shall be no permanent blocking of surface drainages;

        4.     A pipeline corridor shall be sited so as to avoid significant impacts to resources (e.g., aquatic habitats, archaeological areas) to the maximum extent feasible;

        5.     Where pipeline segments carrying hydrocarbon liquids pass through sensitive resource areas (e.g., aquatic habitats) as identified by the project environmental review, provisions identified in the environmental review shall be applied to minimize the amount of liquids released in the sensitive areas in the event of a spill. The potential for damage in those areas shall be minimized by considering spill volumes, duration, and trajectories in the selection of a pipeline corridor. In addition, appropriate measures for spill containment and cleanup (e.g., catch basins to contain a spill) shall be included as part of the required emergency response plan;

        6.     Permits for new pipeline construction shall require engineering of pipe placement and burial within a corridor to minimize incremental widening of the corridor during subsequent pipeline projects, unless the proposed route is determined to be unacceptable for additional pipelines.

        E.     Optional Development Standards. The following standards may be applied to a proposed pipeline project in addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, to the extent deemed necessary by the commission.

        1.     A performance security shall be provided in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of all requirements of the approved revegetation and restoration plan and shall be released upon satisfactory completion.

        2.     Disturbed areas shall be jointly inspected by the applicant and city staff one year after completion of construction to assess the effectiveness of the revegetation and restoration program. This inspection shall continue on an annual basis to monitor progress in returning the site to pre-construction conditions or until no additional monitoring is deemed necessary to the planning department. Inspection results shall be submitted annually to the planning department, and additional treatment of the site will be applied as deemed necessary by the department.

        3.     Above ground sections of the pipeline and related facilities excepting those emplaced on a temporary basis for a testing period not to exceed one year, shall be visually compatible with the present and anticipated surrounding by use of any or all of the following measures where applicable: buffer strips; depressions, natural or artificial; screen planting and landscaping continually maintained; and camouflage and/or blending colors.

        4.     Proposed facilities shall be designed and housed such that the noise generated by the facilities as measured at the property boundaries shall be equal to or below the existing noise level of the surrounding area except under temporary testing or emergency situations. Measures to reduce adverse impacts (due to noise, vibration, etc.) to the maximum extent feasible shall be used for facilities located adjacent to noise sensitive locations as identified in the noise element of the general plan. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.150)

 

19.06.160 Sale of agricultural products grown on the premises.
        The following are the requirements for the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises:

        A.    The site shall consist of two or more contiguous acres.

        B.     If a building or structure is required for the sale of such products, the sale shall be conducted either within an existing accessory building or from a separate stand not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet of sales and storage area except that if the premises consist of five or more contiguous acres, such building shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. The building or structure shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way line of any street; this requirement shall apply in lieu of any other setback requirements of the zone district or the sign regulations. Only one stand shall be allowed on the site.

        C.     The design of new structures shall be approved by the director.

        D.    A building permit shall be obtained.

        E.     Signs advertising the sale of agricultural products shall conform to Section 19.04.170 of this title.

        F.     A minimum of two permanently maintained onsite parking spaces shall be provided, which shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the right-of-way line of any street.

        G.    Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, a permit for the sale of agricultural products shall be obtained from the Santa Barbara County Department of Health Care Services pursuant to Title 17, California Administrative Code Section 13653. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.160)

 

19.06.170 Satellite dish antennas.
        All satellite antennas, including portable units and dish antennas, but not including amateur radio antennas and home television and radio antennas, shall be designed, constructed, treated, and maintained in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and as follows, when these provisions are not in conflict with applicable state and federal regulations:

        A.    Plans for antennas shall be submitted with each application for a building permit, and shall include a site plan and elevation drawings indicating the height, diameter, color, setbacks, foundation details, landscaping, and method of screening. The plans shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator through a minor use permit.

        B.     No antenna shall be located within any required front or street side yard setbacks in any zoning district. In addition, no portion of an antenna shall extend beyond the property lines.

        C.     The antennas and supporting structure shall be painted a single, neutral, nonglossy color (i.e., earth tones, off-white, cream, beige) and to the extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of surrounding neighborhoods.

        D.    All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground whenever possible.

        E.     In any residential zoning district, all antennas shall be subject to the following standards:

        1.     Only ground-mounted antennas shall be permitted and the antennas shall be located in the rear yard of the site;

        2.     The height of the antennas shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet;

        3.     Only one antenna may be permitted on any site;

        4.     The antenna shall be separated from adjacent properties by at least a six-foot high solid wall or fence or by plants or trees of equal minimum height;

        5.     Any antenna that is taller than adjacent property line fences shall be located away from the side or rear property line at a distance equal to or greater than the height which the antenna is above the adjacent fence;

        6.     The diameter of the antenna shall not exceed ten feet. This provision may be modified by the zoning administrator if strict compliance would result in no/poor satellite reception;

        7.     The antenna shall be used for private, noncommercial purposes, only.

        F.     In any nonresidential district, antennas may be roof or ground-mounted. These antennas shall be subject to the following standards:

        1.     If roof-mounted, the antennas shall be screened from ground view by a parapet or other type of screening. The minimum height and design of the parapet, wall or screening shall be subject to approval of the zoning administrator;

        2.     If ground-mounted, the antennas shall not be located between a structure and a street adjacent lot line and shall be screened from public view and adjacent properties;

        3.     The location and height of the antennas shall comply with all requirements of the underlying zoning district;

        4.     If the subject site abuts a residential zoning district, all antennas shall be set back a minimum distance from the property line equal to the height of the antenna, unless otherwise screened from view;

        5.     The diameter of the antenna shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. (Ord. 06-12 § 12, 2006: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.170)

 

19.06.171 Amateur radio antennas.
        All amateur radio antennas shall be designed, constructed, treated, and maintained in compliance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). Pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.3, the intent of this section is to allow these facilities to be erected at heights and dimensions sufficient to accommodate amateur radio service communications, do not preclude the establishment of amateur radio service communications, and reasonably accommodates amateur radio service communications, subject to the following conditions that accomplish the city’s legitimate purpose for protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare:

        A.    Ground mounted antennas and supporting equipment shall not be located within the front or side yard setbacks. These structures shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures;

        B.     Antenna height shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height by more than ten feet;

        C.     No more than one antenna shall be permitted per legal lot;

        D.    The antennas and supporting structure shall be painted a single, neutral, nonglossy color (i.e., earth tones, off-white, cream, beige) and to the extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of surrounding neighborhoods;

        E.     The antenna support structure shall not exceed a width or diameter of two feet;

        F.     No portion of the antenna shall overhang any property line;

        G.    All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground whenever possible;

        H.    Review and approval of a zoning clearance and building permit are required to ensure that safety is maintained and the above standards are met. (Ord. 06-12 § 13, 2006)

 

19.06.172 Home television and radio antennas.
        All home television and radio antennas shall be designed, constructed, treated, and maintained in compliance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The following conditions apply to these antennas:

        A.    Antennas shall be four feet or less in diameter or in diagonal measurement so long as they are located entirely on the property and are not located within the front yard area;

        B.     Ground-mounted antennas and supporting equipment shall not be located within the front or side yard setbacks;

        C.     These antennas shall comply with the setback requirements for accessory structures;

        D.    Antenna height shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height by more than five feet;

        E.     No more than two such antennas shall be permitted per legal dwelling unit;

        F.     The antennas and supporting structure shall be painted a single, neutral, nonglossy color (i.e., earth tones, off-white, cream, beige) and to the extent possible, compatible with the appearance and character of surrounding neighborhoods;

        G.    No portion of the antenna shall overhang any property line;

        H.    All electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed underground whenever possible;

        I.      Antennas meeting these requirements do not require a zoning clearance or building permit. (Ord. 06-12 § 14, 2006)

 

19.06.180 Accessory dwelling units.
        A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose or this section is to allow and regulate accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) in compliance with California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22, incorporated herein by this reference, and any successors or additions thereto. Accessory dwelling units provide housing opportunities for the varying needs of the elderly, low-income and other economic groups. The intent is also to ensure a safe and attractive residential environment by promoting high standards of site development consistent with State ADU law.

        B.     Definitions. The following terms when used in this chapter will have the meanings provided in this section:

        “Accessory structure” means a structure that is accessory or incidental to a dwelling on the same lot as the ADU

        “Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” will have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 65852.2(i)(4),which is: an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (i.e., stove, refrigerator, and sink), and sanitation (i.e., bathroom with shower or bathtub) on the same parcel as the existing or proposed single-family dwelling (primary unit) is situated. An ADU also includes the following: (a) an efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958. 1; and (b) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007.

        “Attached ADU” means an ADU that is attached to the primary unit.

        “Car share vehicle operation” means a subscription or membership service that provides automobile reservations for an additional fee to its members on an hourly and/or daily basis.

        “Detached ADU” means an ADU that is detached from the primary unit.

        “Efficiency kitchen” means a kitchen that includes each of the following: (a) a cooking facility with appliances; (b) a food preparation counter or counters that total at least fifteen (15) square feet in area; and (c) food storage cabinets that total at least thirty (30) square feet of shelf space.

        “Floor area” means, for the purpose of this chapter, habitable space consisting of all interior living spaces including, but not limited to, an entry, hallways, sleeping areas, sanitation, and eating and kitchen facilities.

        “Junior ADU” or ‘‘JADU” means a unit that: (a) is created by the conversion of existing floor space, which is contained within the existing floor area of a primary dwelling unit; is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size; provides a separate entrance from the main entrance to the primary unit: and includes an efficiency kitchen. A JADU may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

        “Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the ADU.

        “Primary unit” means the existing or proposed single-family residential structure on the legal lot upon which an ADU is located.

        “Public transit” means a location including, but not limited to, a bus stop or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

        “Tandem parking” means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot. lined up behind one another.

        C.     Additional Standards. In addition to standards and regulations set forth in subsection A of this section the following apply:

        1.     Rental Term. No ADU or Junior ADU may be rented for a term that is shorter than thirty (30) days.

        2.     Owner Occupancy.

        a.     All ADUs permitted before January 1, 2020 are subject to the owner occupancy requirement that was in place when the ADU was permitted.

        b.     An ADU that is permitted after that date but before January 1, 2025, is not subject to any owner-occupancy requirement.

        c.     All ADUs that are permitted on or after January 1, 2025 are subject to an owner-occupancy requirement. A natural person with legal or equitable title to the properly must reside on the property as the person’s legal domicile and permanent residence.

        d.     All JADUs are subject to an owner-occupancy requirement. A natural person with legal or equitable title to the property must reside on the property, in either the principal dwelling or JADU, as the person’s legal domicile and permanent residence. However, the owner occupancy requirement of this paragraph does not apply if the property is entirely owned by another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

        3.     No Separate Conveyance. An ADU or JADU may be rented, but no ADU or JADU may be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the lot and the principal dwelling (in the case of a single-unit dwelling lot) or from the lot and all of the dwellings (in the case of a multifamily dwelling lot).

        4.     Deed Restriction. Prior to issuance of a building permit for an ADU or JA DU, a deed restriction must be recorded against the title of the property in the Santa Barbara County Recorder’s office and a copy filed with the director. The deed restriction must run with the land and bind all future owners. The form of the deed restriction will be provided by the city and must provide that:

        a.     The ADU or JADU may not be sold separately from the principal dwelling.

        b.     The ADU or JADU is restricted to the approved size and to other attributes allowed by the ordinance codified in this section.

        c.     The deed restriction runs with the land and may be enforced against future property owners.

        d.     The deed restriction may be removed if the owner eliminates the ADU or JADU, as evidenced by, for example, removal of the kitchen facilities. To remove the deed restriction, an owner may make a written request of the director, providing evidence that the ADU or JADU has in fact been eliminated. The director may then determine whether the evidence supports the claim that the ADU or JADU has been eliminated. Appeal may be taken from the director’s determination consistent with other provisions of city zoning regulations. If the ADU or JADU is not entirely physically removed, but is only eliminated by virtue of having a necessary component of an ADU or JADU removed, the remaining structure and improvements must otherwise comply with applicable provisions of the city’s zoning regulations.

        e.     The deed restriction is enforceable by the director or his or her designee for the benefit of the city. Failure of the property owner to comply with the deed restriction may result in legal action against the property owner, and the city is authorized to obtain any remedy available to it at law or equity, including, but not limited to, obtaining an injunction enjoining the use of the ADU or JADU in violation of the recorded restrictions or abatement of the illegal unit.

        5.     Development Standards. Applies to ADUs that are not exempt from local standards as described in subsection (D)(3)(a) of this section.

        a.     Property Development Standards. Except as otherwise required by Government Code Section 65852.2,the following shall apply; at a minimum, development of at least one eight hundred (800) square foot attached or detached ADU shall be permitted on every qualifying lot:

        i.      Placement, Setbacks and Fencing.

        (A)   An ADU may be placed anywhere on a residential lot as long as the placement of the ADU meets all development standards of the underlying zone, except as specifically set forth in this section.

        (B)   The ADU shall have four foot side and rear setbacks that arc sufficient for life safety. The minimum front setbacks of the underlying zone apply to a newly constructed ADU.

        (C)   An ADU may not violate the minimum distance between building standards for the applicable zone.

        (D)   An attached or detached ADU must have a fence, meeting the requirements for the applicable zone, put in place along the side and rear property lines nearest the structure.

        (E)   No ADU may be located in a way that would prohibit access to a designated parking area or impede safe ingress and egress from a required side, rear, or front setback.

        (F)    No ADU may remove a protected native tree unless the proposed construction complies with the requirements of the Native Tree Protection Ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 12.32.

        (G)   No change in setbacks shall be required when an ADU is constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing legal structure that is converted in to an ADU or to a portion of an ADU, even when that structure has been demolished.

        ii.     Open Space.

        (A)   The open space area on the lot shall be commonly accessible to both the main unit and the ADU unless otherwise approved by the director.

        iii.    Design and Neighborhood Compatibility.

        (A)   An ADU must be compatible with the design of the surrounding neighborhood and not cause excessive noise, traffic, parking or other disturbance to the existing neighborhood or adversely affect public services and resources, including water supply, fire protection, and sewage disposal.

        (B)   An ADU must meet Objective Design Standards.

 

        (1)    The materials and colors of exterior walls, roof, caves, windows, and doors as well as the landscaping of an ADU must match those or the primary dwelling.

        (2)    The roof slope of an ADU must match the dominant roof slope of the primary dwelling. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest portion of the roof.

        (3)    The ADU must have an independent exterior entrance separate from the primary dwelling.

        iv.    Accessory Structures. Except for exempt ADUs described in Section D.3 of this Chapter, an ADU shall not be permitted on a lot zoned for single-family use, in addition to a guest house or similar structure. If an ADU has been approved on the lot a guest house or other occupiable accessory structure may not subsequently be approved unless the ADU is removed.

        6.     Restricted Area # 1. Due to public safety and traffic flow concerns, ADUs and JADUs are not allowed unless the number of code required off-street parking spaces are provided on-site for all existing or proposed primary residences (single-family and/or multifamily dwelling units) and one off-street parking is provided per unit for all proposed ADUs and JADUs, including garage conversions, in the restricted areas and per he requirements described below:

        a.     All properties that have vehicular access from:

        i.      Central Avenue, north of Zaca Street, and south of its intersection with Avenue of Flags,

        ii.     Central Avenue Alley (east or Central Avenue), north of Zaca Street to its northern terminus at 614 Central Avenue and 597 Avenue of Flags.

        b.     All properties that have vehicular access from the following roadways between Central Avenue and Central Avenue Alley:

        i.      Zaca Street,

        ii.     State Highway 246,

        iii.    1st Street, and

        iv.    2nd Street.

        c.     Any property in the above areas that is accessed solely by an unimproved or unpaved road or alley.

        d.     Off-Street Parking in Restricted Area # l. The following parking regulations govern additional parking requirements for ADUs in the Restricted Area # l.

        i.      Number of Spaces. In addition to the required parking for the primary residence as specified in the applicable zoning district and in Section 19.04.140 et seq., and a minimum of one parking space shall be provided per ADU, all of which may be covered or uncovered in any configuration on-site.

        ii.     Location. The additional parking space may be covered or uncovered and may be provided in setback areas in locations determined by the zoning administrator or through tandem parking on an existing driveway, unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions.

        iii.    Replacement Parking. When the parking area for the primary residence is used for an ADU:

        (A)   Replacement off-street parking is required at a one-to-one ratio and may be provided in any configuration on the lot, including tandem parking, uncovered and on existing driveways.

        (B)   A conversion ADU that replaces the primary dwelling unit’s existing garage shall not cause the applicant to have to construct replacement covered parking for the main unit.

        7.     Restricted Area #2. West Highway 246. Due to public safety and traffic flow concerns, ADUs and JADUs are not allowed in the following areas:

        a.     All properties that have vehicular access from:

        i.      State Highway 246, between Riverside Drive and Industrial Way.

 

        b.     Any property in the above areas that is accessed solely by private drive aisles, or an unimproved or unpaved road or alley.

        8.     Restricted Area #3. Village Specific Plan. Due to public safety and traffic flow concerns, ADUs and JADUs are not allowed in the following areas:

        a.     All properties that have vehicular access from:

        i.      North side of State Highway 246, between McMurray Road and Freear Drive.

        ii.     East side of McMurray Road, between State Highway 246 and 560 McMurray Road.

        b.     Any property in the above areas that is accessed solely by private drive aisles, or an unimproved or unpaved road or alley.

        9.     Utilities.

        a.     Construction of a new or proposed detached ADU over seven hundred fifty (750) square feet may require new meter connections water, electric, and gas service. Sewer service may be provided through the primary unit’s sewer line, provided that the applicant makes a showing that the existing sewer line has sufficient capacity and slope to ensure proper flow strength for the ADU’s sewer output. If sufficient capacity and slope cannot be ensured, an ADU may require a separate sewer line.

        b.     If new utility connections or meters arc required for the ADU, connection and impact fees shall be required, as applicable.

        D.    Application for ADU/JADU.

        The construction or installation of an ADU/JADU is a ministerial decision as required by state law in accordance with the review and approval scheme set forth in Government Code Sections 65852.2 and Ministerial approvals are not subject to review at a public hearing. Construction of an ADU shall be subject to administrative (ministerial) review as follows:

        1.     Submittal of building plans accompanied by the following forms and information:

        a.     A completed project application form for ADU or JADU, as applicable, provided by the planning department and signed by the owner and applicant (if different from the owner),under penalty of perjury.

        b.     Materials and information required by the ADU/JADU application checklist, provided by the planning department.

        2.     Planning department shall verify completeness of materials required and determine applicability of any municipal code requirements and reviews.

        3.     ADU Exemption. As set forth in Government Code Ssection 65852.2(e)(1), certain categories of ADUs shall be permitted without applying local development standards (e.g. limits on lot size, unit size, parking, height, setback, landscaping, or aesthetics) if proposed on a lot developed with one single-family home. ADUs and JADUs eligible for this automatic approval include, but are not limited to:

        a.     An ADU converted from existing space in the home or another structure (e. g. a garage) so long as the ADU can be accessed from the exterior and has setbacks sufficient for fire safety.

        b.     A new detached ADU that is no larger than eight hundred (800) square feet, has a minimum height of sixteen (16) feet, and has rear and side setbacks of four feet.

        c.     A JADU that complies with the requirements of Government Code Section 65852.22.

        d.     One ADU and one JADU may be allowed on a single-family lot as set forth in Government Code Section 65852(e)(1)(B).

        e.     ADUs added to multifamily buildings, in compliance with Government Code Section 65852 (e)(l) (C) and (D).

        4.     ADU Permit. Non-exempt ADUs shall be reviewed for compliance with the development standards described in subsection (C)(5) of this section, except as otherwise set forth herein.

        5.     Exceptions. The standards and regulations for ADUs/JADUs apply to the accessory dwelling unit only. When the accessory dwelling unit is an integral component of a larger project or when other permits are required that are subject to discretionary review by the zoning administrator or planning commission, building permits for the accessory dwelling units may be issued only after associated approvals have been secured.

        6.     Subsequent to planning department review and approval, building plans and applicable permit application(s) shall be submitted to the building department. No ADU/JADU may be constructed until the building department has issued required permits and approvals necessary for the proposed construction.

        E.     Fees. The following fees shall apply:

        1.     Development Impact Fees.

        a.     No development impact fees are required for an ADU that is less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in floor area.

        b.     Any development impact fee that is required for an ADU that is seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or larger in floor area shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the principal dwelling unit. “Development impact fee” here does not include any connection fee or capacity charge for water or sewer service.

        2.     Connection Fees. The following connection fees and/or capacity charges for water and sewer are required:

        a.     None for ADUs under seven hundred fifty (750) square feet.

        b.     Construction of new or proposed detached ADU over seven hundred fifty (750) square feet may require new meter connections; the fee shall be proportionate to the burden of the ADU based upon its square feet and shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the service. (Ord. 20-03 § 2, 2020; Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 07-01 § 3, 2007; Ord. 03-04 § 3, 2003)

 

19.06.190 Solar panels.
        A.    When solar panels are located on the roof of an existing building or structure, no zoning clearance shall be required.

        B.     When solar panels are located on the ground they shall be classified as accessory structures, and shall require zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100). (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.190)

 

19.06.200 Swimming pools and spas.
        A.    Swimming pools, spas, and appurtenant structures shall be classified as accessory uses.

        B.     Pools, spas, and appurtenant structures shall not be located in the required front or side yard setback area and shall not be closer than five feet of any other property line.

        C.     Pools and spas shall also be subject to the regulations in the Plumbing Code and the Swimming Pool Fencing regulations of the Uniform Building Code.

        D.    Solar heating systems shall be required for the heating of any new swimming pool, spa, or hot tub as specified under the Plumbing Code and the Solar Energy requirements of the Buellton Municipal Code. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.200)

 

19.06.210 Temporary second dwellings.
        A.    In any zone where an existing structure is to be used for dwelling purposes on a temporary basis during the construction on the same lot of another structure to be used for dwelling purposes, a zoning clearance for the new structure may be issued by the director, subject to execution of an agreement by the property owner that the existing structure will be removed, converted or reconverted to a permitted accessory building within three months after the occupancy of the newly constructed dwelling and subject to the receipt by the city of a performance security in an amount designated by the city building official and in form and content acceptable to the city attorney, assuring the performance of the property owner’s obligations set forth in the agreement.

        B.     The use of a trailer as a temporary dwelling during the construction of a permanent residence is subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.210)

 

19.06.220 Temporary real estate offices.
        The director may approve a zoning clearance for construction of a temporary tract sales office subject to the following conditions:

        A.    The office shall be located on one of the recorded lots in the subdivision within which it is located or one of the recorded lots in a subdivision of the same subdivider in the immediate vicinity.

        B.     The office shall not be permanently attached to the ground and shall be of such a size that it is readily removable unless it is within some portion of a model home, other than the garage, or unless the commission has approved its conversion to a permanent use.

        C.     So long as it is used as a sales office, it shall not be used for any purpose other than the sale of lots in the particular subdivision within which it is located or for the sale of lots in a subdivision of the same subdivider in the immediate vicinity.

        D.    The garage of a model home may be used for the office subject to the deposit with the resource management of a performance security, in an amount designated by the planning department, guaranteeing the conversion of the tract office to a garage at the expiration of the permit. No occupancy of the model home for dwelling purposes shall be permitted until the office has been removed or a two car covered garage is provided for the dwelling unit.

        E.     The permit shall expire after either:

        1.     Initial sales have been made of all lots within the tract within which it is located or all lots in a subdivision of the same subdivider in the immediate vicinity; or

        2.     One year after its issuance, whichever is earlier. The permit may be extended by the commission upon application of the subdivider for good cause shown.

        F.     The applicant shall deposit the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to assure removal of an office in a separate building after expiration of the permit or any extension thereof. The applicant shall obtain and furnish to the city written permission from the then landowner and all subsequent landowners for the city and its agents to enter upon the land where the office is located to accomplish removal, if the applicant fails to remove the office within thirty (30) days after expiration of the permit or any extension thereof, or after notification from the director if the commission at any time finds that the office is unsightly or has become a public or private nuisance. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.220)

 

19.06.230 Trailers.
        A.    Limitation on Use. Except as otherwise expressly permitted in this section, in the mobilehome park (MHP) zone district, and in the provisions of the individual zone districts allowing mobilehomes certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC Section 5401 et seq.), no trailer shall be used for any purpose whatsoever.

        B.     Temporary Construction Trailers. In all zone districts, trailers which have been converted for use as construction offices, tool storage, or for particular work such as electrical shops, cabinet shops, and other similar uses and which are not used for human habitation during the night are permitted to be maintained on a building site without the requirement of a land use permit during periods of erection of buildings thereon, provided:

        1.     Building permits have been issued for the buildings;

        2.     Trailers shall be promptly removed upon completion of construction;

        3.     No more than three such converted trailers shall be located on any one building site.

        C.     Temporary Security Trailers for Construction Projects. In all zone districts, during periods of erection of buildings upon building sites, a trailer usable for or designed for human habitation may be maintained on such site for use as a watchman’s quarters subject to the issuance of a zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100), provided:

        1.     Building permits have been issued for the buildings;

        2.     Only one such trailer shall be permitted on a site; and

        3.     The trailer shall be promptly removed upon completion of construction or within one year, whichever is earlier.

        D.    Temporary Security Trailers. In all zone districts, a trailer usable for or designed for human habitation may be permitted to be used as a watchman’s quarters for a maximum of two years subject to issuance of a minor use permit (Section 19.08.110) and a zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100), provided:

        1.     The trailer is accessory to a permanent building, structure, or use;

        2.     The permittee complies with the State Mobile Home Act;

        3.     The trailer complies with setbacks and distances between buildings required for buildings or structures;

        4.     The trailer, when added together with other dwelling units on the lot on which the trailer is located, does not exceed the number of dwellings permitted under the applicable zone district.

        E.     Temporary Dwelling Use of Trailers During Residential Construction. In all zone districts, a trailer may be used for a single-family dwelling during construction of a residential building for a period of one year or until thirty (30) days after an occupancy permit is issued by a city building official or the building is occupied, whichever is earlier, under a zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100), provided:

        1.     The one year period shall be reduced by any period during which the trailer has been illegally occupied at the site;

        2.     The building permit has been issued for the residential building and the foundation inspection has been completed;

        3.     The permittee complies with the State Mobile Home Act;

 

        4.     The trailer complies with the setbacks and distance between buildings required for buildings or structures.

        A time extension for the zoning clearance issued under this section may only be granted as a minor use permit (Section 19.08.110).

        F.     Use of Trailers for Various Purposes. In all zone districts, trailers may be permitted pursuant to a minor use permit (Section 19.08.110), and a zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100):

        1.     To house any use otherwise permitted under the applicable zoning regulations for a period not to exceed two years for each minor use permit, provided either:

        a.     The trailer is accessory to a permanent building already on the same site; or

        b.     A permanent building is under construction or building permits have been issued for a building on the site to house the use and to replace the trailer, and provided further that the permitted period of use for all permits for the same site under (a) above, shall not exceed five years.

        2.     To house otherwise permitted branch offices of banks or savings and loan associations provided the branch office is licensed as a mobile branch office by the State or Federal Government and all district setbacks are complied with.

        G.    Use of Trailers as Offices. Trailers may be permitted to be used temporarily primarily for the performance of duties imposed on the owner or lessee of the land in connection with the agricultural activities conducted thereon by federal, state, or county laws or regulations, for the following periods and under the following permits:

        1.     For less than thirty (30) days without the requirement of a zoning clearance.

        2.     For thirty (30) days to one year with a zoning clearance.

        3.     For over one year with a minor use permit (Section 19.08.110) and a zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100).

        Any extension of the time limits in this section shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. Permits under subsections (G)(2) and (G)(3) of this section, shall provide that any such trailers shall be removed from the lot within six months after the effective date of any rezoning of the lot on which the trailer is located to a zone district classification other than agriculture.

        H.    Temporary Farm Worker Housing. Pursuant to a minor use permit under Section 19.08.110 and a zoning clearance under Section 19.08.100 of this title, trailers may be used for a period not to exceed five years as single-family dwellings by workers (either employees or owners) engaged in agriculture on the farm or ranch on which the trailer will be located, provided:

        1.     The permittee complies with the State Mobile Home Act;

        2.     The trailer(s) complies with the setbacks and distance between buildings required for buildings or structures;

        3.     The permittee demonstrates a need for such a trailer(s);

        4.     The permits provide that the trailer shall be removed from the lot within six months following the effective date of any rezoning of the lot on which the trailer is located to a zone district classification other than agriculture.

        I.      Storage of Trailers Accessory to a Residential Use. The storage of trailers designed for or capable of human habitation or occupancy shall be classified as an accessory use to a residential use only if the trailer does not exceed eight feet in width, thirteen (13) feet six inches in height (as measured from the surface upon which the vehicle stands), and forty (40) feet in length. All such trailers shall be screened from the view from abutting streets.

        J.      Emergency Residential Use. If an occupied dwelling is destroyed by an accident or natural disaster, the director may grant a zoning clearance for a ninety (90) day period for emergency use of a trailer as a dwelling, provided that:

        1.     No trailer is illegally located on the lot; and

        2.     An application for the temporary use of a trailer has been filed under another subsection of this section. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.06.230)

 

19.06.240 Temporary uses.
        A.    General. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and subject to the requirements prescribed in this section, the following temporary uses may be located in the commercial and industrial zones established by Section 19.02.010 (Zone districts established):

        1.     Uses and improvements of an inconsequential nature including, but not limited to, Christmas tree sales, outdoor commercial displays and sales, special promotional events and non-charitable auctions. Produce stands are prohibited;

        2.     Storage of temporary buildings (e.g., housing moving), earth moving equipment, construction vehicles, building materials and similar non-fixable artifacts stored on a site not adjacent to a construction project or building site;

        3.     Uses and improvements required in emergency situations where delays incident to normal permit processing pursuant to this title would defeat or seriously impair the purposes of an applicant or endanger the public health, safety or welfare;

        4.     Green Grocer. A green grocer use may be approved subject to the following:

        a.     A green grocer is defined as an open air market of eight or less booths selling fruit, produce, or other consumable items.

        b.     The green grocer must be associated with an existing business and located on the property of that business.

        c.     All the development standards and conditions of subsection C shall apply.

        d.     The time limits of subsection B do not apply. A green grocer use may be permitted up to ten hours per week on a given site. An annual temporary use permit would be issued and shall be renewed yearly.

        e.     This use is only allowed in the CR, CS, and M zoning districts.

        B.     Permitting. Temporary uses listed in subsection A of this section lasting for a duration of not greater than five weeks in any consecutive twelve (12) month period may be approved by the director through a zoning clearance. Where a temporary use occurs or operates for less than seven days within a calendar week, the full calendar week shall be counted against the five week maximum. As used herein, the phrase “calendar week” means Monday through the following Sunday.

        C.     Conditions. All temporary uses and improvements are subject to the following requirements:

        1.     Traffic access, parking and on-site circulation shall be provided in sufficient amount and location to accommodate the temporary event;

        2.     Provisions for fire protection, water supply, sanitation, and related services shall be furnished as necessary and appropriate to service the event;

        3.     Fencing, walls or other forms of screening shall be furnished as necessary or appropriate to protect adjacent property not otherwise located in a commercial or industrial zone;

        4.     All activities involving the sale of goods or services shall be subject to the city’s business license requirements including, but not limited to, reporting the city of Buellton as the point of sale for all on-site transactions;

        5.     The object of use or improvement, as well as the site of the temporary event, shall be maintained in a continuous state of good condition and repair for the duration of the event;

        6.     The site of the temporary event shall be restored to its original vegetative and topographic state immediately upon completion of the event;

        7.     Food service uses shall comply with all county of Santa Barbara health department requirements;

        8.     A temporary use consisting of outdoor commercial sales and display shall be limited to five weeks per legal property in any consecutive twelve (12) month period and must occur on a developed site. The use of vacant, unimproved sites shall be prohibited. The zoning clearance shall be filed no earlier than thirty (30) days before the sale. This subsection does not apply to Christmas tree sales.

        D.    Interpretation. Temporary uses, structures or development not expressly authorized in this section or allowed elsewhere within this chapter may be permitted subject to a determination by the planning commission as to the terms, conditions and permit process by which such use or improvements may be approved.

        E.     Exemptions. Exemptions to the provisions of this section are as follows:

        1.     Temporary uses authorized elsewhere under this chapter;

        2.     Charitable, nonprofit organizations, as determined by the director in accordance with state and federal law, engaged in fund raising activities of six or fewer times per year when such activity is conducted on private property with the consent of the property owner;

        3.     Temporary produce stands may be allowed with a minor use permit provided that an application for a conditional use permit or development plan has been submitted for an indoor/outdoor farmers market and the temporary produce stand is located on the property that is the subject of the conditional use permit or development plan. (Ord. 14-01 § 3, 2014; Ord. 07-06 § 3, 2007; Ord. 06-12 § 17, 2006: Ord. 00-08 § 1, 2001)

 

19.06.250 Mobilehome park conversions to other uses and closures.
        A.    Prior to conversion of a mobilehome park to another use, except pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, or prior to closure of a mobilehome park or cessation of use of the land as a mobilehome park, the person or entity proposing the change in use shall file a report on the impact of the conversion, closure, or cessation of use upon the displaced residents of the mobilehome park to be converted or closed. In determining the impact of the conversion, closure, or cessation of use on displaced mobilehome park residents, the report shall address the availability of adequate replacement housing in mobilehome parks and relocation costs. The impact report shall contain, at minimum, the following items:

        1.     The names, addresses, and mobilehome site identification numbers of all persons owning mobilehomes within the mobilehome park and of all mobilehome park tenants as of the date of application for a change of use or closure.

        2.     The age, including date of manufacture, or each mobilehome within such park, including the type of mobilehome, width characteristics, size, and number identifying the mobilehome site being occupied.

        3.     A list of vacant mobilehome sites in comparable mobilehome parks within a ten-mile radius of the park which is the subject of the application or request. The list shall contain a schedule of site rental rates for each park listed and the criteria of the management of each park for acceptance of new tenants and used mobilehomes.

        4.     A relocation plan, which shall include a timetable for implementing the physical relocation of mobilehomes, implementation of relocation assistance, payment of relocation costs, and conversion of the park to one or more other uses or closure of the park.

        5.     A listing of the measures proposed to mitigate adverse impacts and of the reasonable costs of relocation of displaced residents.

        B.     The person proposing the change in use or closure shall provide a copy of the report to the owners and residents of each mobilehome in the mobilehome park and to the city of Buellton. The report shall be provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the required public hearings by the city of Buellton on the impact report and any associated discretionary actions. A statement from the park owner shall be submitted under penalty of perjury that he or she has complied with the noticing requirements of this subsection.

        C.     All impact reports for either a change of use or closure shall require a public hearing in accordance with Section 19.10.400.

        D.    The city council shall review the impact report, prior to any change of use or closure, and may require, as a condition of the change or closure, the person or entity to take steps to mitigate any adverse impact of the conversion, closure, or cessation of use on the ability of displaced mobilehome park residents to find adequate housing in a mobilehome park. The steps required to be taken to mitigate shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation.

        E.     If the closure or cessation of use of a mobilehome park results from an adjudication of bankruptcy, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable.

        F.     The city council may establish reasonable fees to cover any costs incurred by the local agency in implementing this section. Those fees shall be paid by the person or entity proposing the change in use or closure.

        G.    This section is applicable when the closure, cessation, or change of use is the result of a decision by a local governmental entity or planning agency not to renew a conditional use permit or zoning variance under which the mobilehome park has operated, or as a result of any other zoning or planning decision, action, or inaction. In this case, the local governmental agency is the person proposing the change in use for the purposes of preparing the impact report required by this section and is required to take steps to mitigate the adverse impact of the change as may be required in subsection D of this section.

        H.    This section is applicable when the closure, cessation, or change in use is the result of a decision by an enforcement agency, as defined in Section 18207 of the Health and Safety Code, to suspend the permit to operate the mobilehome park. In this case, the mobilehome park owner is the person proposing the change of use for purposes of preparing the impact report required by this section and is required to take steps to mitigate the adverse impact of the change as may be required in subsection D of this section.

        I.      A local agency to which application has been made for the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to a hearing or any other action on the application, inform the applicant in writing of the provisions of Section 798.56 of the Civil Code and all applicable local requirements which impose upon the applicant a duty to notify residents and mobilehome owners of the mobilehome park of the proposed change in use, and shall specify therein the manner in which the applicant shall verify that residents and mobilehome owners of the mobilehome park have been notified of the proposed change in use. Neither a hearing on the application, nor any other action thereon, shall be taken by the local agency before the applicant has satisfactorily verified that the residents and mobilehome owners have been so notified, in the manner prescribed by law or local regulation.

        J.      This section shall not be applicable to a project which is created from the conversion of a rental mobilehome park to resident ownership. (Ord. 08-05 § 3, 2008)

 

19.06.260 Emergency shelters.
        Emergency shelters shall comply with the following standards:

        A.    The property is located more than five hundred (500) feet from any other emergency shelter and approval will not result in an over-concentration of emergency shelters in the surrounding area; and

        B.     That not more than thirty (30) persons, exclusive of staff, will be permitted on the site, if the proposed shelter is located on a lot or parcel of land of less than one acre; and

        C.     On-site parking spaces shall be provided as required in Section 19.04.142; and

        D.    That the land uses and developments in the immediate vicinity of the site will not constitute an immediate or potential hazard to occupants of the shelter; and

        E.     The facility must conform to all development standards of the zoning district in which it is located, except as modified by this section; and

        F.     Emergency shelters are to be available to residents for no more than sixty (60) days. Extensions up to a total stay of one hundred eighty (180) days may be provided, if no alternative housing is available; and

        G.    The shelter shall be operated by a responsible agency or organization, with experience in managing or providing social services. On-site management and appropriate security shall be provided at the shelter. (Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010)

 

19.06.270 Prohibition of cigarette, tobacco, and head shops.
        A.    No person shall establish, operate, or permit to be operated, a cigarette, tobacco, or head shop in or upon any premises in the city of Buellton. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly allow property of which he or she is the tenant or owner to be used as a cigarette, tobacco, or head shop.

        B.     No cigarette, tobacco, or head shop shall be established or located or operated within the city of Buellton, nor shall any building permit, conditional use permit, development plan, zoning clearance, or other entitlement for use be issued for any cigarette, tobacco, or head shop, nor shall any existing uses be modified to add a cigarette, tobacco, or head shop.

        C.     Definitions. For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following definitions apply:

        1.     “Cigarette, tobacco, and head shop” means a retail use where more than forty-five (45) percent of the square footage of occupied floor area is dedicated to the sale, distribution, delivery, furnishing or marketing of tobacco, tobacco products, and/or tobacco paraphernalia.

        2.     “Tobacco paraphernalia” means paraphernalia, devices, or instruments that are designed or manufactured for the smoking, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the body of tobacco, tobacco products, or controlled substances as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq.

        3.     “Tobacco product” means any product containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, including any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine. Tobacco product does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. (Ord. 13-04 § 3, 2013)

 

19.06.280 Electric vehicle charging stations.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with California Government Code Section 65850.7.

        B.     Definitions. The terms, phrases, and words used in this section shall be construed in compliance with the definitions set forth by California Government Code Section 65850.7, including the following:

 

        1.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, or unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

        C.     Applicability.

        1.     This section applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city.

        2.     All electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall not require a permit issued under this section unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle charging station.

        3.     Routine operations and maintenance or like-kind replacements of the components of an electric vehicle charging station shall not be subject to permitting.

        D.    Application Process.

        1.     All documents required for submission of an electric vehicle charging station application shall be made available on the city’s website.

        2.     The city shall provide a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review.

        3.     Electronic submittals by utilization of email, the internet or facsimile and electronic signatures shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents submitted.

        4.     An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the city, shall be deemed complete and administratively approved.

        5.     Upon receipt of an incomplete application, a written correction notice shall be issued detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

        6.     An application for a charging station shall not be denied unless written findings are made based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact.

        E.     Exemption. Charging stations shall be exempt from land use permit requirements, as set forth in Section 19.02.030 of this title, unless a zoning clearance is required per this section.

        F.     Zoning Clearance.

        1.     A zoning clearance shall be required if, based on substantial evidence, a finding is made that the charging station would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.

        2.     Any conditions on a zoning clearance approval shall be solely imposed in order to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety and shall do so at the lowest cost possible.

        G.    The approval for any electric vehicle charging station application or permit shall not be conditioned on the approval of such a system by an association, as defined by Civil Code Section 4080.

        H.    Requirements.

        1.     Regulations applied shall be limited to applicable local, state and federal health and safety requirements necessary to ensure the proposed installation will not have a specific, adverse impact on public health or safety, including, but not limited to, the following:

        a.     Applicant shall verify the electric vehicle charging station meets all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters

Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability, and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

        b.     Setbacks. No installation shall conflict with required setbacks as set forth in Section 19.04.160 of this title.

        c. Signs. All signs proposed as part of the project shall require separate sign approval through the provisions set forth in this title.

        d.     Noise. If there is substantial evidence that the installation would have an adverse impact to noise levels, the applicant must verify compliance with adopted noise regulations of the city of Buellton, in Section 8.04.030(G) of this code.

        e.     Easements. No installation shall conflict with existing or proposed easements. (Ord. 20-05 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 19.08 LAND USE PERMIT PROCEDURES
19.08.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter provides procedures for the preparation, filing, processing by the planning department, and the approval or disapproval of land use permit applications. The types of land uses allowed in each zone and the type of land use permit required for each are determined by Chapter 19.02 of this title. Procedures for changing or obtaining relief from the requirements of this title (such as rezonings, variances and appeals) are in Chapter 19.10 of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.010)

 

19.08.020 Multiple land use permit applications.
        When the planning department receives applications for two or more land use permits described by this title that relate to the same development project, and the individual applications are under the separate jurisdiction for final decision, all of the applications shall be submitted as follows:

        A.    If the separate applications are under the jurisdiction of, and involve a final decision by, the director and the zoning administrator, all applications shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.

        B.     If the separate applications are under the jurisdiction of, and involve a final decision by, the director and/or zoning administrator and the planning commission, all applications shall be submitted to the planning commission.

        C.     If the separate applications are under the jurisdiction of, and involve a final decision by, the director and/or zoning administrator, and/or the planning commission and city council, all applications shall be submitted first to the planning commission for their review and recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council and final decision by the city council. (Ord. 01-04 § 4, 2002: Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.020)

 

19.08.030 Re-applications.
        No land use permit application described by this chapter shall be accepted nor acted upon if within the past one year, substantially the same application has been made and denied by the planning commission, zoning administrator, or the city council, which covers substantially the same real property, unless either the planning commission, zoning administrator, or the city council permits such re-application because of an express finding that one or more of the following applies:

 

        A.    That new evidence material to a revised decision will be presented that was unavailable or unknown to the applicant at the previous hearings and which could not have been discovered in the exercise of reasonable diligence by the applicant;

        B.     That there has been a substantial and permanent change of circumstances since the previous hearings, which materially affects the applicant’s real property; or

        C.     That a mistake was made at the previous hearings which was a material factor in the denial or denials of the previous application. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.030)

 

19.08.100 Zoning clearance.
        When zoning clearance is required by Chapter 19.02 of this title to authorize a proposed land use, the permit application shall be processed as provided by this section.

        A.    Jurisdiction. The director shall have jurisdiction over all zoning clearances and their extensions of time.

        B.     Application Contents. Applications for zoning clearance shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the “required application contents” list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications.

        C.     Timing of Approval.

        1.     A zoning clearance shall not be issued until all necessary approvals, except building permits, have been obtained.

        2.     In the case of a development that requires a public hearing and final action by the planning commission or the zoning administrator, the planning department shall not issue a zoning clearance within ten calendar days of the date that the planning commission or zoning administrator took final action, during which time an appeal may be filed according to Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        3.     If a zoning clearance is requested for property subject to a resolution of the city council initiating a rezoning, a zoning clearance shall not be issued while the proceedings are pending on such rezoning unless the proposed buildings or structures would conform to both the existing zoning of such property and the rezoning initiated by the city council or unless a preliminary development plan was approved by the city before the adoption of the resolution.

        D.    Findings for Approval. A zoning clearance shall be issued only if all of the following findings are made:

        1.     That the proposed development conforms to the applicable policies and provisions of this title and the general plan.

        2.     That the proposed development is located on a legally created lot as determined by the city engineer.

        3.     That the subject property is in compliance with all laws, rules and regulations pertaining to zoning uses, subdivisions, setbacks and any other applicable provisions of this title, and such zoning violation processing fees as established from time to time by the city council have been paid. This subsection shall not be interpreted to impose new requirements on legal nonconforming uses and structures under Section 19.10.200 et seq.

        4.     That the proposed development is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        E.     Time Limits. Zoning clearances shall expire one year after date of issuance unless, prior to the expiration date, the applicant, or applicant’s successor, has established or commenced the proposed land use, completed substantial physical construction on the building or structure to be used, or applied to the planning director for a time extension. An applicant, or applicant’s successor, may apply for a single one-year time extension, which the planning director may approve upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a zoning clearance and any time extension, an applicant, or applicant’s successor, must apply for a new zoning clearance in order to proceed with the proposed land use. A zoning clearance shall lapse and thereafter become null and void if the exercise and use of the rights granted by such zoning clearance are discontinued for a consecutive period of one year.

        F.     Revocation. Issuance of a zoning clearance is contingent upon compliance with all conditions imposed as part of the project approval. If it is determined that development activity is occurring in violation of any or all such conditions, the director may revoke the approval and all authorization for development.

 



(Ord. 16-03 § 2, 2016; Ord. 06-02 § 8, 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.100)

19.08.110 Minor and conditional use permits.
        This section and Chapter 19.02 of this title provide for uses that are essential or desirable but cannot be readily classified as allowable in individual zones subject only to zoning clearance because of their special character, uniqueness of size or scope, or possible effect of public facilities or surrounding uses. The intent of this section is to provide for discretionary review of such uses. When a minor use permit or conditional use permit are required by Chapter 19.02 of this title to authorize a proposed land use, the permit application shall be processed as follows.

        A.    Jurisdiction.

        1.     The zoning administrator shall have jurisdiction over all minor use permits and extensions of time thereof and the planning commission shall have jurisdiction over all conditional use permits and their extensions of time.

        2.     In no event shall an application be under the jurisdiction of both the planning commission and the zoning administrator. In the event that a portion of a project would need planning commission action, the total project shall be under the jurisdiction of the planning commission.

        3.     If a minor use permit or conditional use permit is submitted in conjunction with an application for a general plan amendment, rezoning, tentative map or any other entitlement which requires final action by the city council, the planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council. The planning department shall provide to the city clerk the recommendation of the planning commission, together with all forms of notice required, in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title, of the time and place of a public hearing before the city council to consider the applications. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing and cause to be published all required notices for the public hearing on the applications. The decision of the city council shall be final.

        B.     Application Contents. Applications for minor use permits and conditional use permits shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the “required application contents” list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications.

        C.     Processing.

        1.     Upon receipt of the required copies of the permit application, the planning department shall process the application through environmental review.

        2.     Upon completion of environmental review and a staff report, the planning commission or zoning administrator shall then consider the requested minor use permit or conditional use permit at a noticed public hearing and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title.

        3.     The action of the planning commission or zoning administrator shall be final subject to appeal to the city council as provided under Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        4.     Minor use permits and conditional use permits may be granted for such period of time and upon such conditions and limitations as may be required to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Such conditions shall take precedence over those required in the specific zone districts.

        5.     Any amendments to a minor or conditional use permit shall be processed in the same manner as specified by this title for approval of the original permit.

        D.    Findings Required for Approval. A minor use permit or conditional use permit application shall be approved or conditionally approved only if all of the following findings are made:

        1.     That the site for the project is adequate in size, shape, location, and physical characteristics to accommodate the type of use and level of development proposed.

        2.     That significant environmental impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

        3.     That streets and highways are adequate and properly designed.

        4.     That there are adequate public services, including, but not limited to, fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, and police protection to serve the project.

        5.     That the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the neighborhood and will be compatible with the surrounding area.

        6.     That the project is in conformance with the applicable provisions and policies of this title and the general plan.

        7.     That the proposed development is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        E.     Time Limits.

        1.     Minor and conditional use permits shall expire five years after approval unless, prior to the expiration date, the applicant, or applicant’s successor, has completed substantial physical construction on the development or applied to the planning commission for a time extension. An applicant, or applicant’s successor, may apply for two one-year time extensions, which the planning commission or city council may approve upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a minor or conditional use permit and any time extension, an applicant, or applicant’s successor, must apply for a new minor or conditional use permit in order to proceed with the development.

        2.     A minor or conditional use permit shall lapse and thereafter become null and void if the exercise and use of the rights granted by such permit are discontinued for a consecutive period of one year.

        F.     Revocation. If any of the conditions of the permit are not complied with, the planning commission or zoning administrator, after written notice to the permittee and a noticed public hearing, may revoke the permit.

        G.    Site and Design Review.

        1.     Preliminary Site and Design Review. All projects shall be reviewed by the planning commission within the first thirty (30) days of an initial project submittal to review and provide preliminary comments on the site design and architectural elevations. A color board shall be submitted with the initial submittal of a project to assist in the review of the project by staff and the planning commission. The planning commission shall also determine whether story poles are required for projects that are twenty-five (25) feet in height or less as referenced in paragraph 2 of this subsection G.

        2.     Story Poles and Modeling. For all projects that exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, story poles shall be erected on the project site no later than thirty (30) days before the first public hearing on the project and shall remain in place until a final decision is made on the project. A surveyor or registered civil engineer may be required to certify in writing to the city that the story poles are properly located and reflect proposed heights. Story poles may also be required for projects that are less than twenty-five (25) feet in height as determined by the planning commission during the preliminary site and design review process referenced in paragraph 1 of this subsection G. A scale model, a three-dimensional computer graphic presentation, or a three-dimensional graphic rendering shall be provided at the public hearings for the project. Said model or graphic presentations shall include structures on all surrounding properties. The city council may waive the requirement for story poles, scale models, or graphic presentations upon a written request to the city council demonstrating that these items would not provide clarification for review of the project.

 



(Ord. 16-03 § 2, 2016; Ord. 09-06 § 3, 2009; Ord. 06-02 § 9, 2006; Ord. 01-04 § 5, 2002; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.110)

19.08.120 Development plans.
        The development plan process provides for the discretionary review by the city of projects allowed by right within their respective zoning districts which, because of the type, scale, or location of the development, require more detailed review than that afforded by the zoning clearance process. When development plan approval is required by Chapter 19.02 of this title to authorize a proposed land use, the permit application shall be processed as follows.

        A.    Applicability.

        1.     Whenever Chapter 19.02 of this title requires development plan approval for a specified land use, a development plan application shall be filed with the department and approved only for:

        a.     The first development of a vacant site; or

        b.     The replacement of an existing building, structure, or site improvement; or

        c.     The construction of an additional building, structure, or site improvement not authorized by a development plan; or

        d.     An existing building, structure, or site improvement proposed for expansion or alteration, that was not originally authorized by a development plan.

        After the construction of a building, structure, or site improvement authorized by development plan approval is completed, the replacement of an existing land use with a new use that is listed as allowed by Chapter 19.02 of this title shall require zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100) instead of a new development plan, except where the proposed new use is prohibited by conditions of approval of the previous development plan.

        2.     When development plan approval is required by Chapter 19.02 of this title, no construction permit shall be issued for any development, including grading, for any property subject to the provisions of this section until a preliminary and/or final development plan has been approved as provided by this section, with the exception that the director may waive the requirements of this section if the project involves only a minor alteration, addition, or replacement to an existing structure, and where there is a previously approved final development plan on file in the planning department, the project is in substantial conformance with such development plan.

        3.     An applicant may file a preliminary and then a final development plan, or just a final development plan. When only a final development plan is filed, it shall be processed in the same manner as a preliminary development plan.

        4.     No portion of any property not included within the boundaries of the development plan shall be entitled to any development permits.

        B.     Jurisdiction. In the service commercial (CS) and light industry (M-1) zoning districts, preliminary and final development plans for buildings and structures that do not exceed a total of ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area for the entire parcel shall be under the jurisdiction of the director and shall be processed as set forth herein.

        C.     Application Contents. Applications for preliminary and final development plans shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the “required application contents” list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications.

        D.    Processing of Preliminary Development Plan.

        1.     Any application filed pursuant to this section that is inconsistent with the use and/or density requirements of this title or the general plan must incorporate measures or be accompanied by any additional permit applications necessary to make the project consistent. The planning department may refuse to accept for processing any application the director finds to be inconsistent with the general plan.

        2.     Upon receipt of the preliminary development plan, the planning department shall process the plan through environmental review pursuant to the city CEQA guidelines.

        3.     If the preliminary development plan is under the jurisdiction of the director, a public hearing shall not be required. However, notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the director’s decision as provided in Section 19.10.400 of this title. The director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the plan. The director shall give notice of approval pursuant to Section 19.10.400(A)(2) of this title. The director’s decision shall be final, subject to appeal to the planning commission as provided in Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        4.     The planning commission shall consider preliminary development plans within its jurisdiction at a noticed public hearing and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the plan. The planning commission’s action shall be final, subject to appeal to the city council as provided in Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        5.     If the preliminary development plan is submitted in conjunction with an application for a general plan amendment, rezoning, tentative map or any other entitlement which requires final action by the city council, the planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council. The planning department shall provide to the city clerk the recommendation of the planning commission, together with all forms of notice required, in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title, of the time and place of a public hearing before the city council to consider the applications. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing and cause to be published all required notices for the public hearing on the applications. The decision of the city council shall be final.

        6.     If a revised preliminary development plan is required, it shall be processed in the same manner as the original plan. When approved by the planning commission or director, such revised plan automatically supersedes any previously approved plan.

        E.     Processing of Final Development Plan.

        1.     Any application filed pursuant to this section that is inconsistent with the use and/or density requirements of this title or the general plan must be accompanied by an application to make the project consistent. The planning department may refuse to accept for processing any application the director finds to be inconsistent with the general plan.

        2.     Upon receipt of the final development plan, the planning department shall process the plan through environmental review, unless there is no change from the preliminary development plan.

        3.     When either the planning commission or director has approved a preliminary development plan, the director shall review the final development plan for conformance with the preliminary development plan and shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the final development plan, without a public hearing. The director shall give notice of approval pursuant to Section 19.10.400(A)(2) of this title. The director’s action shall be final subject to appeal to the planning commission as provided in Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        4.     If the final development plan has any substantial changes from the preliminary development plan approved by the planning commission, other than those required by conditions set in the preliminary development plan, the director shall refer the final development plan to the planning commission for approval.

        5.     When there is no preliminary development plan, the final development plan shall be processed in the same way as a preliminary development plan, as provided by subsection D of this section.

        F.     Findings Required for Approval.

        1.     Preliminary Development Plan. A preliminary development plan shall be approved only if all of the following findings can be made:

        a.     That the site for the project is adequate in size, shape, location, and physical characteristics to accommodate the density and intensity of development proposed.

        b.     That adverse impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

        c.     That streets and highways are adequate and properly designed.

        d.     That there are adequate public services, including, but not limited to, fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal, and police protection to serve the project.

        e.     That the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the neighborhood and will not be incompatible with the surrounding areas.

        f.      That the project is in conformance with the applicable provisions of this title and the general plan.

        g.     That the project will not conflict with any easements required for public access through, or public use of a portion of the property.

        h.     That the proposed development is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        2.     Final or Revised Final Development Plan. A final or revised final development plan shall be approved only if all of the following findings are made, in addition to the findings required by subsection (F)(1) of this section:

        a.     The plan is in substantial conformity with any approved preliminary or revised preliminary development plan except when the planning commission or director considers a final development plan for which there is no previously approved preliminary development plan. In this case, the planning commission or director may consider the final development plan as both a preliminary and final plan.

        b.     The plan is in conformance with all applicable provisions and policies of the city general plan and this title.

        c.     That the proposed development is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        G.    Conditions, Restrictions, and Modifications.

        1.     At the time the preliminary or final development plan is approved, the director, planning commission, or city council may modify the building height limit, distance between buildings, setback, yard, parking, building coverage, landscaping or screening requirements specified in the applicable zone district when the director, planning commission, or city council finds that such modifications are justified.

        2.     As a condition of approval of any preliminary or final development plan, the director, planning commission, or city council may impose any appropriate and reasonable conditions or require any redesign of the project as they may deem necessary to protect the persons or property in the neighborhood, to preserve the neighborhood character, natural resources or scenic quality of the area, to preserve or enhance the public peace, health, safety, and welfare, or to implement the purposes of this title.

        3.     The director, planning commission, or city council may require as a condition of approval of any development plan, the preservation of trees existing on the property.

        H.    Time Limits.

        1.     Preliminary development plans shall expire two years after approval unless, prior to the expiration date, the applicant, or applicant’s successor, has submitted a final development plan application for the development or applied to the planning commission for a time extension. An applicant, or applicant’s successor, may apply for a one-year time extension, which the planning commission or city council may approve upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a preliminary development plan and any time extension, an applicant, or applicant’s successor, must apply for a new development plan in order to proceed with the development.

        2.     Final development plans shall expire five years after approval unless, prior to the expiration date, the applicant, or applicant’s successor, has completed substantial physical construction on the development or applied to the planning commission for a time extension. An applicant, or applicant’s successor, may apply for two one-year time extensions, which the planning commission or city council may approve upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a final development plan and any time extension, an applicant, or applicant’s successor, must apply for a new development plan in order to proceed with the development. A development plan shall lapse and thereafter become null and void if the exercise and use of the rights granted by such development plan are discontinued for a consecutive period of one year.

        I.      Site and Design Review.

        1.     Preliminary Site and Design Review. All projects shall be reviewed by the planning commission within the first thirty (30) days of an initial project submittal to review and provide preliminary comments on the site design and architectural elevations. A color board shall be submitted with the initial submittal of a project to assist in the review of the project by staff and the planning commission. The planning commission shall also determine whether story poles are required for projects that are twenty-five (25) feet in height or less as referenced in paragraph 2 of this subsection I.

        2.     Story Poles and Modeling. For all projects that exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height, story poles shall be erected on the project site no later than thirty (30) days before the first public hearing on the project and shall remain in place until a final decision is made on the project. A surveyor or registered civil engineer may be required to certify in writing to the city that the story poles are properly located and reflect proposed heights. Story poles may also be required for projects that are less than twenty-five (25) feet in height as determined by the planning commission during the preliminary site and design review process referenced in paragraph 1 of this subsection I. A scale model, a three-dimensional computer graphic presentation, or a three-dimensional graphic rendering shall be provided at the public hearings for the project. Said model or graphic presentations shall include structures on all surrounding properties. The city council may waive the requirement for story poles, scale models, or graphic presentations upon a written request to the city council demonstrating that these items would not provide clarification for review of the project. (Ord. 16-03 § 2, 2016; Ord. 09-06 § 3, 2009; Ord. 6-02 § 10, 2006; Ord. 01-04 § 6, 2002; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.08.120)

 

19.08.130 Development agreements.
        A.    Purpose. This section outlines the procedures and requirements for the review and approval of development agreements. The provisions of this section are fully consistent with the requirements of state law (Section 65864 et seq., of the California Government Code).

        In defining the provisions of any development agreement executed in compliance with this section, each provision shall be consistent with the language of this section, state law (Government Code Section 65864 et seq., cited above), and the agreement itself. Should any discrepancies between the meaning of these provisions arise, reference shall be made to the following documents, and in the following order:

        1.     The plain terms of the development agreement itself;

        2.     The provisions of state law (Government Code Section 65864 et seq.); and

        3.     The provisions of this section.

        B.     Application.

        1.     Any owner of real property may request and apply to enter into a development agreement provided the following:

        a.     The status of the applicant as the owner or long-term lessee of the property is established to the satisfaction of the director, and

        b.     The application is made on forms approved, and contains all information required by the department, and is accompanied by the required filing fee;

        2.     The director is empowered to receive, review and process, together with recommendations for commission and council consideration, all applications for development agreements; and

        3.     Processing fees shall be collected for any application for a development agreement made in compliance with the provisions of this title.

        C.     Public Hearings.

        1.     Upon finding the application for a development agreement complete, the director shall set the application, together with staff recommendations, for public hearing before the commission in compliance with Section 19.10.400 (Public hearings). Following conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall make a recommendation to the council.

        2.     Upon receipt of the commission recommendation, the city clerk shall set the application and report for public hearing before the council. After the public hearing, the council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application.

        3.     Should the council approve or conditionally approve the application, it shall as a part of its action of approval direct the preparation of a development agreement embodying the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved, and an ordinance authorizing execution of the development agreement by the city manager.

        4.     The ordinance shall contain findings that the development agreement is consistent with this title, the general plan, and any applicable specific plan.

        D.    Content of Development Agreement.

        1.     Mandatory Contents. All development agreements shall contain the following provisions:

        a.     Duration of the agreement;

        b.     Permitted uses for the subject property;

        c.     Density or intensity of the permitted uses;

        d.     Approved site plans, elevations, floor plans and sections;

        e.     Provisions, if any, for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

        f.      Protection from either a future growth control ordinance or a future increase in development and/or impact fees;

        g.     A tiered amendment review procedure that may incorporate the following:

        i.      Director sign-off for minor modifications to the development project, and

        ii.     Approval of major modifications to the development project by the council; and

        h.     The possibility of subsequent discovery of health and safety issues such as a “compelling public necessity” (i.e., a new environmental health hazard is discovered), which would necessitate a reconsideration or amendment of the previously approved development agreement.

        2.     Permissive Contents. A development agreement may include the following:

        a.     Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions; provided, that these provisions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density/intensity of development specified in the agreement;

        b.     Provisions which require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any single phase, be completed within a specified time;

        c.     Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public improvements and facilities, including, but not limited to, applicant participation in benefit assessment proceedings; and

        d.     Any other terms, conditions and requirements as the council may deem necessary and proper, including, but not limited to, a requirement for ensuring, to the satisfaction of the city, performance of all provisions of the agreement in a timely fashion by the applicant/contracting party.

        E.     Execution and Recordation.

        1.     The city shall execute development agreements on or after the date upon which the resolution approving the agreement is enacted.

        2.     A development agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Santa Barbara County Recorder no later than ten days after it is executed.

        F.     Periodic Review.

        1.     Every development agreement approved and executed in compliance with this section shall be subject to periodic council review, during the full term of the agreement. Appropriate fees to cover the city’s costs to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant/contracting party in compliance with Section 19.01.060 (Fees).

        2.     The purpose of the periodic review shall be to determine whether the applicant or its successor-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant or its successor to demonstrate compliance to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the city.

        3.     If, as a result of periodic review the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or its successor-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the council may order, after a noticed public hearing, that the agreement be terminated or modified.

        G.    Effect of Development Agreement. Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement the rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the land, density and design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, are the rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement does not prevent the city, in subsequent actions, from applying new rules, regulations and policies that do not conflict with those applicable to the property, nor does a development agreement prevent the city from conditionally approving or disapproving any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations and policies.

 

 



(Ord. 95-01 § 3, 1995)

 

 

19.08.140 Specific plans.
        A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to set forth procedures for the preparation, adoption, amendment, or repeal of specific plans. This process provides for a coordinated level of planning and design for one or a combination of parcels that warrant special study by virtue of size, shape, topography, ownership or the application of important general plan policies as necessary and appropriate to protect valuable resources, foster economic goals, facilitate community revitalization and/or accommodate mixed uses.

        B.     Process.

        1.     The preparation, adoption, amendment, or repeal of a specific plan may be initiated by the planning commission, city council or applicant in the time and manner provided in Section 19.10.110.A.

        2.     Applications to initiate the specific plan process by private parties shall be made on forms approved, and contains all information required by the planning department, and is accompanied by the required filing fee.

        3.     A specific plan shall include the elements specified in Government Code Section 65451 and all other materials as deemed necessary or appropriate by the planning director, in consultation with the planning commission and city council pursuant to Section 19.08.140.C.

        4.     The adoption of specific plans, as well as their subsequent amendment or repeal, shall be subject to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in Section 19.10.110.A. Additional forms of public participation may be required pursuant to Section 19.08.140.C.

        5.     A specific plan shall be adopted by either ordinance or resolution. If adopted by ordinance, use and development standards embodied within the specific plan shall supersede corresponding standards contained in the zoning ordinance.

        6.     A specific plan shall not be adopted unless all of the following criteria have been met:

        a.     The form and substance of the specific plan, as well as the process used in its preparation and adoption, are consistent with the requirements set forth in Section 19.08.140.C.

        b.     The specific plan is in conformance with all applicable policies and implementation programs set forth in the general plan.

        c.     The specific plan will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, property values, and general welfare of the community.

        d.     The specific plan will not adversely affect such necessary community services as traffic circulation, sewage disposal, fire protection, police protection, and water supply.

        e.     That the proposed development in the specific plan is in conformance with the community design guidelines.

        C.     Methodology. Within thirty (30) days following initiation of the specific plan process, the planning director shall convene a joint meeting of the planning commission and city council to prescribe the specific methodology to be employed in preparing the specific plan. Not later than sixty (60) days following initiation of the specific plan process, the city council shall declare its findings by resolution regarding the following matters:

        1.     The scope, specificity and format of documentation to be included in the specific plan including, as deemed appropriate, site characterization, base maps, environmental data, and design development plans.

        2.     Issues particular to the site including, as deemed appropriate, special studies required to ascertain market support and project feasibility, economic and fiscal impact, infrastructure capacity, and environmental resources.

        3.     Roles and responsibilities relative to document preparation, project management, consultant involvement, review process, public participation, performance schedule and document reproduction.

        D.    Effect.

        1.     All zoning actions, subdivisions, public improvement projects, development agreements, and any other discretionary land use permits and approvals within the effective area of an adopted specific plan shall be consistent with the specific plan.

        2.     At the time of adoption of the specific plan, the city council shall make a determination as to whether the existing zoning on the property is consistent with the specific plan under the provisions of Section 65860(a) of the Government Code. If the city council finds that it is not consistent, then either the city or proponent of the specific plan shall initiate rezoning of the parcel(s) to bring the zoning into conformance with the specific plan.

        3.     No development shall commence on properties for which a specific plan has been adopted until a development plan, as required under the applicable zoning district, has been approved. (Ord. 06-02 § 11, 2006; Ord. 00-07 § 1, 2001)

 

19.08.150 Standard conditions of approval.
        All zoning clearances, including residential projects approved under Section 19.16.013(C)(5)(a), shall comply with standard conditions of approval imposed by the resolution of the city council, as may be adopted and amended from time to time. All land use permits, other than zoning clearances, shall be subject to standard conditions of approval imposed by the resolution of the city council and may be modified or expanded in connection with the discretionary approval process applicable to each such land use permit. (Ord. 05-05 § 2(D), 2005)

 

*       Editor’s Note: Ord. 05-05 repeals Section 19.08.150, Housing element consistency, which was added by Ord. 05-02, but was not codified, and adds a new Section 19.08.150, Standard conditions of approval.

 

19.08.160 Adaptive retrofit permit.
        This section implements relevant provisions of the Fair Employment and Housing Act which prohibits discrimination in all aspects of housing (rental, lease, terms and conditions, etc.) because of a person’s disability. Disabled persons (as defined in Section 19.16.012) have the right to use the services of a guide, signal or service dog or other such designated animal and to keep such animals in or around their dwellings. At the request of a disabled person (or by someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent), a housing provider must make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The housing provider must allow a disabled person (at the tenant’s expense or at the expense of someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent) to reasonably modify existing premises if the modifications are necessary to afford the disabled person full enjoyment of the premises. Where such modifications require an exception in development standards of the underlying zone district, an adaptive retrofit permit application shall be processed as follows:

        A.    Jurisdiction.

        1.     The zoning administrator shall have jurisdiction over all adaptive retrofit permits and extensions of time thereof.

        2.     In no event shall an application be under the jurisdiction of both the planning commission and the zoning administrator. In the event that a portion of a project would need planning commission action, the total project shall be under the jurisdiction of the planning commission.

        3.     If an adaptive retrofit permit is submitted in conjunction with an application for a general plan amendment, rezoning, tentative map or any other entitlement which requires final action by the city council, the planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council. The planning department shall provide to the city clerk the recommendation of the planning commission, together with all forms of notice required, in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title, of the time and place of a public hearing before the city council to consider the applications. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing and cause to be published all required notices for the public hearing on the applications. The decision of the city council shall be final.

        B.     Application Contents. Applications for adaptive retrofit permits shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the required application contents list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications.

        C.     Processing.

        1.     Upon receipt of the required copies of the permit application, the planning department shall process the application through environmental review.

        2.     Upon completion of environmental review and a staff report, the zoning administrator shall then consider the requested adaptive retrofit permit at a noticed public hearing and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title.

        3.     The action of the zoning administrator shall be final subject to appeal to the planning commission as provided under Section 19.10.130 of this title.

        4.     Adaptive retrofit permits may be granted for such period of time and upon such conditions and limitations as may be required to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Such conditions shall take precedence over those required in the specific zone districts.

        5.     Any amendments to an adaptive retrofit permit shall be processed in the same manner as specified by this title for approval of the original permit.

        D.    Findings Required for Approval. An adaptive retrofit permit application shall be approved or conditionally approved only if all of the following findings are made:

        1.     That the site for the project is adequate in size, shape, location, and physical characteristics to accommodate the adaptive retrofit proposed;

        2.     That significant environmental impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible;

        3.     The specific modification in building height limit, distance between buildings, setback, yard, parking, building coverage, landscaping or screening requirements specified in the applicable zone district is necessary and appropriate to accommodate the needs of the disabled person;

        4.     That the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the neighborhood and will be compatible with the surrounding area;

        5.     That the project is in conformance with the applicable provisions and policies of this title and the general plan.

        E.     Time Limits.

        1.     At the time the zoning administrator approves an adaptive retrofit permit, a time limit may be established within which construction must commence or the use must begin. The time limit shall be a reasonable time based on the size and nature of the proposed development or use. If no date is specified, the time limit shall be one year from the date of approval. Such time may be extended by the zoning administrator once for good cause shown, provided a written request, including a statement of reasons for the time extension, is filed with the planning department prior to the expiration date.

        2.     An adaptive retrofit permit shall become null and void and be automatically revoked if the approved use is discontinued for a period of more than one year. The time limit may be extended by the zoning administrator one time for good cause shown, provided a written request, including a statement of reasons for the time extension request, is filed with the planning department prior to the expiration date.

        F.     Revocation. If any of the conditions of the adaptive retrofit permit are not complied with, the zoning administrator, after written notice to the permittee and a noticed public hearing, may revoke the permit. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(F)(4), 2006)

Chapter 19.10 ZONING ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION
19.10.010 Administrative responsibility.
        This chapter shall be administered by the planning director under the policy direction of the Buellton city council working with the planning commission and zoning administrator as the duties of each are described by this chapter. As provided by Government Code Section 65100, the functions of a planning agency shall be performed by the Buellton city council, planning commission and planning department. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.010)

 

19.10.020 Planning director and planning department.
        The planning director shall head the planning department, shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the discretion of the city manager. The planning director shall have the responsibility and authority to perform all the functions described by Government Code Section 65103, and also to carry out any other responsibilities assigned by the council, including, but not limited to, the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title, and the review of projects pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. Except where otherwise provided by this title, the responsibilities of the planning director may also be carried out by planning department employees under the supervision of the director. Wherever this title makes reference to “zoning administrator” or “staff” it is expressly understood that the zoning administrator or staff are acting under the direction and control of the director and that they report directly to the director rather than the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.020)

 

19.10.030 Zoning administrator.
        The planning director or designee shall serve as a zoning administrator pursuant to the authority established by Government Code Sections 65900 et seq., and as follows:

        A.    Appointment. The planning director shall have the authority to appoint a qualified planning department employee as zoning administrator, who shall serve in that capacity at the discretion of the planning director.

        B.     Duties of Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall serve as a hearing officer and is assigned the authority and original jurisdiction to investigate, consider, and approve or deny applications for minor use permits, variances, and any other matters as specifically provided by this title.

        C.     Referral to Planning Commission. The planning director or zoning administrator may transfer original hearing jurisdiction from the zoning administrator to the commission at their discretion when it is deemed necessary because of policy implications, unique or unusual circumstances, or the magnitude of the project.

        D.    Appeal. Decisions of the zoning administrator may be appealed as provided by Section 19.10.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.030)

 

19.10.040 Planning commission.
        The planning commission established for the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65101 by Chapter 2.08 of the Buellton Municipal Code shall have the authority to perform the duties and functions assigned to it by this title and other titles of this code. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.040)

 

19.10.100 Changes to zoning ordinance, relief from standards.
        Sections 19.10.110 through 19.10.120 of this chapter provide procedures for changing and/or obtaining relief from the ordinance codified in this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.100)

 

19.10.110 Zoning ordinance amendments and rezonings.
        This section establishes the procedures by which changes may be made in both the text of this title and the city zoning map whenever the city council determines that such changes are warranted by the community welfare, the public necessity, and good zoning and planning practices.

        A.    Processing Requirements. Zoning title text amendments and rezonings of property shall be initiated, and applications filed and processed as follows:

        1.     Initiation. Proposals to amend the text of the ordinance codified in this title or to rezone property may be initiated by:

        a.     Resolution of the city council.

        b.     Resolution of the planning commission.

        c.     In the case of zoning title text amendments, application by any person with a substantial interest in the proposed amendment.

        d.     In the case of proposals to change the zoning on any property from one zone to another (rezonings), by application from one or more persons owning property representing at least fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation of the property for which the rezoning is sought.

        2.     Application Contents. Applications for zoning title text amendments and rezonings of property shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the “required application contents” list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications. Applications for the rezoning of property shall also include any additional materials required by subsection B of this section.

        3.     Application Filing—Consistency Required. Any application filed pursuant to this section that is inconsistent with the use and/or density requirements of this title or the general plan must be accompanied by an application to make the project consistent. The planning department may refuse to accept for processing any application the director finds to be inconsistent with the general plan.

        4.     Environmental Review. After initiation of an amendment and/or acceptance of a complete application by the planning department, the planning department shall process the proposed amendment through environmental review as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the Buellton CEQA guidelines.

        5.     Planning Commission Hearing and Action. After certification of the final environmental document, the commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the proposal, as provided by Section 19.10.400 of this chapter. The commission’s action shall be transmitted to the council as a written recommendation. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation.

        6.     City Council Hearing and Action. Upon receipt of the commission recommendation, the council shall hold a public hearing as provided by Section 19.10.400 of this chapter. The council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the commission; provided that any modification of the proposed amendment by the council not previously considered by the commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the commission for report and recommendation, but the commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the commission to report within forty (40) days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification.

        B.     Additional Application Materials—Re-zonings. Unless the commission expressly waives the requirement, applications for rezoning to the following districts shall include a preliminary development plan (Section 19.08.120(D)):

        1.     The multifamily residential (RM) district (Section 19.02.140).

        2.     Planned residential development (PRD) district (Section 19.02.150).

        3.     Mobilehome planned development (MHP) district (Section 19.02.160).

        4.     The neighborhood commercial (CN) district (Section 19.02.230).

        5.     General commercial (CR) district (Section 19.02.220).

        6.     Industrial/manufacturing (M) district (Section 19.02.320).

        7.     Recreation (REC) district (Section 19.02.330).

        C.     Findings Required for Approval of Text Amendment or Rezone. In order for the commission to recommend approval or for the council to approve a rezoning or zoning title text amendment, the following findings shall be made by the commission and council:

        1.     The request is in the interests of the general community welfare.

        2.     The request is consistent with the general plan, the requirements of state planning and zoning laws, and this title.

        3.     The request is consistent with good zoning and planning practices. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.110)

 

19.10.120 Variances.
        A.    Purpose and Intent. This section provides for variances from the strict application of the regulations of this title on land, buildings, and structures, where, because of extraordinary conditions such as the size, shape, unusual topography, or other situation or condition of such property, the literal enforcement of this title would impose practical difficulties or would cause undue hardship unnecessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this title.

        B.     Applicability. Variances may be granted pursuant to this section only as follows:

        1.     In no case shall a variance be granted to permit a use or activity which is not otherwise permitted in the district in which the property is located.

        2.     Variances may only be granted from the regulations on land, buildings, and structures, and no variances may be granted from the procedural regulations of this title.

        C.     Jurisdiction. Upon making the findings required under this section, the planning commission may approve or conditionally approve variances to the regulations applicable to physical standards for land, buildings, and structures contained in this title. However, if a variance is submitted in conjunction with an application for a general plan amendment, rezoning, tentative map or any other entitlement which requires final action by the city council, the planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to the city council. The planning department shall provide to the city clerk the recommendation of the planning commission, together with all forms of notice required, in accordance with Section 19.10.400 of this title, of the time and place of a public hearing before the city council to consider the applications. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing and cause to be published all required notices for the public hearing on the applications. The decision of the city council shall be final.

        D.    Application Contents. Applications for variances shall include the forms provided by the planning department, together with all additional information and materials specified on the “required application contents” list furnished by the planning department with all land use permit applications.

        E.     Processing.

        1.     An application filed pursuant to this section that is inconsistent with the use and/or density requirements of this title or the adopted general plan must incorporate measures or be accompanied by any other application necessary to make the project consistent. The planning department may refuse to accept for processing any application the director finds to be inconsistent with the general plan.

        2.     The planning commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the requested variance and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided by Section 19.10.400 of this chapter.

        3.     In granting a variance, the planning commission may require such conditions as deemed necessary to assure that the intent and purpose of this title and the public health, safety, and welfare will be promoted.

        4.     The planning commission’s action is final, subject to appeal to the council as provided in Section 19.10.130.

        F.     Findings Required for Approval. A variance shall only be approved if all of the following findings are made:

        1.     Because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including, but not limited to, size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

        2.     The granting of the variance shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.

        3.     That the granting of the variance will not be in conflict with the intent and purpose of this title or the general plan.

        4.     The applicant agrees in writing to comply with all conditions imposed by the city in the granting of the variance.

        G.    Time Limits. A variance shall expire and become void two years after its approval unless, prior to the expiration date, a building permit has been obtained and substantial physical construction has been completed on the site in compliance with the variance, or a time extension has been applied for by the applicant. The zoning administrator may, upon good cause shown, grant a single time extension of one year. (Ord. 01-04 § 7, 2002; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.120)

 

19.10.130 Appeals—Procedure.
        Decisions of the planning director, zoning administrator, and the commission may be appealed by an applicant or any aggrieved person as provided by this section.

        A.    Appeals to the Planning Commission. Decisions of the director on the issuance, revocation, or modification of zoning clearances, minor use permits, development plans, or sign exemptions or adaptive retrofit permits may be appealed to the commission, as follows:

        1.     The appeal, which shall be in writing, and accompanying fee (Section 19.01.060) must be filed with the planning department within ten calendar days of the date of the decision of the planning department.

        2.     The appellant shall state specifically in the appeal how the decision of the planning department is inconsistent with the purposes of this title or otherwise in error.

        3.     Prior to a hearing on the appeal, the planning department shall transmit to the commission copies of the permit application including all maps and data and a statement setting forth the reasons for the decision by the planning department.

        4.     In reviewing an appeal, the commission may consider any zoning title issue involving the proposal, in addition to the specific points raised in the appeal. The commission shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the planning department at a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided by Section 19.10.400, and notice shall also be mailed to the appellant.

        B.     Appeals to the City Council. Decisions of the commission or zoning administrator may be appealed to the council by the applicant or any interested person adversely affected by the decision, as follows:

        1.     The appeal, which shall be in writing, and accompanying fee (Section 19.01.060) must be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of the date of the commission’s or zoning administrator’s decision. In the case of a conditional use permit, in addition to an appeal by the applicant or other persons, within twelve (12) days after the decision of the zoning administrator or the commission, the council may appeal the decision by a majority of the council setting an appeal for noticed public hearing before the council.

        2.     The appellant shall state specifically in the appeal how the decision of the commission or zoning administrator is inconsistent with the purposes of this title or otherwise in error.

        3.     Prior to the hearing on the appeal, the city clerk shall notify the commission or zoning administrator that an appeal has been filed. The commission or zoning administrator shall then transmit to the council copies of the application including all maps and data and a statement of findings setting forth the reasons for the decision by the commission or zoning administrator.

        4.     In reviewing an appeal, the council may consider any zoning ordinance issue involving the proposal, in addition to the specific points raised in the appeal. The council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the commission or zoning administrator considered at a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as provided by Section 19.10.400 of this chapter, and notice shall also be mailed to the appellant. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(F)(5), 2006; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.130)

 

19.10.200 Nonconforming uses.
        Within the districts established by this title, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and land uses that were lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this title, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendments. It is the intent of this title to discourage the long term continuance of such nonconformities, but to permit them to exist under limited conditions. It is further the intent of this title to prevent nonconforming uses and structures from being enlarged, expanded, or extended, or being used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited by the district in which the nonconformity is located.

        A.    Nonconforming Uses of Land, Buildings, and Structures. A nonconforming use may be continued subject to the following regulations, so long as such use remains otherwise lawful.

        1.     Structural Change. No existing building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use under this title shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. No building or structure accessory to a nonconforming use under this title shall be erected, enlarged, or extended unless such building or structure is also accessory to a conforming use.

        2.     Extension or Expansion. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout an existing building provided no structural alterations except those required by law or title (i.e., building code regulations) are made therein. No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. No existing nonconforming use of land outside buildings, or involving no buildings, shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the use became nonconforming, or moved to any portion of the lot not occupied by such nonconforming use at such time.

        3.     Change of Use. A nonconforming use may only be changed to a conforming use.

        4.     Discontinuance. If a nonconforming use is abandoned, any future use shall comply with the provisions of the zone in which the use is located. Proof of discontinuance of a nonconforming use for twelve (12) consecutive months shall be prima facie evidence that the nonconforming use has been abandoned.

        5.     Damage.

        a.     Where structures, other than residential, are involved in a nonconforming use that are collectively damaged by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural disaster to an extent of seventy-five (75) percent or more of replacement cost at the time of the damage, as determined by the planning department, the nonconforming use shall be discontinued and the damaged structure thereafter used in accordance with regulations of the district in which it is located unless the zoning administrator finds that the adverse impact upon the neighborhood would be less than the hardship which would be suffered by the owner of the structure should restoration of the nonconforming use be denied. Where damage is to an extent of less than seventy-five (75) percent, such structures may be restored to the same or lesser size and in the same location, provided, however, that restoration shall commence within twelve (12) months of the time of damage and be diligently carried to completion, and the nonconforming use may be resumed and continued as before or on a lesser scale, but shall not be enlarged or intensified.

        b.     Where buildings or structures dedicated to nonconforming residential dwelling uses, except in industrial zones, are damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake or other natural disaster, such structures may be reconstructed to the same or lesser size and in the same general footprint location, provided that reconstruction shall commence within twelve (12) months of the time of damage and be diligently carried to completion. The nonconforming residential dwelling use may be restored and continued as before, or on a lesser scale, but shall not be enlarged, expanded or intensified (e.g., an increase in gross square footage).

        B.     Nonconforming Buildings and Structures. If a building or structure is conforming as to its use but nonconforming as to setbacks, height, lot coverage, parking, or other requirements concerning the building or structure, such structure may remain so long as it is otherwise lawful, subject to the following regulations.

        1.     Extension or Expansion. A nonconforming structure may be enlarged, extended, moved, or structurally altered provided that any such extension, enlargement, etc., complies with the setback, height, lot coverage, parking, and other requirements of the zone district in which such structure is located. No living quarters may be extended into an accessory building located in the required front, side, or rear yards by such addition or enlargement.

        2.     Damage.

        a.     If a nonconforming structure, other than residential, is damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, or other natural disaster to an extent of not more than seventy-five (75) percent of the replacement cost at the time of damage, as determined by the planning department, such structure may be reconstructed to the same or lesser size on the same site, provided such reconstruction shall commence within twelve (12) months of the time of damage and be diligently carried to completion. Where such nonconforming structure is damaged to an extent greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the replacement cost, it may not be restored unless the zoning administrator finds that the adverse impact upon the neighborhood would be less than the hardship which would be suffered by the owner of the structure should restoration of the nonconforming structure be denied.

        b.     Where the reconstruction permitted in (B)(2)(a) of this section, does not commence within the specified twelve (12) months, such structure shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the regulations of this title.

        c.     Where buildings or structures dedicated to nonconforming residential dwelling uses, except in industrial zones, are damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, earthquakes, or other natural disasters, such structures may be reconstructed to the same or lesser size and in the same general footprint location, provided that reconstruction shall commence within twelve (12) months of the time of damage and be diligently carried to completion. The nonconforming residential dwelling use may be resumed and continued as before, or on a lesser scale, but shall not be enlarged, expanded, or intensified (e.g., an increase in gross square footage).

        C.     Termination of Nonconforming Uses. In addition to the provisions for termination of certain nonconforming uses contained elsewhere in this chapter, any nonconforming use or uses of either land or buildings or both may be ordered terminated by the council after a public hearing as provided in subsection E of this section if one or more of the three following conditions is found to apply to any such nonconforming use or uses.

        1.     That the condition of the improvements, if any, on the property are such that to require the property to be used only for those uses permitted in the zone where it is located would not impair the constitutional rights of any person; or

        2.     That the nature of the improvements are such that they can be altered so as to be used in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone in which such property is located without impairing the constitutional rights of any person; or

        3.     Except in the case of a dedicated cemetery, that the nonconforming use is detrimental to the public health or safety or is a public nuisance.

        D.    Unpermitted Expansion of Nonconforming Uses. After a public hearing as provided in subsection E of this section, an expansion of or change in a nonconforming use of buildings or land, or both, not expressly permitted under and strictly in accordance with the terms of this title and especially this section, nor required by law, may be ordered terminated by the council.

        E.     Termination Procedure. All nonconforming uses to be terminated under the provisions of this chapter may be ordered terminated by the council upon following the procedure prescribed in this section. Any noncompliance with an order of termination of the council made pursuant hereto, as well as any continuance of any nonconforming use beyond the express period of time prescribed in this section shall be deemed a violation of the terms of this title.

        1.     Initiation of Proceedings. Upon recommendation of the commission, or upon petition by a person or persons affected by a nonconforming use of buildings or land or both, or on its own initiative, the council may set a date for, and call a public hearing to determine whether or not a nonconforming use of land or buildings or both, or an unpermitted expansion of or change in such use should not be ordered terminated.

        2.     Notice. Fifteen (15) days notice of a termination hearing shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by service upon the owner or owners of the land and upon the person operating or maintaining such nonconforming use, if not the owner. Service of such notice shall be either personal or by mail addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. The notice shall specify the date, time and place of said hearing and shall specify the grounds on which the nonconforming use or changes or expansion thereof is sought to be terminated.

        3.     Hearings. All hearings held under this section by the council shall be open to the general public, be presided over by the chair, vice-chair or acting chair of the council, and the proceedings shall be tape-recorded.

        a.     The owner or owners, the party or parties maintaining the nonconforming use, the council and all other interested persons may be represented by attorneys of their own choosing, may submit written and oral evidence, provided that oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation, may call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits, cross-examine opposing witnesses or any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him or her to testify and to rebut the evidence against him or her. If the person or persons maintaining the nonconforming use do not testify in their own behalf they may be called and examined as if under cross-examination.

        b.     The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

        c.     Hearings may be continued from time to time by the council.

        4.     Action by Council. The council shall render its decision in writing, containing findings of fact, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the public hearing was completed and closed. It shall deliver copies by mail or personally to the parties concerned in the hearing. Failure to so render such decision within the thirty (30) days or any extension thereof stipulated to by the parties shall be deemed to permit the continuance of the nonconforming use or the expansion thereof or change thereto, which was the subject of said hearing. The decision shall, if it ordered the nonconforming use, or change thereto or expansion thereof terminated, specify such time within which the person so maintaining such nonconforming use or change thereto or expansion thereof, shall so terminate as the council deems reasonable and proper under the circumstances. (Ord. 97-02 § II(5, 6, 7, 8), 1997; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.200)

 

19.10.300 Zoning ordinance enforcement.
        This section establishes procedures for the enforcement of the provisions of this title. The enforcement procedures are intended to support timely correction of nuisances and violations of the provisions of this code while assuring due process of law in the abatement or correction of such nuisances and violations.

        A.    Investigation. The director, or any person within the planning department authorized by the director, is authorized to investigate all reported or apparent violations of any of the provisions of this title. If a violation is determined to exist or to be impending, the director is authorized to take such measures as deemed necessary or expedient to enforce and secure compliance with the provisions of this title.

        1.     Cooperation of Other Officials. The director or designated agents may request, and shall receive, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the city to assist in the discharge of their duties.

        2.     Right of Entry and Inspection. As provided by California Government Code Section 65105, the director may enter at all reasonable times any building, structure, or premises in the city for the purpose of carrying out any act necessary to perform any duty imposed by this title. Upon request the director shall provide adequate identification. Except under exigent circumstances, an inspection warrant shall be obtained if entry is refused.

        3.     Liability. The director or any other person charged with the enforcement of this title, if acting in good faith and within the course and scope of his or her employment, shall not thereby be liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as the result of, or by reason of, any act or omission occurring in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the director, or his or her agents or employees, because of such act or omission, performed in the enforcement of any provision of this title, shall be defended by the city attorney of the city.

        B.     Work Stoppage. Where any building construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this title, the director may order the work stopped by giving notice in writing and serving such notice and order on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done. Any such persons, their agents, employees, or servants, shall forthwith stop such work until such time as recommencement is authorized by the director.

        C.     Referral for Legal Action. If unable to otherwise enforce the terms of this title, the director shall refer the matter to the district attorney and/or city attorney of the city for appropriate legal action.

        D.    Legal Actions. The city may choose to undertake any of the following legal actions to secure correction and/or abatement of nuisances or violations of this title.

        1.     Civil Actions.

        a.     Public Nuisance. Any building or structure that is set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and any use of any lands, building, or premises established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.

        b.     Injunctive Relief. Whenever, in the judgment of the director, any person, firm, or corporation is engaged in or is about to engage in any act or practice which constitute or will constitute a violation of any provision of this title or any rule, regulation, order, or permit issued thereunder, and at the request of the director, the district attorney or city attorney may make application to the superior court for an order enjoining such act or practice, or for an order directing compliance, and upon a showing by the department that such person, firm, or corporation has engaged in or is about to engage in any such act or practice, a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order may be granted.

        c.     Abatement. In the event that any person, firm, or corporation shall fail to abate a violation hereunder after notice of same and opportunity to correct or end the violation, the director of the planning department may request the city attorney or district attorney to apply to the superior court of Santa Barbara County for an order authorizing the planning department to undertake those actions necessary to abate the violation and requiring the violator to pay for the costs of such undertaking.

        2.     Civil Remedies and Penalties.

        a.     Civil Penalties. Any person, whether acting as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, who wilfully violates the provisions of this title or any rule, regulation, order, or permit issued thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each day that the violation continues to exist.

        b.     Costs and Damages. Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title or the rules, regulations, orders, or permits issued hereunder, shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the city, its agents, and agencies as a direct and proximate result of such violations.

        c.     Procedure. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of such conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the violator, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant.

        3.     Criminal Actions and Penalties.

        a.     Infractions. Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as a principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating any provisions of this title, or the rules, regulations, orders, or permits issued thereunder, shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by:

        i.      A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;

        ii.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; and

        iii.    A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

        b.     Misdemeanors. Any offense that would otherwise be an infraction may, at the discretion of the district attorney or city attorney, be filed as a misdemeanor if the defendant has been convicted of two or more violations of any of the provisions of this title within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense or has been convicted of three or more violations of any of the provisions of this title within the twenty-four-month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor the punishment shall be a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that where such prior convictions are alleged in the accusatory pleading, and either admitted by the defendant in open court, or found to be true by the jury trying the issue of guilt or by the court where guilt is established by plea of guilty or nolo contendere or by trial by the court sitting without a jury, the punishment shall be a fine of no less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

        c.     Violations. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this article or the rules, regulations, orders, or permits issued thereunder, is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.

        4.     Cumulative Remedies and Penalties. The remedies or penalties provided by this title are cumulative to each other and to the remedies or penalties available under all other laws of this state.

        E.     Recovery of Costs. This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this title in cases where no permit is required in order to cure a violation. The intent of this section is to recoup administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement.

        1.     Record of Costs. The planning department shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible city departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this title and shall recover such costs from the property owner as provided herein. Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the council.

        2.     Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this title is found to exist, the director, or any person within the department authorized by the director, shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the subject property by mail of the existence of the violation, the department’s intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner’s right to a hearing on objections thereto. The notice shall be in a form approved by the city attorney.

        3.     Summary of Costs and Notice. At the conclusion of the case, the director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the subject property by certified mail. The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the city attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for city cost recovery within ten days of the date of the notice, and that if no such request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges. In the event that (a) no request for hearing is timely filed or, (b) after a hearing the director affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or person in control and possession shall be liable to the city in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount as determined by the director. These costs shall be recoverable in a civil action in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction within the city.

        4.     Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person having possession and control thereof, who receives a summary of costs under this section shall have the right to a hearing before the director on his or her objections to the proposed costs in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.

        a.     A request for hearing shall be filed with the department within ten days of the service by mail of the department’s summary of costs, on a form provided by the department.

        b.     Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request, and on ten days written notice to the owner, the director shall hold a hearing on the owner’s objections, and determine the validity thereof.

        c.     In determining the validity of the costs, the director shall consider whether total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: whether the present owner created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists.

        d.     The director’s decision shall be appealable to the council as provided by Section 19.10.130 of this chapter.

        F.     Processing Fee Assessment. Any person who shall erect, construct, alter, enlarge, move or maintain any building or structure, or institute a use for which a permit is required by this title without first having obtained a permit therefor, shall, if subsequently granted a permit for that building, structure or use, or any related building, structure or use on the property, first pay such additional permit processing fees as established by council resolution.

        G.    Violations of Conditions—Penalty. If any portion of a privilege authorized by a variance, conditional use permit, development plan or other permit approved under this title is utilized, the conditions of the variance, conditional use permit, development plan or other permit approved under this title, immediately become effective and must be strictly complied with. The violation of any valid condition imposed by the commission, council, zoning administrator, or planning department in connection with the granting of any variance, conditional use permit, development permit, or other permit taken pursuant to the authority of this title shall constitute a violation and shall be subject to the same penalties as defined in this section. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.300)

 

19.10.400 Public hearings.
        When a public hearing is required by this title, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this section.

        A.    Notice of Hearing. Notice of a public hearing shall be given as follows:

        1.     Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include: the date, time and place of the hearing; the name of hearing body; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property that is the subject of the hearing. If a proposed negative declaration or final environmental impact report has been prepared for the project pursuant to the city of Buellton CEQA guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the proposed negative declaration or certification of the final environmental impact report (EIR).

        2.     Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter for a permit, permit amendment, appeal, or zoning title amendment shall be given as follows, as required by Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091:

        a.     Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days before the hearing.

        b.     Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days before the hearing to:

        i.      The owner(s) of the property being considered or the owners agent, and the applicant.

        ii.     Each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide such facilities and services may be significantly affected.

        iii.    All owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred (300) feet of the property that is the subject of the hearing.

        iv.    Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the planning director and has paid the fee set by the most current planning department fee schedule for such notice.

        If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed is more than one thousand (1,000), the planning director may choose to provide the alternate notice allowed by Government Code Section 65091(a)(3).

        3.     Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required by subsection (A)(2) of this section, the director may also provide any notice with content or using a distribution method as the director determines is necessary or desirable.

        B.     Scheduling of Hearing. After the completion of any environmental documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and a planning department staff report, the matter shall be scheduled for public hearing on the next available zoning administrator, commission or council agenda (as applicable) reserved for such matters, but no sooner than twenty-one (21) days after the posting of a proposed negative declaration. At the discretion of the hearing body, a public hearing may be continued from its scheduled date to a future date as provided by subsection C of this section.

        C.     Notice of City Action When Hearing Continued. If a decision on a permit or amendment is continued by the city to a time that is neither previously stated in the public notice of the hearing, nor announced at the hearing as a time certain, the city shall provide notice of the further hearings (or action on the permit) in the same manner and within the same time limits as provided by subsection A of this section.

        D.    Conduct of Hearing. At the public hearing, interested persons may present information and testimony about the proposed project or amendment. Applications may be scheduled for separate action, or a consent agenda may be used where several applications may be considered and decided at one time. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.10.400)

Chapter 19.12 DEFINITIONS
19.12.010 Purpose of chapter.
        This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this title that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. Where any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with definitions in other titles of the Buellton Municipal Code, these definitions prevail for the purposes of this title. (Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.12.010)

 

19.12.020 Definitions of specialized terms and phrases.
        As used in this chapter:

        “Abut” means to physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line.

        “Accessory building or structure” means a building or structure, excluding an accessory dwelling unit, containing no kitchen and located upon the same building site as the building or use to which it is accessory, the use of which is customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the use of the principal building, or to the principal use of the land.

        “Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means an attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking (i.e., stove, refrigerator, and sink), and sanitation (i.e., bathroom with shower or bathtub) on the same parcel as the existing or proposed single-family dwelling (primary unit) is situated. An ADU also includes the following: (1) an efficiency unit. as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1; and (2) a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007.       “Accessory use” means a use that is incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, and which does not alter the principal use of the subject lot or adversely affect other properties in the zone.

        “Agricultural accessory structure (land use)” means an uninhabited structure or building designed and built to store farm animals, implements, supplies or products, that contains no residential use and is not open to the public. Includes: barns; grain elevators; silos, and other similar buildings and structures, but not commercial greenhouses (which are under “plant nurseries”), or buildings for agricultural processing activities (which are under “agricultural support use”). Also includes but is not limited to wind-powered and solar machines used for direct climate control, and water pumping or other conversion of wind or solar energy to mechanical or thermal power. Wind energy conversion machines for electric power generation are included under “electric generating plants.” See Section 19.06.010 of this title for specific use requirements applicable to agricultural accessory structures.

        “Agricultural support use (land use)” means uses such as the sorting and processing of fruits and vegetables, wineries, or feed distribution; that are a necessary and integral part of maintaining on-premises production and marketing, and that are directly associated with on-site agricultural or ornamental crop, or animal raising operations. Other uses permitted by conditional use permit in the agriculture zone such as oil drilling are not to be construed as an agricultural support use.

        “Airport” means any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft.

        “Alley” means a passage or way affording generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.

        “Animal keeping (land use)” means the keeping, feeding or raising of animals as a commercial agricultural venture, avocation, hobby or school project, either as a principal land use or subordinate to a residential use. Includes the keeping of common farm animals, small-animal specialties such as rabbit farms and other fur-bearing animals; bee farms; aviaries; worm farms; household pets, etc. This definition does not include grazing, which involves the keeping of grazing animals at densities less than two animals per acre, and is instead included under the definition of “grazing.” Sections 19.02.120(E) and 19.02.340(E) of this title contain specific use requirements for animal keeping.

        “Antenna amateur radio” means ground, building, or tower-mounted antenna operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio Service and as designated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Includes antennas, towers and equipment buildings.

        “Antennas, communications facilities (land use)” means public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, cellular telephone, and data network communications; including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, towers and equipment buildings. Does not include:

        1.     Home television and radio receiving antennas;

        2.     Telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections, which are included under “pipelines and transmission lines”;

        3.     Amateur radio antennas;

        4.     Satellite dish antennas.

        “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms within a building but comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit, with kitchen or cooking facilities, occupied or suitable for occupation as a residence for eating, living and sleeping purposes.

        “Appurtenant structure” means a structure that is auxiliary or accessory to another structure or use.

        “Artist studio” means a building or structure, or portion of a building or structure, used as a place of work by an artist or photographer, but shall not include commercial sales or transactions on the property. An artist studio may include a restroom, however it shall specifically exclude cooking facilities, or any other use that would allow the building or structure to be used as a separate dwelling unit or guest house.

        “Attached building” means a building having at least five lineal feet of wall serving as a common wall with the building to which it is attached.

        “Basement” means a story of a building that is partly or wholly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story if it has a minimum height of six and one-half feet and more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground.

        “Bathroom” means a restroom which also contains bathing facilities.

        “Block” means that property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest intersection or intercepting streets, and a railroad right-of-way, watercourse or body of water.

        “Boarding house” means a building where the business of keeping boarders is generally carried on and which is held out, by the owner or keeper as a place where boarders are kept.

        “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or chattel. A trailer shall not constitute a building within the meaning of this title.

        “Building coverage” means the amount of land covered or permitted to be covered by buildings or structures, excluding tennis courts and unenclosed swimming pools, usually measured as a percent of a lot.

        “Building height” means the vertical distance from the average finished grade of the lot covered by the building to the highest points of the coping of a flat roof or to the mean height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.

        “Building material stores (land use)” means primarily indoor retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, and also including paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies (which may also be sold in hardware stores, included under the definition of “retail stores, general merchandise”). Includes all such stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a larger proportion of total sales. Also includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in “wholesaling and distribution.” Establishments with more outdoor than indoor sales and storage are included under “storage yards and sales lots.”

        “Building site” means a single lot of land in one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure.

        “Business sign or structure” means any sign or structure designed, intended or used for advertising the particular business, product or service located or sold on the same premises as that on which the sign or structure is located.

        “Business support services (land use)” means establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc., also includes:

        1.     Blueprinting;

        2.     Business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see “repair and maintenance—vehicle”);

        3.     Commercial art and design (production);

        4.     Computer-related services (rental, repair, maintenance);

        5.     Equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are “storage yards and sales lots”);

        6.     Exterminators;

        7.     Film processing laboratories;

        8.     Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site;

        9.     Janitorial services;

        10.   Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping);

        11.   Other “heavy service” business services;

        12.   Outdoor advertising services;

        13.   Photocopying;

        14.   Photofinishing;

        15.   Protective services (other than office related);

        16.   Research and development laboratories;

        17.   Soils and materials testing laboratories;

        18.   Window cleaning.

        “Cabana.” See “pool house/cabana.”

        “Canopy structure” means a temporary or portable canvas or metal roofed structure typically used for providing shade, including those that are affixed to the ground through the use of bolts or stakes.

        “Centerline of street” means the centerline of a street or highway as established by the city engineer or by the California Department of Transportation. Where no right-of-way lines have been so established, the centerline of the traveled way shall be construed as the centerline. The centerline of the service road of a freeway or limited access highway shall be defined as the centerline of the traveled way of such service road.

        “Chemical products (land use)” means manufacturing establishments that produce or use basic chemicals and establishments creating products predominantly by chemical processes. Establishments classified in this major group manufacture three general classes of products: (1) basic chemicals such as acids, alkalines, salts, and organic chemicals; (2) chemical products to be used in further manufacture such as synthetic fibers, plastic materials, dry colors, and pigments; and (3) finished chemical products to be used for ultimate consumption such as drugs, cosmetics, and soaps; or to be used as materials or supplies in other industries such as paints, fertilizers, and explosives. Also includes sales and transportation establishments handling the chemicals described above in other than one of the uses included in the retail trade group on the land use and permit tables.

        “Child day care, centers (land use)” means a commercial or non-profit facility that provides care, protection and supervision of fifteen (15) or more minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours, typically while parents are working, and/or before or after daily attendance at an elementary school. Child day care centers may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use. Includes pre-schools. Such facilities are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services.

        “Child day care, family care homes (land use)” means regularly provided care, protection and supervision of twelve (12) or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day while the parents or guardians are away.

        “City” means the city of Buellton, California.

        “City council” means the city council of the city of Buellton, California.

        “Cogeneration” means the sequential use of energy for the production of electrical and useful thermal energy, as per Public Resource Code 25134.

        “Commercial shopping center” means for the purposes of the sign regulations of this title, a commercial development consisting of two or more structures, developed as one site. See also “shopping centers (land use).”

        “Commercial vehicle” means a vehicle or article of equipment used primarily in conjunction with a business or industrial use, but not including vehicles or equipment used primarily in conjunction with the permitted use of land in residential or agricultural districts.

        “Commission.” See “planning commission.”

        “Community centers (land use)” means multipurpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multipurpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for such activities as meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc. Includes grange halls.

        “Community design guidelines” means the most current set of design guidelines adopted by the Buellton city council.

        “Conditional use” means a use which requires a special degree of control because of characteristics peculiar to it, or because of size, technological processes or type of equipment, or because of the exact location with reference to surroundings, streets and existing improvements or demands upon public facilities. Such control is to ensure that the particular use at the particular site on which such use is proposed to be located is compatible with other existing or permitted uses surrounding the site.

        “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of a separately owned interest in a portion of a parcel of real property or building, including residences, apartments, offices or stores. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate legally protected interest in other portions of real property.

        “Construction contractor (land use)” means storage yard operated by, or on behalf of a contractor licensed by the state of California for storage of large equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor’s type of business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor’s own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as offices and repair facilities. The yard shall not include a junk yard.

        “Contiguous.” See “abut.”

        “Council.” See “city council.”

        “Court” means an open, unoccupied space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or buildings, and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings.

        “Density” means the maximum number of dwelling units allowed by this title for a specified area of land (e.g., “ten dwellings per acre,” “one dwelling per lot”).

        “Detached building” means a building, no part of which is attached to any other building.

        “Development” means any change made by a person or persons to unimproved or improved real property, including, but not limited to, placement, construction, reconstruction or alteration of buildings or structures, landscaping improvements, mining, excavation, or drilling operations. Agriculture is not defined as development within this title.

        “Director” means director of the city planning department.

        “Drive-through facilities” means a commercial establishment or an accessory facility of a commercial establishment in which customers wait in line in their vehicles to progress to a service point at which they briefly transact business from their vehicles and then immediately depart from the premises, including but not limited to, banks (motor banks, drive-through banks, drive-up banks), fast food establishments, and film deposit and pickup establishments, but not including drive-in movies, drive-in car washes through which the vehicles do not travel on their own power, drive-in food establishments where customers do not wait in line in their vehicles for service, or gasoline service stations.

        “Driveway” means a private right-of-way which affords vehicular access from a public or private street as defined herein to abutting or adjacent property which is not and, under existing subdivision and zoning regulations, cannot be divided into more than four separate lots or parcels.

        “Dwelling” means a building or portion thereof designed for and occupied in whole or in part as a residence or sleeping place, either permanently or temporarily, by one family and its guests, with sanitary facilities and one kitchen provided within the unit. Interior access shall be provided and maintained throughout all habitable portions of the dwelling. Additionally, this interior access requirement shall not be satisfied by providing access through nonhabitable areas of the dwelling. Boarding or lodging houses, dormitories, and hotels shall not be defined as dwelling units.

        “Dwelling, single-family” means a single detached dwelling designed for and occupied exclusively by one family alone, and having but one kitchen.

        “Dwelling, multifamily” means a single detached building designed for and occupied exclusively by two or more families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping units, including apartment house, apartment hotels, condominiums, and flats, but not including trailer courts or camps, motels, hotels or resort type hotels.

        “Electric generating plants (land use)” means facilities engaged in the generation and distribution of electrical energy for sale. The electricity may be generated from oil, gas, coal or nuclear fuels or from “alternate” sources including, but not limited to, water, wind, the sun, bio-gas, municipal or agricultural wastes. This includes “cogeneration,” which means the sequential use of energy for the production of electrical and useful thermal energy. The sequence can be thermal use followed by electric power production or the reverse.

        “Wind energy conversion system” (WECS) means any device which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy. WECS producing electricity are included here; those used for direct climate control, water pumping or other conversion to mechanical or thermal power, are included under “agricultural accessory structures.” Transmission lines located off the site of the power plant are included under “pipelines and transmission lines.” Electrical substations are included under “public utility facilities.”

        “Electric vehicle charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

        “Electrical and electronic equipment, instruments (land use)” means establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:

        1.     Appliances such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines;

        2.     Avionics;

        3.     Electrical transmission and distribution equipment;

        4.     Electronic components and accessories such as semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices;

        5.     Electronic instruments, components and equipment such as calculators and computers;

        6.     Electrical welding apparatus;

        7.     Lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting;

        8.     Industrial apparatus;

        9.     Industrial controls;

        10.   Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, and associated sensors and accessories;

        11.   Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines;

        12.   Motors and generators;

        13.   Ophthalmic goods;

        14.   Optical instruments and lenses;

        15.   Photographic equipment and supplies;

        16.   Pre-recorded magnetic tape;

        17.   Radio and television receiving equipment such as television and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies;

        18.   Surveying and drafting instruments;

        19.   Telephone and telegraph apparatus;

        20.   Transformers, switch gear and switchboards;

        21.   Watches and clocks.

        Does not include testing laboratories (research and development, soils and materials testing, etc.), which are defined under “business support services.”

        “Environmentally sensitive habitat area” means any area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which could be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments.

        “Family” means one or more persons occupying premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club, or similar dwelling for group use. A family shall not include a fraternal, religious, social, or business group. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants employed by the family.

        “Farm equipment and supplies sales (land use)” means establishments selling, renting or repairing agricultural machinery, equipment, and supplies for use in soil preparation and maintenance, the planting and harvesting of crops, and other operations and processes pertaining to farming and ranching:

 

        1.     Dairy equipment;

        2.     Frost protection equipment;

        3.     Hay, grain and feed sales;

 

 

        4.     Irrigation equipment;

        5.     Packaged fertilizer;

        6.     Packaged agricultural sprays;

        7.     Livestock equipment;

        8.     Poultry equipment.

        Sales may include the final assembly of farm machinery, implements or equipment from component parts received from the manufacturer in a partially assembled state, but not the creation of such components from raw materials. The sale of agricultural machinery does not include trailers, tractors and other motorized, self-propelled farm vehicles, which are included under “auto, mobilehome, vehicle and parts sales.”

        “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

        “Floor area—gross” means the total area of all floors of a building as measured to the surfaces of interior walls and including corridors, stairways, elevator shafts, attached garages, porches, balconies, basements, and offices.

        “Floor area—net” means the gross floor area excluding vents, shafts, stairs, corridors, attics, and unenclosed porches and balconies.

        “Front line” means the shortest boundary line of a lot which corresponds with a street line; the boundary lines of a through lot which corresponds with street lines shall be front lines. When the street-side boundary lines of a corner lot are equal or of substantially equal lengths, the front line shall be the line located on the principal street.

        “Furniture and fixtures manufacturing (land use)” means manufacturers producing: wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all types of office furniture and public building furniture and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes wood and cabinet shops.

        “Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores (land use)” means stores primarily selling: home furnishings such as furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, stoves, refrigerators, other household electrical and gas appliances including televisions and home sound systems and outdoor furniture such as lawn furniture, movable spas and hot tubs. Also includes the retail sale of office furniture and large musical instruments.

        “Garage, private” means a building or portion thereof used or designed to be used as an accessory building for the storage of motor vehicles primarily for the use of the occupants of the premises on which such building is located.

        “Garage, public” means a building or portion thereof, except a private garage, used or designed to be used for the storage and care of motor vehicles or where any such vehicles are repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale.

        “Glass products (land use)” means manufacturing establishments producing flat glass and other glass products which are pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment. Does not include artisan and craftsman type operations of a larger scale than home occupations, which are included under handicraft industries and small scale manufacturing.

        “Grading” means any excavation or filling of earth or combination thereof.

        “Greenhouse” means a structure used for cultivating plants with impervious roof and walls in which the climate is controlled; includes hothouses.

        “Guest house-cottage” means detached living quarters of a permanent type of construction without kitchen or cooking facilities of any kind, intended and used primarily for temporary guests of the occupants of the main building on the lot on which such guest house is located, and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

        “Habitable space” means as defined by Section 409 of the Uniform Building Code, space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas, are not considered habitable space.

        “Handicraft industries, small-scale manufacturing (land use)” means manufacturing establishments not classified in another major manufacturing group, including: jewelry, silverware and plated ware; musical instruments; toys; sporting and athletic goods; pens, pencils, and other office and artists’ materials; buttons, costume novelties, miscellaneous notions; brooms and brushes; caskets; and other miscellaneous manufacturing industries. Also included are artisan and craftsman-type operations which are not home occupations, and which are not secondary to on-site retail sales.

        “Hillside” means lands with slopes exceeding twenty (20) percent.

        “Hog ranch” means any property used for the raising or keeping of more than six hogs.

        “Home occupation” means an occupation conducted within the dwelling portion of a building by the occupants of the dwelling unit.

        “Hospital” means a facility or institution which provides a broad range of medical care and services, including the overnight and/or long term in- and out-patient care of persons afflicted with physical and/or mental diseases, injuries, complaints, or other infirmities.

        “Hotels and motels (land use)” means guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals or kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other temporary lodging (generally less than thirty (30) days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes: accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, etc., and may include a single manager’s unit for full-time occupancy.

        “Housekeeping unit” means a person or group of persons living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit.

        “Improvement” means any object affixed to or growing in the ground other than a building or structure.

        “Information kiosk” means a freestanding or wall sign, bulletin board style, that displays handbills, posters and flyers for temporary events.

        “Isosceles trapezoid” means a quadrilateral having only two parallel sides, the two non-parallel sides being equal in length.

        “Kennels and animal boarding (land use)” means commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats for commercial purposes, except for dogs or cats in pet shops or animal hospitals.

        “Kitchen” means a room, all or any part of which is designed, built, equipped, used, or intended to be used for the preparation and cooking of foods.

        “Land use permit” means any of the entitlements required by this title to authorize development or a new land use, including zoning clearance (Section 19.08.100), minor use permit (Section 19.08.110), conditional use permit (Section 19.08.110), or development plan (Section 19.08.120).

        “Living area” means the interior living portion of a dwelling unit including basements and attics, not including the garage or an accessory structure.

        “Lodging or rooming house.” See “boarding house.”

        “Lot” means a single parcel of land in one ownership, the boundaries of which are delineated in the latest recorded parcel map, subdivision map, or certificate of compliance recorded in the city recorders’ office or deed provided that such recorded deed does not create or attempt to create a lot in violation of the provisions of any applicable California law or city ordinance.

        “Lot area, gross” means the area included within the boundaries of the lot as described in the latest recorded deed to said lot or as shown on the recorded parcel or subdivision map creating the lot, including any portion so described or mapped lying within a public or private street.

        “Lot area, net” means the gross lot area minus any area lying within a public street which is defined as a permanently reserved right-of-way which has been dedicated to the city.

        “Lot, corner” means a lot bounded by streets on two or more adjacent sides.

        “Lot depth” means the average distance between the front or street line and the rear lot lines, or between the front lot line and the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear lot line.

        “Lot, flag.” See “Lot, interior.”

        “Lot frontage” means the length of the front line measured at the street right-of-way line.

        “Lot, interior” means a lot which has access by a private easement and has no street frontage or by a portion of the lot having a width of less than forty (40) feet.

        “Lot, key” means a lot, the side line of which abuts the rear line of one or more adjoining lots.

        “Lot line” means the lines bounding a lot as defined in this section.

        “Lot, through” means a lot having frontage on two parallel, or approximately parallel streets.

        “Lot width” means the average distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth.

        “Lumber and wood products (land use)” means manufacturing, processing, and sales uses including:

        1.     Cooperage stock mills;

        2.     Lath mills;

        3.     Merchant sawmills;

        4.     Mobilehome and modular home assembly;

        5.     Pallets and skids;

        6.     Particle board assembly;

        7.     Planing mills;

        8.     Plywood and veneer mills;

        9.     Shingle mills;

        10.   Truss and structural beam assembly;

        11.   Turning and shaping on a manufacturing basis;

        12.   Wholesale sale of basic wood products;

        13.   Wood containers;

        14.   Wood preserving.

        Craft-type shops are included in “handicraft industries and small scale manufacturing.” Other wood and cabinet shops are included under “furniture and fixture products.” The indoor retail sale of building materials, and the sale of construction tools and equipment is included under “building material stores.” Outdoor retail sales of such products are included under “storage yards and sales lots.”

        “Master sign program” means a graphic and written statement of standards for the style, materials, colors, lettering, size and placement of all signs on the site of a commercial center.

        “Medical services—clinics and laboratories (land use)” means service establishments primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services including: medical, dental and psychiatric offices (mental health-related services including various types of counseling practiced by licensed individuals other than medical doctors or psychiatrists, or unlicensed individuals, are included under offices); medical and dental laboratories; out-patient care facilities; and allied health services. Associations or groups primarily engaged in providing medical or other health services to members are included. Clinics may include accessory retail pharmacies.

        “Medical services—hospitals and extended care (land use)” means hospitals and similar establishments primarily engaged in providing diagnostic services, extensive medical treatment including surgical and other hospital services; such establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include accessory retail pharmacies, and emergency heliports. Also includes residential establishments providing nursing and health related care as a principal use with in-patient beds, such as: skilled nursing facilities (facilities allowing care for physically or mentally disabled persons, where care is less than that provided by an acute care facility); extended care facilities; convalescent and rest homes; board and care homes. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are classified in “residential care.”

        “Medical services—veterinary clinics and hospitals (land use)” means office and medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals.

        “Membership organization facilities (land use)” means permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for: business associations; professional membership organizations; labor unions and similar organizations; grange and farm centers (not including sales activities, which are included under “farm equipment and supplies”); civic, social and fraternal organizations (not including lodging, which is under “organizational houses”); political organizations, country clubs (golf courses are under “parks and playgrounds”) and other membership organizations.

        “Metal products fabrication, machine and welding shops (land use)” means the assembly of metal parts, including blacksmith and welding shops, sheet metal shops, machine shops and boiler shops, that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products.

        “Mobilehome (land use)” means a trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and forty (40) feet in length, which is designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. For purposes of this title, a mobilehome on a permanent foundation is considered a structure.

        “Mobilehome park (land use)” means any area or tract of land where two or more mobilehome lots are rented, leased, or offered for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. The rental paid for any such mobilehome shall be deemed to include rental for the lot it occupies.

        “Modular home” means a dwelling unit constructed in whole or in part of prefabricated material or components to be assembled on-site and affixed to a permanent foundation, subject to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

        “Multifamily dwelling (land use).” See “dwelling, multifamily.”

        “Nonconforming lot” means a lot the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption of this title or any amendments hereto, and which does not conform to the present regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated.

        “Nonconforming structure” means a building or structure, the setbacks, height, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption of this title or any amendments hereto, and which does not conform to the present regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated.

        “Nonconforming use” means any use of land, building, or structure which was lawful prior to the adoption of this title or any amendment hereto, and which does not conform to the present regulations on use of the zoning district in which it is situated.

        “Notice to property owner document” means a notarized, legal document required by the city, to be completed and recorded with the deed by the property owner as part of a permit approval process and/or in conjunction with correction of a zoning violation. The purpose of the notice is to document specific conditions and/or restrictions that apply to a particular property and the improvements thereon.

        “Offices (land use)” means professional or government offices including:

        1.     Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;

        2.     Advertising agencies;

        3.     Architectural, engineering, and surveying services;

        4.     Attorneys;

        5.     Counseling services;

        6.     Copying, quick printing, and blueprinting services;

        7.     Court reporting services;

        8.     Data processing and computer services;

        9.     Detective agencies and similar services;

        10.   Educational, scientific and research organizations;

        11.   Employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services;

        12.   Government offices including agency and administrative office facilities;

        13.   Management, public relations and consulting services;

        14.   Photography and commercial art studios;

        15.   Post offices (not including bulk mailing distribution centers, which are included under “vehicle and freight terminals”);

        16.   Real estate agencies;

        17.   Writers and artists offices outside the home.

        Does not include: medical offices, which are allowed under “medical services—clinics and laboratories”; or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the principal use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed in any zone as part of an approved principal use.

        “Offices, temporary (land use)” means a mobilehome, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as: a temporary business or construction office during construction of permanent facilities on the same site or as an office on the site of a temporary off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

        “Oil.” Where used in this title, the word “oil” shall include gas and other hydrocarbon substances.

        “One ownership” of property includes ownership under a contract to purchase in any manner whereby such property is under a single or unified control, including ownership of property by a person or persons, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, or organization of any kind.

        “Open space” means:

        a.     “Public open space.” Public open space shall include but not be limited to public parks, recreational support facilities (restrooms, stairways, picnic tables, etc.), public parking lots, access corridors such as bike paths, hiking, or equestrian trails, usable natural areas, and vista points which are accessible to members of the general public. Environmentally sensitive habitat areas and archaeological sites may be included in public open space. Water bodies such as streams, ponds, and lakes may be included in public open space only if available for active recreational purposes, i.e., swimming, boating, or fishing but in no case shall water bodies be credited for more than five percent of the total public open space requirement within a development. Public open space shall not include areas which are unusable for recreational purposes, i.e., private or public streets, private parking lots, or hazardous areas such as steep slopes and bluff faces.

        b.     “Common open space.” Common open space shall include but not be limited to recreational areas and facilities for the use of the prospective residents or guests of a development such as tennis courts, swimming pools, playgrounds, community gardens, landscaped areas for common use, or other open areas of the site needed for the protection of the habitat, archaeological, scenic, or other resources. Water bodies may be included but shall not be credited for more than five percent of the total required common open space. Common open space shall not include driveways, public or private streets, parking lots, private patios and yards, other developed areas or hard surfaced walkways.

        c.     “Private open space.” Private open space shall include but not be limited to patios, decks, and yards for the private use of the residents of individual dwelling units.

        “Ordinance.” See “zoning ordinance.”

        “Outdoor commercial recreation (land use)” means facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation, including: amusement, theme and kiddie parks; drive-in theaters; golf driving ranges independent from golf courses; miniature golf courses (golf courses are included under the definition of “parks and playgrounds”); skateboard parks and water slides; go-cart and miniature auto race tracks; recreation equipment rental (e.g., ATCs and other nonhighway motor vehicles, roller skates); health and athletic clubs with predominately outdoor facilities; tennis courts, swim and tennis clubs. May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including, but not limited to, bars and restaurants, fast-food restaurants, video game arcades, etc.

        “Outdoor festival” means any musical festival, dance festival, “rock” festival or similar activity at which music is provided by paid, or professional, or amateur performers or by prerecorded means, which is held at any place other than in a permanent building or permanent installation, which permanent installation has been constructed for the purpose of conducting such activities or similar activities, to which members of the public are invited or admitted for a charge or free of cost, and which is to be or is attended by five hundred (500) or more persons. If such a festival or activity is to be or is attended by less than five hundred (500) persons, it is an amusement enterprise conducted partially or wholly outside of a completely enclosed building.

        “Owner” means for the purpose of the attached residential second unit title, an owner shall be the individual whose name appears on the title to the property and for whom a home owners exemption is claimed.

        “Parcel.” See “lot.”

        “Parking lot” means an off-street area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of five or more vehicles.

        “Parking lot sale” means a temporary sale that is conducted by a retail store, shop or establishment in the area usually used for on-premises customer parking or pedestrian access (not within a public right-of-way) of that retail store, shop, or establishment and at which sale the same type of merchandise sold within that store, shop, or establishment is sold at retail.

        “Parking space” means a space designed and reserved for parking of motor vehicles, including all necessary maneuvering space, as provided elsewhere in this title.

        “Person” means any individual, organization, partnership, or other business association or corporation, including any utility, and any federal, state, local government, or special district or an agency thereof.

        “Personal services (land use)” means establishments providing nonmedically related services, including automated teller machines (ATMs) independent from banks and financial institutions; beauty and barber shops; shoe repair shops; tanning salons; laundromats (self-service laundries); dry cleaning pick-up stores and small-scale dry cleaners without pick-up and delivery services; clothing rental; dating and escort services. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

        “Pipelines and transmission lines (land use)” means transportation facilities for the conveyance of: crude petroleum; refined petroleum products such as gasoline and fuel oils; natural gas; mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas; or the pipeline transmission of other commodities. Also includes pipeline surface and terminal facilities, including pump stations, bulk stations, surge and storage tanks. Power transmission includes facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers (classified under “offices”), distribution substations (classified under “public utility facilities”), or power plants (classified under “electric generating plants”).

        “Planning commission” means the city planning commission.

        “Planning department” means the city planning department.

        “Plant nurseries (land use)” means commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Also includes establishments engaged in the sale of such products (e.g., wholesale and retail nurseries) and commercial scale greenhouses (home greenhouses are included under “residential accessory uses”). The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under “retail stores, general merchandise.”

        “Pool house/cabana” means a building or structure designed as accessory to a pool located on the same lot as the pool house/cabana.

        “Premises” means the area of land in one ownership surrounding a house or building.

        “Primary zoning district” means any one of the residential, commercial/industrial, or special-purpose zoning districts established by Section 19.02.010 (Zoning districts established), that is applied to a site by the zoning map (Section 19.02.020), in addition to one or more of the overlay zones established by Sections 19.02.400 et seq. (Overlay zoning districts).

        “Principal structure” means a structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In any residential, agricultural or estate district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal structure on the lot on which it is situated.

        “Public safety facilities (land use)” means facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, lookouts, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

        “Public utility” means a company regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.

        “Public utility facilities (land use)” means fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091: electrical substations and switching stations; telephone switching facilities; natural gas regulating and distribution facilities; public water system wells, treatment plants and storage; and community wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields. These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in “offices”), or equipment and material storage yards.

        “Public works” means:

        1.     Production, storage, transmission, treatment and recovery facilities for water, sewerage, and other similar utilities owned or operated by any public agency, excluding energy facilities.

        2.     All public transportation facilities, including streets, roads, highways, public parking lots and structures, airports, railroads, and mass transit facilities and stations, bridges, trolley wires and other related facilities financed and owned by the government.

        “Recreation and fitness centers (land use)” means primarily indoor establishments providing amusement, entertainment, or physical fitness services for a fee or admission charge, such as: arcades containing coin operated amusements and/or electronic games (five or more such games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment constitutes an arcade pursuant to this definition, four or less are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site); card rooms, billiard and pool halls; bowling alleys; ice skating and roller skating; dance halls, clubs and ballrooms which are principal uses rather than being subordinate to an eating or drinking place; fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; tennis, handball, racquetball, indoor archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities.

        “Recreational vehicle” means a motor home, travel trailer, camper or camping trailer, with or without motor power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath and toilet rooms. Recreation vehicle shall also include trailer-borne boats.

        “Recreational vehicle park (land use)” means any area or tract of land, where one or more lots are rented or leased or offered for rent, or leased to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for temporary purposes.

        “Recycling collection stations (land use)” means facilities for temporary accumulation and storage of recyclable materials, that are later transported to processing facilities. Includes sites for implementing the California Beverage Container Recycling Act (AB 2020), which may involve reverse vending machines, mobile collection units, and other attended and unattended collection facilities. Does not include automobile wrecking yards or any recycling processing facilities, which are listed under recycling, scrap and wrecking yards; does not include temporary storage of toxic or hazardous waste materials.

        “Recycling, scrap and wrecking yards (land use)” means establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from such vehicles. Does not include terminal waste disposal sites.

        “Repair and maintenance—accessory to sales (land use)” means the repair of vehicles, equipment or other products on the same site as the retail sales of such vehicles, equipment or other products as a service to purchasers, that is incidental and accessory to the sales operation.

        “Repair and maintenance—vehicle (land use)” means the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a principal use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. Does not include: automobile parking (see “vehicle storage”), repair shops subordinate to and maintained by a vehicle dealership which are included under “auto, mobilehome, vehicle and parts sales”; service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile wrecking yards which are included under “recycling, scrap and wrecking yards.”

        “Repair and maintenance—consumer products (land use)” means service establishments where repair of consumer products is the principal business activity, including: electrical repair shops; television and radio and other appliance repair; watch, clock and jewelry repair; re-upholstery and furniture repair. Does not include shoe repair (included under “personal services”). Does not include repair or services incidental and accessory to retail sales. Does not include businesses serving the repair needs of heavy equipment, which are included under “business support services.”

        “Residential accessory uses (land use)” includes any use that is customarily part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. Such uses include accessory structures such as swimming pools, spas and hot tubs, workshops, studios, greenhouses, garages, guesthouses (without cooking or kitchen facilities), solar panels, propane tanks, and similar equipment. Includes home receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts (broadcast and receiving antennas for ham radio and commercial applications, and satellite dish antennas, are included under the definition of “antennas, communication facilities”).

        “Residential care homes (land use)” means facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the elderly, and people with some limits on their ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a major element. Includes: children’s homes; halfway houses; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; self-help group homes.

        “Restroom” means a room which may contain a toilet and washbasin but shall specifically exclude any type of bathing facilities.

        “Retail stores, general merchandise (land use)” means retail trade establishments selling many lines of merchandise. Such types of stores and lines of merchandise include but are not limited to:

        1.     Artists’ supplies;

        2.     Auto parts (not repair or machine shops);

        3.     Bicycles;

        4.     Books;

        5.     Cameras and photographic supplies;

        6.     Clothing and accessories;

        7.     Department stores;

        8.     Drug and discount stores;

        9.     Dry goods;

        10.   Fabrics and sewing supplies;

        11.   Florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only—outdoor sales are “plant nurseries”);

        12.   General stores;

        13.   Gifts, novelties and souvenirs;

        14.   Handcrafted items (stores may include crafting operations subordinate to sales);

        15.   Hardware;

        16.   Hobby materials;

        17.   Jewelry;

        18.   Luggage and leather goods;

        19.   Musical instruments, parts and accessories;

        20.   Newsstands;

        21.   Orthopedic supplies;

        22.   Pet stores;

        23.   Religious goods;

        24.   Small wares;

        25.   Specialty shops;

        26.   Sporting goods and equipment;

        27.   Stationery;

        28.   Toys and games;

        29.   Variety stores.

        “Right-of-way line” means the recorded boundary of a public or private street or the existing or planned boundary of a public street as indicated in the circulation element of the general plan.

        “Schools—specialized education and training (land use)” means business, secretarial schools and vocational schools offering specialized trade and commercial courses. Includes specialized nondegree granting schools such as: music schools; dramatic schools; language schools; driver education schools; ballet and other dance studios; seminaries and other establishments exclusively engaged in training for religious ministries; and establishments furnishing educational courses by mail. Facilities, institutions and conference centers are included that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development (including fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management, as examples).

        “Secondary use” means:

        A.    A land use subordinate or accessory to a principal land use.

        B.     When used in reference to residential use in conjunction with commercial and industrial uses in this title, secondary shall mean two residential bedrooms per one thousand (1,000) square feet of total gross floor area of commercial or industrial development. However, in no event shall the total gross floor area of the residential development exceed the total gross floor area of the commercial or industrial use.

        “Secondhand stores (land use)” means indoor retail establishments that buy and sell used products, including, but not limited to, books, clothing, furniture and household goods. The sale of cars and other used vehicles is included under “auto, mobilehome, vehicle and parts sales.”

        “Semi-detached building” means a building having a common wall with another building which wall has no opening connecting the two buildings.

        “Service station (land use)” means a retail place of business engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the normal operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and to the fulfilling of motorists needs. These include sale of petroleum products, sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items. Washing and lubrication services; the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair; and the supplying of other incidental customer services and products. Major motor repairs, painting and body and fender work and mechanical car wash are excluded.

        “Setback” means the minimum required distance that a building or structure must be located from any property line or street centerline.

        “Setback, front” means a setback extending across the front of a lot between the inner side setback lines and measured from the front line of the lot to the front line of a building.

        “Setback, rear” means a setback extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the main building. For the purpose of this title, the rear setback of an irregular or triangular lot shall be measured from a line at least ten feet long lying entirely within the lot, parallel or most nearly parallel to and most distant from the front line of the lot.

        “Setback, side” means a setback between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of a building, and extending from the front line of the lot to the required rear setback line.

        “Shadow construction” means pipeline construction, involving two or more separate pipeline projects in the same corridor, coordinated at closely-timed intervals so that site rehabilitation is required only once.

        “Shopping centers (land use)” means commercial developments on a single parcel or contiguous parcels under one ownership, containing five or more retail stores, service uses, or other tenants, where each have individual entrances from a commonly-owned public area such as a parking lot, mall corridor or atrium. Also includes such commercial developments where individual tenant spaces are subdivided as a commercial condominium, with parking and pedestrian circulation areas owned in common. The land uses allowed in shopping centers are determined by the applicable zone pursuant to Section 19.02.210.

        “Sign area” means the area of the smallest rectangle within which a single sign face can be enclosed. See Section 19.04.170(F).

        “Sign, community identification” means a sign located on public property, where the sign message is limited to identifying the city (e.g. “Welcome to the City of Buellton”).

        “Sign copy” means the information content of a sign, including text, illustrations, logos, and trademarks.

        “Sign, directory” means a sign identifying the occupants of a building and their location.

        “Sign face” means the visible portions of a sign including all sign copy, but excluding structural elements not an integral part of the sign copy display.

        “Sign, freestanding” means a self-supporting sign not attached to a building or structure, typically including pole-mounted and monument signs.

        “Sign height” means the vertical distance from average natural grade to the top of the sign, including the support structure and any design elements.

        “Sign, off-premise” means a sign identifying or advertising a business, service or land use that is not conducted on the same premises as the sign.

        “Sign, projecting” means a sign attached perpendicular to a building wall.

        “Sign, roof” means a sign located on a building roof, above the mansard of a building or that extends above the roof line of a building.

        “Sign, suspended” means a sign that hangs from under an eave, awning or arcade.

        “Sign, temporary” means a sign constructed from a nonpermanent material, in place for a temporary time period (e.g., banners).

        “Sign, wall” means a sign affixed to the wall of a building that is flush with the wall.

        “Site” means a lot or multiple lots under common ownership that are the location of a proposed land use or development.

        “Site coverage” means the percentage of the total area of a site that is occupied by buildings.

        “Sport facilities and outdoor public assembly (land use)” means indoor and outdoor facilities for spectator-oriented sports, and other outdoor public assembly facilities for such activities as outdoor theater and concerts, that include: amphitheaters; stadiums and coliseums; arenas and field houses; race tracks; motorcycle racing and drag strips; and other sports that are considered commercial.

        “Stock cooperative” means a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock or membership certificate in the corporation held by the persons having such right of occupancy. The term “stock cooperative” does not include a limited-equity housing cooperative, as defined in this title.

        “Storage yards and sales lots (land use).” Storage yards are service establishments primarily engaged in the outdoor storage of motor vehicles, construction equipment, materials or supplies, farm machinery or industrial supplies on a lot or portion of a lot greater than three hundred (300) square feet in area. Sales lots consist of any permanent outdoor sales area for construction equipment or other heavy equipment; outdoor equipment rental yards (except auto rental which is included under “auto, mobilehome, vehicle and parts sales”); large-scale temporary or permanent outdoor sales activities such as swap meets and flea markets. Also includes retail ready-mix concrete operations which are incidental to an outdoor equipment rental yard. Does not include: sales lots for autos and other vehicles, which are included under “auto, mobilehome, vehicle and parts sales”; or the sale of farm equipment, which is included under “farm equipment and supplies sales.”

        “Story” means the portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.

        “Story poles” means a three-dimensional visual device used to delineate the location, height, and bulk of a proposed structure using wood beams or plastic poles or other suitable material.

        “Street” means a permanently reserved, public or private right-of-way which affords the public a principal means of vehicular access to abutting or adjacent property, not including alleys or driveways as defined herein. The service or frontage road of a freeway shall be considered as a street separate from such freeway or highway.

        “Street frontage” means the portion of a property line abutting a public or private street.

        “Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, column beams or girders, or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof.

        “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground excluding trailers and sidewalks.

        “Studio dwelling unit” means a single dwelling unit that does not contain a bedroom and which is located within a multifamily dwelling.

        “Subdivision” means a division of land as defined in the State Subdivision Map Act.

        “Swap meet” means an open-air market operating during daylight hours on weekends and holidays for the sale or exchange of merchandise at retail by a number of sellers. Signs or other advertising by the individual sellers and outdoor storage of materials or merchandise, except during hours of operation, are prohibited.

        “Temporary guest” means nonpaying guests occupying the premises for no more than one hundred twenty (120) days in any twelve (12) month period.

        “Theaters and meeting halls (land use)” means indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, such as: public and semi-public auditoriums; exhibition and convention halls; civic theaters, meeting halls and facilities for “live” theater and concerts; motion picture theaters; meeting halls for rent and similar public assembly uses. Outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events are included under the definition of “sport facilities and outdoor public assembly.”

        “This title.” See “zoning ordinance.”

        “Trailer” means a vehicle with or without motor power which is designed or used for human habitation, office, shops, or storage including camper, travel trailer, and mobilehome, but not including mobilehomes on a permanent foundation.

        “Vehicle storage (land use)” means service establishments in the business of storing operative cars, buses and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a principal use. (All principal uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by this title.) Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. Does not include wrecking yards (classified in “recycling, scrap and wrecking yards”).

        “Vision clearance” means a triangular space at the street or highway corner of a corner lot containing no planting, walls, or other structure exceeding three feet in height. Vision clearance shall be measured along the street line from the corner to the hypotenuse of the triangle.

        “Warehousing (land use)” means facilities for the storage of farm products, furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature for later distribution to wholesalers and retailers. Includes cold storage. Also includes warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public. Does not include warehouse facilities where the primary purpose of storage is for goods for wholesaling distribution. Does not include terminal facilities for handling freight (classified in “vehicle and freight terminals”).

        “Wholesaling and distribution (land use)” means establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as: merchant wholesalers; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products; stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment; bottling works.

        “Wind energy conversion system.” See “electric generating plants.”

        “Winery” means a bonded establishment primarily used for the purpose of processing grapes or other fruit products. Processing includes, but is not limited to, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging, storage, bottling, and wholesale/retail sales.

        “Zoning administrator” means a position authorized by Section 65900 et seq. of the California Government Code created by ordinance, which authorizes a hearing officer to hear and decide applications including, but not limited to, minor use permits and variances, as set forth within this title.

        “Zoning clearance” means the procedure for land use and development review and approval described in Section 19.08.100.

        “Zoning ordinance,” “this ordinance” means the city zoning ordinance authorized by Section 65850 of the Government Code. (Ord. 20-05 § 2, 2020; Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 09-06 § 3, 2009; Ord. 06-12 §§ 15, 16, 2006; Ord. 06-02 § 12, 2006; Ord. 96-02 § 12, 1996; Ord. 94-13, 1994; prior code § 19.12.020)

Chapter 19.14 ADULT USE ZONING REGULATIONS
19.14.010 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:

        “School” means any public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision thereof or which is licensed by the state to offer day care, nursery care, pre-school, elementary, or secondary academic instruction, including day care, nursery, kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools and high schools.

        “Sensitive use” means any county or city zone or land use district, including those within planned communities, which contain the words “residence,” “residential,” or “rural living,” within its title; any church, chapel, religious institution, or similar place of worship; any cemetery, or similar facility; any school, nursery, or day care center; or any park, playground, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for such use by city or county action or by city or county acceptance of dedications for such use.

        Terms used in this chapter not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in Chapter 5.06 entitled “Adult-Oriented Business Licenses” of this code and are incorporated in this chapter by this reference. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.012 Adult-oriented business—Application.
        In order to operate an adult-oriented business within this city, the applicant or proprietor of the business must obtain the license required by Chapter 5.06 and any other license required by Title 5 of this code. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no adult-oriented business shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit or a planned development permit. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.014 General provisions.
        Adult-oriented businesses shall only be permitted to be established in the M zone, industrial and manufacturing and shall be subject to the location and design standards specified by this chapter. For the two years prior to establishing the adult-oriented business and at all times during its operation in Buellton, neither the owner (if an individual) nor any of the directors, officers or general partners (if a corporation or partnership) of the adult-oriented business shall have been found guilty of a misdemeanor or felony classified by the state as a sex-related offense, including, but not limited to, Penal Code Sections 266a-c, 266e, 266g-i, 315, 316, 647 subsection (a) or (b), or have either had an adult-oriented business license or similar license or permit suspended or revoked or have otherwise been found to have violated any of the provisions of an adult-oriented business license or similar permit, license or ordinance in any city, county, territory or state. Nor shall any such person be on parole or probation for any of the aforementioned violations. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.016 Location, design and performance standards.
        A.    Locational Standards—Sensitive Uses. An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of a sensitive use.

        B.     Locational Standards—Distance Between Adult-Oriented Businesses. An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of an existing adult-oriented business. If two or more existing adult-oriented businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than seven hundred fifty (750) feet, then in determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses.

        C.     Locational Standards—Measurement of Distance. For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight level line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the building or structure in which the adult-oriented business is or will be located to the nearest property line of any land use, land use district, or zone described in subsection A of this section, or to the nearest point of the building or structure or part thereof if less than the entire structure is occupied by or proposed to be occupied by an adult-oriented business in which an existing adult-oriented business described in subsection B of this section, is located.

        D.    Sensitive Uses—Subsequent Location. An adult-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of an adult-oriented business, a church, a school, or any other sensitive use within seven hundred fifty (750) feet.

        E.     Design Standards.

        1.     The adult-oriented business shall not be located completely or partially within any mobile structure or pushcart.

        2.     All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing the interior from any exterior area.

        3.     No partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion, or part of a building, structure, or premises—including restrooms—may have an aperture, hole, slit, or other opening or gap which is designed or otherwise constructed to encourage, permit, or allow sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition.

        4.     Each adult-oriented business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same building.

        5.     The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes, and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the Orange County fire authority and the city’s building department.

        6.     Any adult-oriented business in which live entertainment is performed, shall have such performances only conducted on a stage or on a platform that is raised eighteen (18) inches and which has a rail which does not allow patrons to be any closer to the performers than ten feet. Said rail shall be at least forty-two (42) inches in height and shall be installed around the perimeter of the stage or platform.

        7.     Any adult-oriented business shall be designed such that a manager’s station is provided for the purpose of supervising activities within the business and such that a manager in the manager’s station can view the entire interior of the business to which the public is allowed access, excepting restrooms.

        8.     Any viewing room or area shall be visible from the manager’s station and such view shall not be obscured or obstructed by any wall, curtain, door, any other structure, or by any display of merchandise.

        9.     No private viewing areas as defined herein shall be permitted or shown on any design for an adult-oriented business.

        10.   The owner of the adult-oriented business shall provide restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from sexually oriented materials and sexually oriented merchandise. Only one person will be allowed in the restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the owner of the adult-oriented business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The owner shall ensure that the attendant permits no person of the opposite sex in the restroom, not more than one person to enter a restroom stall, and, with the exception of urination and excretion, permit no persons to engage in any specified sexual activity in the public portion of the restroom.

        F.     Performance Standards. The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable site development standards, including parking, of the zone, district, or area in which the adult-oriented business is located, the Building Code, Fire Code, and the Health and Safety Code of the city. An adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following performance standards:

        1.     At all times, the maintenance and operation of an adult-oriented business shall be in accordance with the design standards set forth in subsection D of this section.

        2.     The building entrance to the adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.

        3.     A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult-oriented business is open to the public.

        4.     Any viewing room shall be visible from the manager’s station of the adult-oriented business, and visibility of the entire viewing room from the manager’s station shall be neither obscured nor obstructed by any curtain, door, wall or other structure.

        5.     All exterior areas of adult-oriented businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds and debris.

        6.     No special events, promotions, concerts, or similar activities which are likely to increase the parking demand at the location of the adult-oriented business shall occur unless the permitholder has obtained a special events permit from the city as would be required by all other types of businesses within the city.

        7.     Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult-oriented business on-site and as specified for the zone, district, or area in which the business is located in accordance with the parking provisions of Buellton Municipal Code and as follows:

        a.     Adult Theater, Adult Cabaret, Adult Motion Picture Theater or Adult Arcade. One parking space shall be provided for every two seats in a viewing room, or one parking space shall be provided for every two occupants per the allowable occupant load as established by the chief building official and/or the fire marshal, whichever standard is greater. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each employee or independent contractor on the maximum shift.

        8.     Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether or not an adult-oriented business license has been issued to said business under this code, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or viewing area of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:

        a.     There shall be at least one manager’s station on the premises. A manager’s station(s) shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area.

        b.     It is the duty of the adult business license holder to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

        c.     The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designed, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

        d.     It shall be the duty of the adult business license holder and any employees or independent contractors present on the premises to insure that the view area specified in subsection (F)(8)(c) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designed as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter.

        9.     An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:

        a.     All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the required site or plot plan. The required lighting shall remain on for at least thirty (30) minutes after the closing time of the adult-oriented business to promote safety for employees thereof.

        b.     All off-street parking areas shall have a security system provided that visually records and retains activities in the parking lot for at least a forty-eight (48) hour period for the purposes of promoting safety and identifying violators.

        c.     All interior portions of the adult-oriented business, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two foot-candles of light.

        d.     For adult-oriented businesses which exceed an occupant load of one hundred twenty-five (125) persons, the provision of on-site security personnel shall be required during all business hours pursuant to a plan to be reviewed and approved for adequacy by the designated head of the law enforcement entity providing law enforcement services to the city. Security personnel shall be licensed in accordance with the California Business and Professions Code, to the satisfaction of the designated head of the entity providing law enforcement services to the city.

        10.   Adult Motion Picture Theater/Adult Arcade.

        a.     A manager’s station shall be located near the main entrance and the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture or arcade viewing areas.

        b.     No adult motion picture theater or adult arcade shall be maintained or operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater or adult arcade is visible upon entrance to such premises. No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall be maintained.

        c.     Maximum Number of Devices. No person shall operate an adult motion picture theater or adult arcade in which the number of image producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located.

        11.   Adult Hotel/Motel.

        a.     Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented or sub-rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period on a recurring basis creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel/motel as that term is defined in this title.

        b.     A person is in violation of the provisions of this title if such person rents or sub-rents a sleeping room at a location without an adult-oriented business license and an adult use planning permit to a person or persons and within ten hours thereafter rents or sub-rents the same room to another person(s), or sub-rents the same room to the prior renter.

        12.   No advertising sign or structure, advertisement, display, or other promotional material depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities, shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area.

        13.   No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult-oriented business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.018 Couch dancing/straddle dancing and other sexual and related activities prohibited.
        For purposes of this section, “couch dancing” or “straddle dancing” are defined as an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business intentionally touching any patron or coming within ten feet of any patron while appearing in a state of semi-nudity or while simulating any specified sexual activity.

        A.    No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this code, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing any employee or independent contractor:

        1.     To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

        2.     To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;

        3.     To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business while engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity;

        4.     To voluntarily be within ten feet of any patron while engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity;

        5.     To violate any provision of Section 5.12.034 of this code.

        B.     No employee or independent contractor of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not an adult business license has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall:

        1.     Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

        2.     Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

        3.     Engage in or simulate a “specified sexual activity” while intentionally touching a patron at the adult-oriented business;

        4.     Engage or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than ten feet from any patron;

        5.     Violate any provision of Chapter 5.06 of this code.

        C.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee or independent contractor who is engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult-oriented business.

        D.    No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee or independent contractor at the business who is engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

        E.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall violate any provision of Chapter 5.06 of this code.

        F.     No waiter(s) or waitress(es) at an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall appear on the premises in the nude, semi-nude, or display or expose specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.020 Performer requirements.
        It is unlawful for any person to act as a performer in an adult-oriented business where one or more of the following apply:

        A.    The performer is less than eighteen (18) years of age;

        B.     The performer has, within the past two years, been convicted of any of the offenses listed in Section 19.14.014, or parallel offenses outside the state;

        C.     The performer has, within the past two years, violated any applicable subsection of Section 19.14.014 or any applicable subsection of Section 19.14.018.

        D.    The performer has, within the past two years, been found to have violated any other adult-oriented business ordinance of any other city, county, or state, or has had any adult-oriented business permit suspended or revoked;

        E.     The performer has, within the past two years, been convicted of engaging in any act of obscenity on the premises of the adult-oriented business; or

        F.     The performer is on probation or parole for any of the reasons described in subsections B, C, D or E. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.022 Inspections.
        The owner of an adult-oriented business will permit officers of the city, the county and each of their authorized representatives to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter at any time the adult-oriented business is open for business or occupied. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.024 Applicability and nonconforming period.
        All design and performance standards set forth in this chapter are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable and govern all existing and proposed adult-oriented businesses and shall immediately apply to any proposed adult-oriented business upon adoption and passage of this chapter.

        A.    In the event that there is any adult-oriented business lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and is not in compliance with the design and performance standards of this chapter, any such adult-oriented business shall conform to all design and performance standards within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

        B.     In the event that there is any adult-oriented business lawfully in existence and located outside the boundaries of the city and the parcel on which the adult-oriented business is located is annexed into the city subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and is not in compliance with the design and performance standards of this chapter, any such adult-oriented business shall conform to all design and performance standards within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.026 Extension of nonconforming use amortization period—Adult-oriented businesses.
        A.    An application for extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use shall be made as provided in this chapter.

        B.     The owner of the property on which an adult-oriented business is located or the owner of the adult-oriented business who desires to extend the amortization period must apply for approval of an extension not later than three months prior to expiration of the amortization period, unless the community development director determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. Such application shall be made in writing on a form as prescribed by the community development director and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the city council. The party requesting the extension of the amortization period shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by Section 19.14.032 of this chapter is unreasonable and that the requested extension is a reasonable amortization period for the owner to receive a fair rate of return on the investment in the business. The party applying for the extension shall furthermore be required in order to meet its burden of proof to submit the documentation set forth in this section.

        C.     Not later than thirty (30) days after submittal of an application to extend the amortization period, the community development director shall notify the applicant, in writing, if the application is not complete. A complete application shall include:

        1.     The applicant’s signature;

        2.     A written request for an extension of the amortization period which shall include information relevant to the factors listed in subsection F of this section and shall identify the term of the requested extension;

        3.     The required fees;

        4.     A mailing list and a set of gummed labels attached to envelopes with first-class postage fully paid thereon with the names, addresses, and tax assessor parcel numbers of all owners of real property within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the external boundaries of the property on which the adult-oriented business is located; and

        5.     A tax assessor’s parcel map identifying the properties to be notified within the three hundred (300) foot radius.

        If the application is not complete, the community development director shall specify in writing those parts which are incomplete and shall identify the manner by which the application can be made complete. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within thirty (30) calendar days after it is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete.

        D.    The planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the request for an extension.

        E.     Reserved.

        F.     Criteria and Findings. In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use, and in determining, the appropriate length of such an extension, the planning commission shall consider the amount of investment in the business, the opportunities for relocation to a legally permissible site, the costs of relocation, the effects of the business on the surrounding area, and the following additional factors:

        1.     The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements;

        2.     The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional nonconfidential equivalents;

        3.     The remaining useful life of the business improvements;

        4.     The remaining lease term;

        5.     The ability of the business and/or land owner to change the use to a conforming use; and

        6.     The date upon which the property owner and/or business operator received notice of the nonconforming status of the adult-oriented business and the amortization requirements.

        G.    The planning commission, or city council on appeal, shall receive and consider evidence presented by the applicant and any other persons, and shall make findings that the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria set forth above. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.028 Appeals.
        A.    The applicant or license holder or property owner may appeal the decision of the planning commission pursuant to Section 19.14.026 of this chapter to the city council in accordance with Section 19.10.130B of the Buellton Municipal Code.

        B.     If an appeal filed hereunder is denied by the city council, such denial is subject to judicial review according to the expedited provisions of the California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.030 Continuation of nonconforming buildings and uses.
        A.    Any nonconforming building may be continued and maintained, except as provided in this chapter, provided there are no structural alterations, except as provided in this chapter.

        B.     Any nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided in this chapter, provided that the use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.032 Removal or alterations of nonconforming uses.
        The following provisions shall apply to adult-oriented businesses:

        A.    Any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, shall be subject to an amortization period of three years, and any adult-oriented business which becomes a nonconforming use after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to an amortization period of three years commencing on the date the use becomes nonconforming.

        B.     The owner of any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use may apply for extension of the amortization period, pursuant to Section 19.14.026 of this chapter. Such application shall be made prior to the expiration of the amortization period unless the reviewing authority determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application.

        C.     Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, any adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use shall cease all business operations and all signs, advertising and displays relating to said business shall be removed within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.034 Establishment of an adult-oriented business.
        The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall include any of the following:

        A.    The opening or commencement of operation of any such business as a new business;

        B.     The conversion of any existing business, (whether or not an adult-oriented business), to any adult-oriented business;

        C.     The addition of any adult-oriented business to any existing adult-oriented businesses if the addition results in enlargement of the place of business. For the purposes of this subsection, enlargement shall mean an increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by either construction or use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof, whether located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

 

19.14.036 Violation and penalty.
        It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this chapter and shall subject the violator to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.32 of the Buellton Municipal Code. (Ord. 00-03 § 5, 2000)

Chapter 19.16 AFFORDABLE HOUSING
19.16.010 Purpose and applicability.
        A.    Intent. This chapter prescribes incentives for the production and preservation of housing for persons and families of low and moderate income in furtherance of the Housing Element of the General Plan and Redevelopment Plan for the Buellton Improvement Project. In addition, the provisions of this chapter are intended to implement statutory requirements governing affordable housing including, but not limited to, inclusionary zoning (California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)), replacement housing (California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(a)), Density Bonuses (California Government Code 65915), and accessory dwelling units (California Government Code Section 65852.2).

        B.     Effectuation. The provisions of this chapter apply to all Residential Projects for which entitlements have not been obtained as of October 12, 2002. For the purpose of Section 19.16.016(D)(3), this chapter shall not apply to residential projects for which entitlements, other than a zoning clearance, have been obtained as of October 12, 2002. Furthermore, the provisions of Section 19.16.016 do not apply to the demolition of structures which have been declared to be a public nuisance or results from an order to abate or correct substandard conditions issued by a government agency having jurisdiction prior to October 12, 2002.

        C.     Conflicts. The requirements set forth in this chapter do not replace other statutes or regulations. In case of conflict, the most restrictive requirement shall govern.

        D.    Exemptions. The requirements set forth in this chapter do not apply to: (1) zoning clearance or administrative approvals (including final development plans) required in connection with entitlement permits for which discretionary approval was granted before October 12, 2002, so long as such actions are incidental to the entitlement permit and conform to the terms and conditions of the discretionary approval; or (2) modifications in entitlement permits for which discretionary approval was granted before October 12, 2002, and do not increase the number of residential dwellings that were previously authorized for construction or demolition. Any modifications in discretionary permits on or after October 12, 2002, that change the dwelling unit count from that which was originally approved, the net change shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 06-10 § 2(J)(2), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.012 Definitions.
        Except where otherwise noted, the definitions appearing in Section 19.16.012 of this chapter apply throughout this title. Capitalization is used to identify defined terms used throughout this chapter and shall have the meanings as set forth below unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

        “Additional Incentives” means such regulatory concessions as specified in California Government Code Sections 65915 (d) and (h) to include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, direct financial assistance, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with a Residential Project, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions that are offered in addition to a Density Bonus. See Section 19.16.018 of this chapter.

        “Affordable Housing Agreement” means a legally binding agreement between a Developer and the city to ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied. The Agreement, among other things, establishes the number and location of Affordable Units, Target Households, production schedule, Retention Period and development standards. See Section 19.16.022(B) of this chapter.

        “Affordable Rent” means the maximum monthly Housing Cost of an Affordable Unit that is reserved for occupancy by a Target Household not exceeding the calculations set forth in Table 1 below.

 

Table 1: Affordable Rent Calculation

Income Category

Housing Cost Formula

Very Low

50 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Lower

60 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12.

Moderate

110 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12.

 

        “Affordable Sales Price” means a sales price at which a Target Household may purchase an Af-fordable Unit and results in a maximum Housing Cost not exceeding the calculations set forth in Table 2 below.

 

Table 2: Affordable Sales Price Calculation

Income Category

Housing Cost Formula

Very Low

50 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Lower

70 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12.

Moderate

110 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 35 percent and divided by 12.

 

        “Affordable Unit” means and is limited to those dwelling units that are required to be rented at an Affordable Rent or sold at an affordable sales price to a Target Household.

        “Agency” means the Buellton Redevelopment Agency established pursuant to Section 2.40.020 of the Buellton Municipal Code.

        “AHOZ Sites” means properties identified in Figure 1 and Table 5 of Section 19.16.013 of this chapter.

        “Area Median Income” means the annual median income for the County of Santa Barbara, adjusted for family size, amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations.

        “Buellton Improvement Project” means and includes the Redevelopment Plan for commercial revitalization, residential rehabilitation, affordable housing and infrastructure improvements for an area encompassing approximately one hundred eighty (180) acres, centered at the intersections of Highway 246 and Avenue of Flags, and lawfully established by the city council pursuant to the authority set forth in the Community Redevelopment Law commencing with Section 33000 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “Certificate of Occupancy” means issuance by the Building and Safety Department, County of Santa Barbara, signifying completion and approval for initial occupancy of a Residential Project.

        “Child Care Facility” means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

        “Conversion” means a change of a residential dwelling to a: (i) condominium, cooperative, or similar form of ownership; or (ii) nonresidential use.

        “Demolition” means the removal of a residential dwelling or termination of occupancy by destruction, reconstruction, consolidation or rehabilitation.

        “Density Bonus” means an increase over the otherwise Maximum Residential Density.

        “Density Bonus Units” mean those residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter that exceed the otherwise Maximum Residential Density for the development site.

        “Developer” means: (i) every person, firm, or corporation (and their successors and assigns) that undertakes a Residential Project, directly or through the services of any employee, agent, independent contractor or otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter: and (ii) each and every subsequent owner of property on which a Residential Project is developed to which the obligations of the Developer shall become applicable. A Developer may also be the fee owner of the property on which the Residential Project is proposed. For purposes of Section 19.16.017 where tenant displacement results from code enforcement initiated by a Local Enforcement Agency. Developer expressly means the fee owner of property on which the enforcement action is initiated.

        “Development Impact Fees” mean fees and charges imposed or controlled by the city which offset the cost of governmental services, public infrastructure or environmental impacts attributable to a Residential Project. Development Impact Fees specifically exclude application and administrative fees related to the processing of Entitlements.

        “Disabled Persons” mean persons with a disability consisting of: (i) a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of a person’s major life activities; or (ii) a record of having or being perceived as having, a physical or mental impairment. It does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance (as defined by Section 102 of the Federal Controlled Substance Act. 21 U.S.C. Sec. 802).

        “Displaced Person” means any person who involuntarily moves from real property as a direct result of the rehabilitation, Demolition or other displacing activity and lawfully Inhabited the property a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the date that application is filed with the city for a land use permit allowing such Conversion or Demolition.

         “Emergency Shelters” mean housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

        “Entitlements” mean all permits, licenses and approvals required under Titles 18 and 19 of the Municipal Code of the city of Buellton allowing the permitted use, subdivision or improvement of real property, including, but not limited to, land use permits, tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. As used herein, building permits and final maps constitute ministerial acts not requiring the exercise of administrative discretion. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, building permits and final maps are expressly excluded from the term “entitlement” and do not activate any of the requirements set forth herein.

        “Equivalent Financial Incentive” means a monetary contribution, based upon a land cost per dwelling unit value, equal to one of the following: (i) a Density Bonus and an Additional Incentive(s); or (ii) a Density Bonus, where an Additional Incentive(s) is not requested or is determined to be unnecessary. See Section 19.16.018 of this chapter.

        “Farm Employee Housing” means housing occupied by employees of a farm with a maximum of thirty-six (36) beds in a group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces.

        “General Plan” means the continuum of goals, objectives, policies and programs for the long-term physical development of the city adopted pursuant to Section 65300 et. seq. of the California Government Code.

        “Gross Income” means the anticipated income of a person or family for the twelve-month period following the date of determination of income, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6914, of the California Code of Regulations. The elements of Gross Income include: (i) wages, salaries, tips, commissions, etc.; (ii) self-employment income from owned non-farm business, including proprietorships and partnerships; (iii) farm self-employment income; (iv) interest, dividends, net rental income, or income from estates or trusts; (v) Social Security or railroad retirement; (vi) Supplemental Security Income, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, or other public assistance or public welfare programs; (vii) retirement, survivor, or disability pensions; and (viii) other sources of income received regularly, including Veterans’ (VA) payments, unemployment compensation, and alimony.

        “Household” means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or two or more unrelated persons, excluding employed servants or paid live-in companions, residing together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. Within this context: (i) the term “family” means two or more individuals, whether or not they are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, who live together in a dwelling as a single housekeeping unit; and (ii) the term “person” means any individual, family, partnership, corporation, or association.

        “Household Size Adjustments” means the maximum Household size on which to determine Household Income and compute Affordable Rent and Sales Price, adjusted for the number of bedrooms in a dwelling. Unless the Residential Project is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations, the Household Size Adjustments set forth in Table 3 shall be used for purposes of this chapter. As an example, and for illustrative purposes only, if an Affordable Unit contains two bedrooms, the computation of Affordable Rent and sales price shall be based on the Gross Income of a three-person Household.

 

Table 3: Housing Size Adjustments

Number of Bedrooms

Maximum Number of Persons

0 (Studio)

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

 

        “Housing Costs” mean the sum of all of the costs associated with the rental, purchase and maintenance of a dwelling unit as defined in Title 25, Section 6920 of the California Code of Regulations. For renter-occupied dwellings, Housing Costs mean the total of monthly payments encompassing rent, fees or service charges assessed by the lessor which are required of all tenants (other than security deposits), a reasonable allowance for utilities, and possessory interest, taxes, or other fees or charges assessed for use of the land and facilities by a public or private entity other than the lessor. For owner-occupied dwellings, Housing Costs mean the total of monthly payments encompassing principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

        “Housing Fund” means the city of Buellton Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 19.16.022(A) of this chapter.

        “Housing In-Lieu Fee” means a fee established pursuant to this chapter as an alternative equivalent action for producing Affordable Units on-site as part of a Residential Project. The Housing In-Lieu Fee for Low and Very Low Income Affordable Units shall correspond to the sum used by the county of Santa Barbara in connection with its inclusionary affordable housing program and applicable to Santa Ynez housing market area, as such sum is periodically adopted and amended from time to time by the county board of supervisors. As of August 1, 2005, the Housing In-Lieu Fee for Low and Very Low Income Affordable Units applicable to the Santa Ynez housing market area is one hundred ten thousand dollars ($110,000.00) for each such unit. The Housing In-Lieu Fee for Moderate Income Affordable Units shall be computed as that sum which is fifty (50) percent of the In-Lieu Fee for Low and Very Low Income Affordable Units. As of August 1, 2005, the Housing In-Lieu Fee for Moderate Income Affordable Units is computed as fifty-five thousand dollars ($55,000.00) for each such unit.

        “Housing Element” means the continuum of housing needs, goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing adopted as part of the city’s general plan pursuant to Section 65580 et. seq., of the California Government Code.

        “Implementation Plan” means the specific goals, objectives, programs, potential projects, estimated expenditures, relationship to the elimination of blight, and implementation of affordable housing requirements within redevelopment project areas adopted by the Agency pursuant to Section 33490 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Inhabited” means a dwelling unit that serves as a place of permanent or customary and usual abode of a person or household who, at the time application is filed with the city for a land use permit subject to the provisions of this chapter, lawfully occupied the premises. A person or household is considered to be in unlawful occupancy if such person or household has been ordered to move by a court of competent jurisdiction or if the occupant’s tenancy has been lawfully terminated by the owner for cause, the tenant has vacated the premises, and the termination was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the requirements of this chapter.

        “Local Enforcement Agency” means any lawfully empowered agent or agency of the city, state or federal government with police power authority to enforce laws relevant to the condition, maintenance and occupancy of residential dwellings.

        “Lower Income” means Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for low income families, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations. The qualifying limits for Lower Income is computed as eighty (80) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size.

        “Maximum Residential Density” means the maximum number of residential units permitted on the basis of the General Plan and the maximum density of the underlying zone district.

        “Moderate Income” means Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed one hundred twenty (120) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations.

        “Net Buildable Area” means the gross area of the properties listed in Figure 1 and Table 5, less those portions of each site that cannot be developed due to physical features (e.g., topography and parcel configuration) or environmental constraints (e.g., flood hazards). Net Buildable Area shall be determined on the basis of field survey data, available GIS data, preliminary grading and drainage plans and similar supporting application materials and specialized studies submitted or performed in connection with applications for Entitlements.

        “Net RHNA Goals” means the RHNA allocation for Target Households as of the start of the planning period (“baseline allocation”), less dwelling units completed between the start of the planning horizon (as determined by operation of state law) and the date of adoption of the current Housing Element of the Buellton General Plan (“pre-adoption adjustment”), adjusted annually on January 1st and thereafter based on actual construction occurring during the previous twelve (12) months (“post-adoption adjustment”). In no event shall the percentage of Very Low Income units be less than forty (40) percent of the total inclusionary units. For purposes of the Housing Element adopted on June 10, 2004, the numeric and proportional allocation of Net RHNA Goals (as of the date of adoption of the Housing Element) is set forth in Table 4 below.

 

Table 4: Net RHNA Goals

Households by Income

Baseline
Allocation

Pre-Adoption Adjustment

Post-Adoption
Adjustment

Adjusted Total

No.

%

Target Households

 

 

 

 

 

Very low

129

-7

To be Determined

136

42%

Lower

91

-7

To be Determined

98

31%

Moderate

88

0

To be Determined

88

27%

Subtotal

 

 

 

322

100%

Above Moderate

228

113

To be Determined

115

 

Total

536

99

To be Determined

437

 

Note: Post-adoption adjustment will be effective as of January 1st of each year based on actual construction occurring during the previous twelve (12) months.

 

        “Non-Restricted Unit” means all units within a Residential Project excluding the Affordable Units.

        “Qualifying Resident” means senior citizens or other persons eligible to reside in Senior Citizen Housing as provided in California Civil Code Sections 51.3 and 51.12, or a mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

        “Residential Project” means and includes one or more groups of projects which entail: (i) constructing or placing any new dwelling unit in a permanent location; (ii) converting a nonresidential building to a residential use; (iii) Substantial Rehabilitation of an existing dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units; (iv) subdivision of land which is planned, designed, or used for residential purposes; or (v) converting or demolishing an existing residential dwelling.

        “Residential Rental Unit” means a dwelling unit (as defined in Section 19.12.020) that is occupied by a person or household other than the property owner and for which any compensation is provided in exchange for the right of occupancy. Residential Rental Unit: (1) excludes recreation vehicles and trailers (other than mobilehomes); and (2) includes hotel and motel guest rooms that are used, rented or occupied as primary residences for thirty (30) or more consecutive days by the same occupant.

        “Retention Period” means the duration of time that the Affordable Housing Agreement remains in effect for Affordable Units under this chapter.

        “RHNA” means the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (“RHNA”) process that establishes goals for new residential dwellings to be attained during the planning horizon of the current adopted Housing Element of the Buellton General Plan.

        “Senior Citizen Housing” means a Residential Project consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” and which otherwise qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and implementing regulations (24 CFR, part 100, subpart E), and as that phrase is used in California Civil Code Section 51.2 and 51.3.

        “Special Needs Housing” means single room occupancy units, congregate care facilities and similar types of special living arrangements for persons and families who possess extraordinary housing needs by reason of economic, social, mental or physical disability.

        “Substantial Rehabilitation” means rehabilitation, the value of which constitutes twenty-five (25) percent of the after rehabilitation value of a dwelling, inclusive of land value.

        “Target Household” means a person or family meeting the income and occupancy criteria set forth in this chapter.

        “Title” means Title 19 of the municipal code of the city of Buellton (commonly known as the “Zoning Ordinance”).

        “Transitional Housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.

        “Unit Type” means the size and amenities of a particular dwelling relative to number of bedrooms, quantity of baths, total square footage and similar distinguishing factors.

        “Very Low Income” means Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very low income families, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations. The qualifying limits for Very Low Income is computed as fifty (50) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size. (Ord. 10-04 § 4, 2010; Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(B)(4), (D)(1), (F)(1), (G)(1), 2006; Ord. 05-05 §§ 2(A), (B), 2005; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.013 Affordable housing overlay zone (“AHOZ”).
        A.    Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all AHOZ Sites identified in Figure 1 and Table 5 below. The list of properties set forth in Figure 1 and Table 5 may be modified from time to time by further amendment of this code.

        B.     Basic Provisions. In addition to (and not as a limitation of) the uses allowed according to the underlying zone district of the properties listed in Figure 1 and Table 5, each such property may be developed as a Residential Project, wholly independent and not constrained by the underlying zone district, subject to the provisions set forth below.

        1.     Base Density. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (B)(8) of this section, AHOZ Sites must be developed to a minimum density of twenty-five (25) units per acre. The computation of the minimum required density shall be based on the Net Buildable Area of the properties identified in Figure 1 and Table 5. Where the computation of the minimum required density results in a fraction of a number, the minimum number of units required shall be rounded to the closest whole number.

        2.     Inclusionary Requirement. Not less than twenty (20) percent of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated dwelling units in Residential Projects undertaken by a Developer (other than the Agency) shall be developed with Affordable Units, and not less than thirty (30) percent of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated dwelling units undertaken by the Agency shall be developed with Affordable Units. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (B)(7) and (8) of this section, all of the Affordable Units required by this subsection shall be developed on-site as part of each Residential Project.

        3.     Affordable Unit Distribution. Affordable Units required under this section shall be allocated among the Target Households in proportion to Net RHNA Goals as set forth in Table 4 of Section 19.16.12, but in no event shall the percentage allocated to Very Low Income be less than forty (40) percent. In addition, at least fifty (50) percent of all Affordable Units developed by the Agency shall be reserved for Very Low Income and the balance shall be allocated to Lower and Moderate Income in proportion to Net RHNA Goals.

        4.     Density Bonus. All Residential Projects to which this section applies shall be granted a Density Bonus of two Non-Restricted Units for each Affordable Unit that is produced or required for a Lower or Very Low Income household, up to a maximum combined density of fifty (50) percent above the base density.

        5.     Illustrative Calculation. By way of example, for illustrative purposes only, where a proposed AHOZ Site consists of one acre of land and is proposed to be developed with a total of twenty (20) dwelling units (and the project is to be undertaken by a private Developer without the Agency’s involvement), the base density, inclusionary requirement, affordable unit distribution and Density Bonus would be calculated as follows:

        a.     Base Density. Twenty (20) units/one acre equals twenty (20) units/acre.

        b.     Inclusionary Requirement. Twenty (20) percent as determined by Table 6.

        c.     Computation of Affordable Units. Twenty (20) percent times twenty (20) total units equals four Affordable Units.

        d.     Distribution of Affordable Units.

        i.      Very Low Income. Four total Affordable Units times forty-two (42) percent per Table 4 equals 1.68 Very Low Income Affordable Units.

        ii.     Lower Income. Four total Affordable Units times thirty-one (31) percent per Table 4 equals 1.24 Lower Income Affordable Units.

        iii.    Moderate Income. Four total Affordable Units times twenty-seven (27) percent per Table 4 equals 1.08 Moderate Income Affordable Units.

        e.     Density Bonus. (1.68 Very Low Income Affordable Units plus 1.24 Lower Income Units) times two equals 5.84 Non-Restricted Units. Rounding to the next whole number equals six units.

        f.      Adjusted Unit Total. Base Density (twenty (20) units) plus Density Bonus (six units) equals twenty-six (26) total units.

        6.     Production Requirement. Except as otherwise provided in subsections (B)(7) and (8) of this section, the Affordable Units required under this section shall be constructed concurrent with the Non-Restricted Units developed as part of the Residential Project. For fractions of Affordable Units, including fractions resulting from construction of less than ten dwellings and fractions of Affordable Units allocated among the Target Households, the Developer may elect, at his or her option, to construct the next higher whole number of Affordable Units or pay a Housing In-Lieu Fee for the fractional amount.

        7.     Equivalent Action. Subject to the provisions of subsection (B)(10) of this section, the city council (at its sole discretion) may allow a Developer to dedicate vacant land in lieu of constructing Affordable Units on-site as part of a Residential Project otherwise required by subsections (B)(2) and (6) of this section. All of the units developed on land donated pursuant to this section shall be Affordable Units distributed among the Target Households pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section.

        8.     Exceptions.

        a.     Minimum Allowable Density. Subject to the provisions of subsection (B)(10) of this section, the minimum required density may be reduced by the city council (at its sole discretion) when: (i) the findings required in Sections 19.08.100(D) (Zoning Clearance), 19.08.110(D) (Conditional Uses), or 19.08.120(F) (Development Plans), as applicable, cannot otherwise be made; or (ii) the Developer requests relief and compensates for the difference between the minimum number of Affordable Units computed pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section compared to the number of Affordable Units computed pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section (hereinafter referred to as the “affordable unit differential”).

        i.      Illustrative Calculation. By way of example, and for illustrative purposes only, where the Net Buildable Area is ten acres, the minimum required density is computed as two hundred fifty (250) units and the inclusionary requirement is computed as fifty (50) dwellings (i.e., ten acres times twenty-five (25) du/acre times twenty (20) percent equals fifty (50) Affordable Units). If a Developer requests that the minimum required density be reduced to two hundred (200) units, then the resulting inclusionary requirement is computed as forty (40) dwellings (i.e., two hundred (200) units times twenty (20) percent equals forty (40) Affordable Units). The affordable unit differential is computed as ten dwellings (i.e., fifty (50) units minus forty (40) units equals ten Affordable Units). Except as provided in subsection (B)(8)(a)(ii) of this section, the affordable unit differential shall be satisfied by construction on-site as part of, and concurrent with development of, a Residential Project.

        ii.     Equivalent Actions. Subject to review and approval by the city council (at its sole discretion), and provided the mandatory findings of subsection (B)(10) of this section can be made, the affordable unit differential may be satisfied by dedication of vacant land or payment of a Housing In-Lieu Fee. Except for fractional units for which an Housing In-Lieu Fee may be paid as provided in subsection (B)(6) of this section, or the dedication of vacant land as provided in subsection (B)(7) of this section, in no event shall the number of Affordable Units that must be developed on-site be less than twenty (20) percent of the total units within a Residential Project.

        b.     Inclusionary Requirement. At the discretion of the Developer, the overall inclusionary requirement specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section may be reduced in exchange for a higher percentage of Lower and Very Low Income Affordable Units. The reduction may be achieved by exchanging Moderate Income Affordable Units for Low and Very Low Income Affordable Units at the following rate of exchange: (i) one and one-half Moderate Income Affordable Units for one Low Income Affordable Unit; and (ii) two Moderate Income Units for one Very Low Income Affordable Unit. Fractions of Affordable Units resulting from such an exchange shall be governed by the provisions of subsection (B)(6) of this section.

        9.     Retention Period. Except to the extent a longer period of time may be required by other provisions of law, all Affordable Units required under this section shall remain available at affordable housing costs to, and occupied by, the Target Households for the longest feasible time, but for not less than the following: (a) fifty-five (55) years for renter-occupied dwelling units; and (b) forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied dwelling units. Under terms and conditions of the Affordable Housing Agreement, the city may permit sale of owner-occupied Affordable Units prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) year period pursuant to an adopted program which protects the city’s investment of moneys from the Housing Trust Fund, including, but not limited to, equity sharing that permits retention by the seller of a portion of sales proceeds based on the length of occupancy. The remainder of the excess proceeds of the sale shall be allocated to the city and deposited in the Housing Trust Fund.

        10.   Mandatory Findings.

        a.     Equivalent actions and exceptions provided in subsections (B)(7) and (8) of this section shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and may only be approved if the city council determines that: (i) the land offered for dedication or the payment of an Housing In-Lieu Fee shall result in production of an equivalent number of required Affordable Units (“equivalent action finding”); (ii) the production of an equivalent number of required Affordable Units is reasonably expected to occur within the planning period of the current adopted Housing Element (“timely production finding”); and (iii) the remaining inventory of AHOZ Sites is sufficient to meet Net RHNA Goals in combination with policy decisions regarding base density, percent of inclusionary housing, distribution of affordable units among target income groups and other housing production programs identified in the Housing Element (“sufficient sites finding”). The equivalent action and timely production findings shall only apply when land is offered for dedication or payment of a Housing In-Lieu Fee is proposed as an alternative to constructing required Affordable Units on-site as part of a Residential Project; the sufficient sites finding shall apply in all cases.

        b.     In the event that the required findings cannot be made, the city council shall take one of the following actions: (i) not approve the Residential Project; (ii) not grant the equivalent action or exception; or (iii) designate additional AHOZ Sites as necessary such that the potential number of dwellings that may be developed for all property with an AHOZ designation, in combination with other housing production programs identified in the Housing Element, is sufficient to meet Net RHNA Goals for target income groups.

        C.     Development Standards. Residential Projects developed under the provisions of this section shall be designed and processed in the time and manner set forth below.

        1.     General Guidelines. The Affordable Units required under this section:

        a.     May either be rental or for-sale dwellings;

        b.     Should be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to Non-Restricted Units;

        c.     May have less square footage and interior amenities to those of Non-Restricted Units in the same Residential Project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing; and

        d.     May be clustered or disbursed within the Residential Project.

        2.     Commercial Priority. AHOZ Sites with frontage upon Avenue of Flags or Highway 246 are expressly subject to General Plan Land Use Element policies that give commercial uses priority over residential. In compliance with these policies, AHOZ Sites with frontage upon Avenue of Flags or Highway 246 are subject to the following development parameters: (i) the Maximum Residential Density may be computed on the basis of the gross area of the AHOZ Site; (ii) the minimum required density, for purposes of subsection (B)(1) of this section and computing inclusionary requirements pursuant to subsection (B)(2) of this section, shall be based on Net Buildable Area of the AHOZ Site, exclusive of the portion of property devoted to or supporting commercial uses (e.g., building space, parking areas, and drive aisles); and (iii) new development shall conform to the development standards prescribed in Land Use Policy L-23 of the General Plan. Exceptions to the development standards set forth in Land Use Policy L-23 of the General Plan may be considered on a case-by-case basis and may only be approved by majority vote of the city council when all of the findings set forth in Land Use Policy L-23 can be made.

        3.     Development Review. All Residential Projects shall comply with adopted community design guidelines of the city, provided such guidelines are not unreasonably imposed as to render a project infeasible. Furthermore, discretionary authority under a development plan or conditional use permit shall not be unreasonably exercised to impose standards or criteria for the purpose of rendering infeasible the development of housing for any and all economic segments of the community as prohibited in Section 65913.2 of the California Government Code.

        4.     Environmental Review. All Residential Projects shall be subject to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. and its implementing regulations), if applicable, and shall adhere to mitigation measures prescribed in the Buellton General Plan and companion environmental impact report, as updated and amended from time to time.

        5.     Application Processing. Applications for development of AHOZ Sites under the provisions of this section shall be processed as follows:

        a.     Zoning Clearance. Residential Projects conforming to the following criteria shall be allowed by zoning clearance under the jurisdiction of the planning director as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.100 of this code: (i) the Residential Project consists of no more than twenty-five (25) units per acre (inclusive of density bonus units) on sites with an underlying zone district of general commercial (CR) or residential multifamily (RM); and (ii) the physical attributes of design conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e. building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city.

        b.     Development Plan Approval. Residential Projects greater than twenty-five (25) units per acre (or do not otherwise qualify for a zoning clearance) on AHOZ Sites with an underlying zone district of CR or RM may be allowed by development plan approval under the jurisdiction of the planning commission as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.120 of the Buellton Municipal Code. The physical attributes of design shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e. building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city except or unless a modification is granted under the provisions of Section 19.08.120(G)(1) of this code.

        c.     Conditional Use Permit. Residential Projects on AHOZ Sites zoned single-family residential (RS), commercial service (CS), open space (OS) or industrial (M) may be allowed by conditional use permit approval under the jurisdiction of the planning commission as provided in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.08.110 of the Buellton Municipal Code. The physical attributes of design shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e. building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.) and adopted community design guidelines of the city except or unless a development plan is processed concurrent with the conditional use permit and a modification is granted under the provisions of Section 19.08.120(G)(1) of this code.

        D.    Miscellaneous Provisions.

        1.     Affordable Housing Agreement. An Affordable Housing Agreement shall be made a condition of land use permit approval for all Residential Projects pursuant to this section. The Affordable Housing Agreement shall: (a) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the Affordable Units will be constructed; and (b) be consistent with Section 19.16.022(B) of this chapter.

        2.     Project Entitlements. Every Entitlement for a Residential Project that is granted under the provisions of this section shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this section, as applicable. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map.

        3.     Requirements for Certificate of Occupancy/Final Inspection. No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for any new dwelling unit in a residential project until the developer has satisfactorily completed the requirements of this section and conditions of approval.

        E.     Variable Limit. The provisions of this section shall apply to all development permit applications which are filed with the city on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 05-05 or subsequently amended for applications filed before the effective data, and shall continue thereafter until: (i) the Net RHNA Goals are achieved; or (ii) approval of Residential Projects on AHOZ Sites reaches a total of one thousand five hundred twenty-nine (1,529) total dwelling units inclusive of density bonuses. The list of properties set forth in Figure 1 and Table 5, as well as the variable limit set forth in this subsection, is anticipated to be modified from time to time by further amendment of this code.

 



 

 

Table 5: List of AHOZ Sites

Map No.

General Location
(All Within the City of Buellton)

No. of Parcels

Site Area (Acres)

Assessor Parcel Numbers

Gross

Net

I

Northeasterly of the northerly terminus of McMurray Road adjacent to the McMurray Industrial Park

2

17.95

17.10

137-090-006
137-090-007

II

Along the west side of Jonata Park Road, north of the intersection of Avenue of Flags and Central Avenue

2

18.17

15.00

099-400-064
099-400-065

III

Northwest and southwest of the intersection of Damassa Road and McMurray Road

2

3.39

3.20

137-170-059
137-170-060

IV

East of McMurray Road and north of the easterly prolongation of Glennora Way

1

2.16

1.60

137-090-046

V

Northeast corner of La Lata Drive and Hwy 246

2

1.57

.080

099-590-042
099-590-043

VII

Southeast of the intersection of Hwy 246 and Avenue of Flags

6

2.5

1.15

137-190-013
137-190-017
137-190-024
137-190-026
137-190-032
137-190-033

IX

Southeasterly of the southerly terminus of McMurray Road behind and adjacent to the Buellton Town Center

4

6.72

6.00

137-200-077
137-200-078
137-200-087
137-200-094

X

North of the easterly terminus of Second Street

1

3.63

3.00

137-170-053

XI

Along the easterly side of McMurray Road at the intersection of Damassa Road

1

4.04

4.20

137-170-650

Notes:

 

1.

Numeric listing of AHOZ Sites above excludes potential candidates identified in the General Plan Land Use and Housing Elements that have not been designated for purposes of this section. The gap in numbering is intentional.

 

2.

Net Acres is based on the definition of Net Buildable Area and is derived from Table 2-8B of the final EIR for the General Plan Update – Land Use and Circulation Elements, August 4, 2005. Figures shown are estimated; actual Net Buildable Area will be determined at the time of Entitlements. In addition, the Net Acres for AHOZ Sites V and VII have been further reduced by fifty (50) percent to account for the commercial priority provisions of Section 19.16.013(C)(2).

 

(Ord. 06-10 § 2(J)(1), 2006; Ord. 05-05 § 2(C), 2005)

 

19.16.014 Inclusionary zoning.
        A.    Applicability. Except as provided below, the provisions of this section apply to all Residential Projects resulting in the creation of new housing regardless of the number or location of dwelling units or lots that are constructed, placed, converted, substantially rehabilitated or subdivided on a single parcel of record or as part of a single project. The following Residential Projects are expressly exempt from the requirements of this section:

        1.     Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) constructed by a Developer (other than the Agency) shall be exempt from the inclusionary housing requirements of this section provided that such dwellings are affirmatively marketed to income qualifying tenants under the Federal Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Program. The requirements for affirmative marketing shall be deemed satisfied by one of the following means: (a) the Developer occupies the ADU with a family member; or (b) the Developer shall, in addition to other means of advertising as determined at the Developer’s sole discretion, provide written notice to the Santa Barbara County housing authority and Santa Ynez Valley People Helping People each time the ADU becomes vacant and available for occupancy. The requirement for affirmative marketing shall be evidenced by deed restriction on the parcel recorded with the county of Santa Barbara prior to and as condition precedent to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and shall remain in full force and effect until the ADU is no longer used or occupied. The form and content of the deed restriction shall be determined by the city.

        2.     Special Needs Housing. Special needs housing (as defined in Section 19.16.012) constructed by a Developer (other than the Agency) shall be exempt from the inclusionary requirements of this section. Special needs housing developed by the Agency shall be governed by applicable redevelopment statutes.

        B.     Basic Provisions. As summarized in Table 6: (i) at least thirty (30) percent of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated dwelling units in Residential Projects undertaken by the Agency shall be developed with Affordable Units; and (ii) at least fifteen (15) percent of all new and Substantially Rehabilitated dwelling units in Residential Projects undertaken by a Developer (other than the Agency) shall be developed with Affordable Units. The Affordable Units required under this section shall be constructed concurrent with the Non-Restricted Units developed as part of the Residential Project. For fractions of Affordable Units, including fractions resulting from construction of less than ten dwellings, the Developer may elect, at his or her option, to construct the next higher whole number of Affordable Units, perform an equivalency action alternative or pay the In-Lieu Housing Fee specified below.

        1.     Production Alternatives. As an alternative to constructing Affordable Units as part of a Residential Project, a Developer may satisfy the inclusionary requirements of this section by one of the following means:

        a.     Equivalent Action. Subject to review and approval by the city council, a Developer may propose an alternative equivalent action including, but not limited to: (i) dedication of vacant land; (ii) construction of Affordable Units on another site; (iii) acquisition and enforcement of rental/sales price restrictions on existing standard dwelling units; or (iv) Substantial Rehabilitation of existing substandard dwellings. Any such proposal shall show how the alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than construction of Affordable Units on-site as part of the Residential Project or payment of a Housing In-Lieu Fee. Such proposals may be approved if the city council determines that such alternative: (i) is necessary due to economic hardship or physical constraints that render on-site construction infeasible; and (ii) will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than payment of the Housing In-Lieu Fee.

        b.     Housing In-Lieu Fee. For Residential Projects located within redevelopment project areas, a Developer, at his or her option, may satisfy the inclusionary requirements of this section by payment of an In-Lieu Housing Fee. The Housing In-Lieu Fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for the Residential Project. For Residential Projects located within redevelopment project areas under the jurisdiction of the Agency, a Developer may pay a Housing In-Lieu Fee as a means of satisfying the inclusionary requirements of this section only if approved at the sole discretion by the city council. Such requests shall be considered on a case by case basis and may only be approved if the city council determines that such payment: (i) is necessary due to economic hardship or physical constraints that render on-site construction infeasible; and (ii) will further the affordable housing obligations of the Agency within redevelopment project areas.

        2.     Target Households. Affordable Units required under this section shall be allocated among the Target Households in proportion to Net RHNA Goals as set forth in Table 4 of Section 19.16.012, but in no event shall the percentage allocated to Very Low Income be less than forty (40) percent. In addition, at least fifty (50) percent of all Affordable Units developed by the Agency shall be reserved for Very Low Income and the balance shall be allocated to Lower and Moderate Income in proportion to Net RHNA Goals. (Note: Section 19.16.013(B)(5) provides an illustration of how proportionality is calculated.)

        3.     Production Schedule. For Affordable Units that are constructed as part of a Residential Project, such dwellings shall be completed and occupied concurrent with the Non-Restricted Units. Where the requirements of this section are satisfied either through Equivalent Action or the payment of Housing In-Lieu Fees, the time period for compliance shall be governed by the city’s Housing Element and Agency’s Implementation Plan, but in no event longer than ten years from the date of approval of the Residential Project except as allowed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)(4).

        4.     Retention Period. Except to the extent a longer period of time may be required by other provisions of law, all Affordable Units required under this section shall remain available at affordable Housing Costs to, and occupied by, the Target Households for the longest feasible time, but for not less than the following: (i) fifty-five (55) years for renter-occupied dwelling units; and (ii) forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied dwelling units. Under terms and conditions of the Affordable Housing Agreement, the city may permit sale of owner-occupied Affordable Units prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45)-year period pursuant to an adopted program which protects the city’s investment of moneys from the Housing Trust Fund, including, but not limited to, equity sharing which that permits retention by the seller of a portion of sales proceeds based on the length of occupancy. The remainder of the excess proceeds of the sale shall be allocated to the city and deposited in the Housing Trust Fund.

        5.     Density Bonus. All Residential Projects to which this section applies shall be granted a Density Bonus of two Non-Restricted Units for each Affordable Unit that is produced or required for a Lower or Very Low Income Household, up to a maximum combined density (inclusive of Density Bonus Units) of: (i) fifty (50) percent above the base density for property zoned multifamily residential (RM): and (ii) twenty-five (25) units per acre for property zoned general commercial (CR). To further induce the production of Affordable Units, and subject to development plan approval under the provisions of Section 19.02.120(E)(2), an Additional Incentive for multifamily dwellings on property zoned multifamily residential (RM) may be granted pursuant to Section 19.16.018(B)(1)(a).

        C.     Development Standards. The Affordable Units required under this section may either be rental or for-sale dwellings. When constructed as part of a Residential Project, the Affordable Units shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to Non-Restricted Units. The square footage of Affordable Units and interior features in Affordable Units may not be the same as or equivalent to those in Non-Restricted Units in the same Residential Project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. Affordable Units shall be dispersed throughout the Residential Project or, subject to the approval of a development plan as provided in Section 19.08.120 of this title, may be clustered within the Residential Project when this furthers affordable housing opportunities.

        D.    Miscellaneous Provisions.

        1.     Affordable Housing Agreement. An Affordable Housing Agreement shall be made a condition of land use permit approval for all Residential Projects pursuant to this section. The Affordable Housing Agreement shall: (i) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the Affordable Units will be constructed; and (ii) be consistent with Section 19.16.022(B) of this chapter.

        2.     Project Entitlements. Every Entitlement for a Residential Project that is subject to the provisions of this chapter shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this section, as applicable. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map.

        3.     Requirements for Certificate of Occupancy/Final Inspection. No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued, final inspection approved or release of utilities authorized for any new dwelling unit in a Residential Project until the Developer has satisfactorily completed the requirements of this section (e.g., on-site construction of Affordable Units, alternative equivalent action(s) or payment of the Housing In-Lieu Fee).

 

Table 6: Inclusionary Zoning Basic Provisions

 

Developer

Agency

Inclusionary Percent

15%

30%

Target Households

40% Very Low

50% Very Low

60% Lower and Moderate*

50% Lower and Moderate*

Production Schedule

On-Site Construction: Concurrent with Construction of Non-Restricted Units

Equivalent Action or Housing In-Lieu Fees: 10 Years

Retention Period

Renter-Occupied Dwellings: 55 Years

Owner-Occupied Dwellings: 45 Years

*The distribution between the Lower and Moderate Income categories shall be based on the percentage which these categories represent of total housing needs as identified in the Housing Element according to the following formula:

 

Lower Income Percentage = Lower Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

 

Moderate Income Percentage = Moderate Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

 

Housing needs, for the purpose of computing the distribution of units between income categories, consists of the numeric housing production goals assigned to each income group as determined through the Regional Housing Needs Assessment process embodied in the Housing Element as shown in Table 4 in Section 19.16.012.

 

(Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(B)(5), (D)(2)-(5), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.016 Replacement housing.
        A.    Applicability. Except as provided below, the provisions of this section apply to all Residential Projects resulting in the Conversion or Demolition of existing housing Inhabited by Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income Households, regardless of the number or location of dwelling units that are destroyed, converted or removed on or from a single parcel of record or as part of a single project. The following Residential Projects are expressly exempt from the requirements of this section:

        1.     Owner-Occupied Dwellings. The Conversion or Demolition of a residential structure which is: (i) owned and occupied by the Developer a minimum of ninety (90) consecutive days prior to the date an application is filed with the city for a land use permit; and (ii) is not destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency.

        2.     Public Nuisances. The Demolition of any residential structure which: (i) has been declared to be a public nuisance under the provisions of Division 13 (commencing with Section 17000) of the Health and Safety Code, or any local ordinance enacted pursuant to those provisions; (ii) results from an order to abate or correct substandard conditions issued by a government agency having jurisdiction; (iii) is not destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency; and (iv) has not been occupied by a Target Household for a period of ninety (90) or more consecutive days as of the date of declaration of a public nuisance.

        3.     Nonconforming Uses. The Conversion or Demolition of a residential structure that: (i) constitutes a nonconforming use; and (ii) is not destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency. For purposes of this section, nonconforming uses include motels and hotels with guestrooms that are used, rented or occupied as primary residences; provided, however, that the replacement housing requirements of this chapter expressly apply to the Demolition of each motel or hotel guestroom that has been occupied by a Target Household for a period of ninety (90) or more consecutive days as of the date on which Entitlements or zoning clearances have been obtained.

        B.     Basic Provision. The Conversion or Demolition of existing residential dwelling units Inhabited by persons and families of Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income shall not be authorized unless provision has been made for the replacement of those dwelling units with Affordable Units. Where Conversion or Demolition is undertaken in conjunction with a Residential Project in which new dwelling units are developed, replacement Affordable Units shall be constructed on the site of the Residential Project and occupied concurrent with the Non-Restricted Units.

        1.     Production Alternatives. As an alternative to constructing Affordable Units as part of a Residential Project in which new dwelling units are created, or where the Conversion or Demolition is not undertaken in conjunction with a new Residential Project, a Developer may satisfy the replacement housing requirements of this section by one of the following means:

        a.     Equivalent Action. Subject to review and approval by the city council, a Developer may propose an alternative equivalent action including, but not limited to, (i) dedication of vacant land; (ii) construction of Affordable Units on another site; (iii) acquisition and enforcement of rental/sales price restrictions on existing standard dwelling units; or (iv) Substantial Rehabilitation of existing substandard dwellings. Any such proposal shall show how the alternative will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than construction of Affordable Units on-site as part of the Residential Project or payment of a Housing In-Lieu Fee. Such proposals may be approved if the city council determines that such alternative: (i) is necessary due to economic hardship or physical constraints that render on-site construction infeasible; and (ii) will further affordable housing opportunities in the city to an equal or greater extent than payment of the Housing In-Lieu Fee.

        b.     Housing In-Lieu Fee. For Residential Projects located within the corporate limits of the city, outside of redevelopment project areas, a Developer, at his or her option, may satisfy the replacement housing requirements of this section by payment of an In-Lieu Housing Fee. The Housing In-Lieu Fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit for the Residential Project. In the event that no new development is proposed in connection with Conversion or Demolition of Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income dwellings: (i) the Housing In-Lieu Fee may be deferred until a building permit is required for the property; and (ii) the Developer and owner, if different, shall execute a secured building agreement recorded against the property, assuring payment of the Housing In-Lieu Fee at the time of issuance of any subsequent building permit. For Residential Projects located within redevelopment project areas under the jurisdiction of the Agency, a Developer may pay a Housing In-Lieu Fee as a means of satisfying the replacement requirements of this section only if approved at the sole discretion by the city council. Such requests shall be considered on a case by case basis and may only be approved if the city council determines that such payment: (i) is necessary due to economic hardship or physical constraints that render on-site construction infeasible; and (ii) will further the affordable housing obligations of the Agency within redevelopment project areas.

        2.     Target Households. All replacement dwelling units shall be developed as Affordable Units and shall be available to persons and families in the same or a Lower Income category (Very Low, Lower, or Moderate), as the persons and families displaced from those destroyed or removed units. The Developer shall bear the burden of proving the status of occupancy at the time application is filed with the city for a land use permit allowing such Conversion or Demolition. Data shall be obtained and verified by such methods as may be necessary and reasonable to ensure full, true and complete information from which to base determinations in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 19.16.022(C) of this chapter. In the absence of such data, or where occupancy cannot be established at the time of Conversion or Demolition: (i) all displaced dwellings shall be deemed Inhabited by Target Households; and (ii) all replacement Affordable Units shall be in proportion to the needs identified in the city’s Housing Element for Very Low, Lower and Moderate Income.

        3.     Production Schedule. Where Conversion or Demolition is undertaken in conjunction with a Residential Project in which new dwelling units are developed and the replacement Affordable Units are constructed on the site of the Residential Project, such dwellings shall be completed and occupied concurrent with the Non-Restricted Units. Where the requirements of this section are satisfied either through Equivalent Action or the payment of Housing In-Lieu Fees, the time period for compliance shall be governed by the city’s Housing Element and Agency’s implementation plan, but in no event longer than ten years from the date of approval of the Residential Project except as allowed pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)(4). In all cases where dwellings inhabited by Very Low, Lower and Moderate Income Households are destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency, replacement Affordable Units shall be completed and occupied by Target Households within four years of such destruction or removal.

        4.     Retention Period. Except to the extent a longer period of time may be required by other provisions of law, all Affordable Units required under this section shall remain available at affordable housing costs to, and occupied by, the Target Households for the longest feasible time, but for not less than the following: (i) fifty-five (55) years for renter-occupied dwelling units; and (ii) forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied dwelling units. Under terms and conditions of the Affordable Housing Agreement, the city may permit sale of owner-occupied Affordable Units prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) year period pursuant to an adopted program which protects the city’s investment of moneys from the Housing Trust Fund, including, but not limited to, equity sharing which that permits retention by the seller of a portion of sales proceeds based on the length of occupancy. The remainder of the excess proceeds of the sale shall be allocated to the city and deposited in the Housing Trust Fund.

        5.     Inclusionary Offset. Affordable Units required under Section 19.16.014 may offset replacement housing requirements on a 2:1 basis (i.e., a reduction of two replacement units for each inclusionary unit) subject to the following provisions:

        a.     The inclusionary housing offset shall apply only to inclusionary requirements that are imposed on the same parcel of record as that on which replacement units also are required;

        b.     The units which are demolished or converted (and for which the replacement units are required under this section) must not otherwise be governed by affordable housing covenants that impose rent or occupancy restrictions for a minimum of ten years;

        c.     In the event that a demolished or converted unit dwelling is deed restricted with rent or occupancy restrictions for no fewer than ten years, replacement requirements shall be in addition to, and not offset by, inclusionary units; and

        d.     Replacement and inclusionary housing requirements stipulated under redevelopment law shall govern projects financed, in whole or in part, by the Agency.

        C.     Development Standards. The Affordable Units required under this section may either be rental or for-sale dwellings. Where Conversion or Demolition is undertaken in conjunction with a Residential Project in which new dwelling units are developed, and replacement Affordable Units are constructed on the site of the Residential Project, the Affordable Units shall be developed in accordance with the standards specified in Section 19.16.014(C) of this chapter. All replacement dwellings developed or constructed pursuant to this section shall be decent, safe and sanitary and shall contain at least the same number of bedrooms and other living areas as the dwelling unit destroyed or removed.

        D.    Miscellaneous.

        1.     Affordable Housing Agreement. An Affordable Housing Agreement shall be made a condition of land use permit approval for all Residential Projects pursuant to this section. The Affordable Housing Agreement shall: (i) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the Affordable Units will be constructed; and (ii) be consistent with Section 19.16.022(B) of this chapter.

        2.     Project Entitlements. Every Entitlement for a Residential Project that is subject to the provisions of this chapter shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this section, as applicable. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map.

        3.     Requirements for Permit Issuance. The Conversion or Demolition of existing housing shall be allowed in all zone districts subject to: (i) a zoning clearance as provided in Section 19.08.100 of this title; and (ii) adherence to the terms and conditions of this section. No Demolition permit shall be issued and no land use approval shall be granted for any Residential Project involving the Conversion or Demolition of any residential dwelling until the Developer has satisfactorily completed the requirements of this section (e.g., on-site construction of Affordable Units, alternative equivalent action(s) or payment of the Housing In-Lieu Fee).

 

 

Table 7: Replacement Housing Basic Provisions

 

Within Redevelopment Project Area

Outside Redevelopment Project Area

 

Developer

Agency

Developer

Agency

Project Exemptions

Owner-Occupied Public Nuisances Non-Conform Uses

None

Owner-Occupied Public Nuisances Non-Conform Uses

None

Target

Occupancy Known: Same as Displaced Households

Households

Occupancy Unknown: Proportionate to Housing Elements Needs*

 

 

Production

Developer: 10 years

Schedule

Agency: 4 years

Retention

Renter-Occupied Dwellings: 55 Years

Period

Owner-Occupied Dwellings: 45 Years

*The distribution between the Lower and Moderate Income categories shall be based on the percentage which these categories represent of total housing needs as identified in the Housing Element according to the following formula:

 

Lower Income Percentage

= Lower Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

 

 

Moderate Income Percentage

= Moderate Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

 

(Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(D)(6), (7), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.017 Relocation assistance and advisory services.
        A.    Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all Residential Projects resulting in the Conversion or Demolition of a Residential Rental Unit regardless of: (i) the number or location of dwelling units that are destroyed, converted or removed on or from a single parcel of record or as part of a single project; (ii) whether the dwelling units are occupied by Target Households or persons or families who do not otherwise qualify as being Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income; (iii) whether the Conversion or Demolition results from code enforcement initiated by a Local Enforcement Agency or voluntary acts of a Developer; or (iv) whether the Conversion or Demolition is otherwise exempt from the replacement housing provisions of Section 19.16.016.

        B.     Basic Provisions. Any tenant who is displaced or subject to displacement from a Residential Rental Unit as a result of the following actions shall be entitled to receive relocation benefits from the Developer as specified in this section: (i) an order to vacate or an order requiring the vacation of a Residential Rental Unit by a Local Enforcement Agency as a result of a violation so extensive and of such a nature that the immediate health and safety of the residents is endangered; or (ii) a notice to vacate issued by a Developer in conjunction with a Residential Project.

        1.     Timing of Payments. The relocation benefits required by this section shall be paid by the Developer or designated agent to the tenant within ten days after the date that the order to vacate is first mailed to the tenant and posted on the premises, or at least twenty (20) days prior to the vacation date set forth in the order to vacate, whichever occurs later. If there are fewer than ten days between the first posting and mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date, the relocation benefits shall be paid by the Developer or designated agent to the tenant within twenty-four (24) hours after the notice is posted and mailed. The Local Enforcement Agency shall attempt to provide telephonic or written notice to the owner to notify the owner that the benefits are payable immediately. Failure to provide the notice as specified in this section shall not relieve the Developer of any obligations imposed by this section.

        2.     Noticing Requirements. If a tenant is entitled to relocation benefits pursuant to this section, the Developer shall provide either telephonic or written notice to the tenant of his or her entitlement to the benefits. Written notice may be satisfied by posting a bilingual (English/Spanish) written notice on the premises stating that tenants may be entitled to relocation benefits. Any order by a Local Enforcement Agency that requires a tenant’s displacement and is issued to an owner, designated agent, or tenant, shall be accompanied by a summary of the provisions of this section. Failure to provide a summary shall not relieve any person of the obligations imposed by this section.

        3.     Relocation Benefits. A relocation payment shall be made available by the Developer or designated agent to the tenant in each residential unit and shall be a sum equal to the greater of: (i) two times the actual monthly rent; or (ii) six times the monthly difference between the Affordable Housing Price (rent) and the current fair market rent published by the Santa Barbara County housing authority in conjunction with the Federal Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments Program (determined by the Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 1437f of Title 42 of the United States Code). In addition, the relocation payment shall include an amount, as determined by the Local Enforcement Agency, sufficient for utility service deposits. The relocation benefits shall be paid by the owner or designated agent in addition to the return, as required by law, of any security deposits held by the owner. The relocation benefits shall be payable on a per residential unit basis.

        a.     Penalty for Noncompliance. Any Developer or designated agent who does not make timely payment as specified in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be liable to the tenant for an amount equal to one and one-half times the relocation benefits payable pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section. The foregoing penalty shall not apply when relocation benefits are payable fewer than ten days after the date the order to vacate is first mailed and posted on the premises, if the Developer or designated agent makes the payment no later than ten days after the order is first mailed and posted.

        b.     Exceptions. No relocation benefits pursuant to this section shall be required under the following circumstances: (i) any tenant who has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving rise to the order to vacate, nor shall any relocation benefits be payable to a tenant if any guest or invitee of the tenant has caused or substantially contributed to the condition giving rise to the order to vacate; or (ii) the unit or structure became unsafe or hazardous as the result of a fire, flood, earthquake, or other event beyond the control of the owner or the designated agent and the Developer or designated agent did not cause or contribute to the condition. Determinations as to whether either of the foregoing applies shall be vested with the Local Enforcement Agency and shall be rendered at the same time that the order to vacate the tenants is made.

        c.     Appeals. A Developer or designated agent shall have the right to appeal determinations of the Local Enforcement Agency relative to the payment of relocation benefits under the provisions of Section 19.16.022(D). If such an appeal is filed, the Developer shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the appeal and justify a reduction, adjustment or waiver of relocation payments.

        C.     Elective Payments. If the Developer or designated agent fails, neglects, or refuses to pay relocation payments to a displaced tenant or a tenant subject to displacement, except in the situations described in subsection (B)(3)(b) of this section, the Local Enforcement Agency may advance relocation payments on the Developer’s behalf. If the Local Enforcement Agency, at its sole discretion, offers to advance relocation payments as provided in subsection B of this section, the Local Enforcement Agency shall be entitled to recover from the Developer any amount paid to a tenant except payments made pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section. The Local Enforcement Agency shall also be entitled to recover from the Developer or designated agent an additional amount equal to the sum of one-half the amount so paid, but not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), as a penalty for failure to make timely payment to the displaced tenant, and the Local Enforcement Agency’s actual costs, including direct and indirect costs, of administering the provision of benefits to the displaced tenant.

        1.     Cost Recovery. Any amounts paid by the Local Enforcement Agency, except pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section, and any applicable penalties and actual costs may also be placed as a lien against the property by the Local Enforcement Agency by recording the lien in the recorder’s office of the county of Santa Barbara. Prior to instituting any action to collect from the Developer or designated agent relocation benefits paid pursuant to this section, or to impose a lien therefor, send to the Developer or designated agent by first-class mail, postage prepaid, at the owner’s address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, an itemized accounting of all benefits paid by the Local Enforcement Agency to the Developer’s tenants, and any penalties or costs the Local Enforcement Agency is seeking to recover. If the Developer or designated agent contends that not all of the benefits are chargeable to the Developer or designated agent because the recipients were not displaced tenants, no benefits were payable pursuant to subsection (B)(3)(b) of this section, or on other grounds, the Developer or designated agent shall submit a written appeal to the city within twenty (20) days after receipt by the owner or designated agent of the itemized accounting. The appeal shall be filed and processed in the time and manner stipulated in Section 19.16.022(D). The final decision of the local appellate body shall be subject to Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the Developer fails to obtain a more favorable decision than that set forth in the itemized accounting, the Developer or designated agent shall be liable to the Local Enforcement Agency for the costs of the administrative hearing and appeal, not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The failure to receive the itemized accounting shall not relieve the Developer of any obligation to reimburse the Local Enforcement Agency.

        2.     Nonreimbursable Payments. If there are fewer than ten days between the first posting and mailing of the order to vacate and the vacation date as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, and if the Local Enforcement Agency advances relocation benefits to any tenants prior to the expiration of the ten-day period, the Developer shall not be required to reimburse the Local Enforcement Agency for a charge identified on the itemized accounting described in subsection (C)(1) of this section, if the Developer contests the charge within thirty (30) days after the itemized accounting is mailed to the Developer or designated agent pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section. The Developer or designated agent shall pay the charge that was the subject of the appeal pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section within thirty (30) days after an adverse decision by the city on the appeal is mailed to the Developer.

        3.     Optional Benefits. In the situations described in subsection (B)(3)(b) of this section, the Local Enforcement Agency, at its sole discretion, may pay relocation payments to the tenants of units within a multi-unit structure who did not cause or substantially contribute to the uninhabitable condition.

        4.     Voluntary Payments. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the Local Enforcement Agency to pay any relocation benefits to any tenant, or assume any obligation, requirement, or duty of the Developer pursuant to this section.

        D.    Abatement of Substandard Housing Conditions. A tenant shall not be required to move until proper notice has been given and relocation payments have been made pursuant to this section, except or unless the conditions of the property are so severe as to pose an immediate and serious threat to the health or safety of the occupants, in which case: (1) the Local Enforcement Agency may suspend the requirement for notice and payment of relocation assistance prior to displacement; (2) the property shall be vacated in the time and manner provided by law; and (3) prior to displacement of the occupants, the Local Enforcement Agency shall contact the Santa Barbara County housing authority (SBCHA) and Santa Ynez Valley People Helping People regarding the impending displacement, request that those agencies provide a preference for the occupants for subsidized housing, and provide the occupants with a referral to the SBCHA and People Helping People. In the event that the property must be vacated before the notice and relocation payment requirements are satisfied, the Developer shall remain responsible for payment of relocation assistance after the tenants have been displaced. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(G)(2), 2006)

 

19.16.018 Density bonus.
        A.    Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all Residential Projects resulting in the creation of new housing regardless of the number or location of dwelling units or lots that are constructed, placed, converted, substantially rehabilitated or subdivided on a single parcel of record or as part of a single project.

        B.     Basic Provision. The city shall grant a Density Bonus to a Developer of a Residential Project, who agrees to provide at least: (i) ten percent of the total units of a Residential Project as Affordable Units for Lower Income Households; (ii) five percent of the total units of a Residential Project as Affordable Units for Very Low Income Households; (iii) one hundred (100) percent of the total dwelling units of a Residential Project as Affordable Units for Qualifying Residents; (iv) ten percent of the total units of a common interest Residential Project, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, in which the Affordable Units are offered for sale to Moderate Income Households; or (v) one acre of donated land meeting the requirements, criteria and limitations of Government Code Section 65915(h).

        1.     Density Bonus Calculation. The Density Bonus for which a Developer is entitled shall be determined according to the percentage that Affordable Units constitute of the total Residential Project with adjustments according to Target Household as set forth in Table 7. When calculating the number of permitted Density Bonus Units: (i) any fraction of units (including fractions resulting from construction of less than five dwellings) shall be rounded up to the next whole integer; (ii) the total Residential Project on which the percentage of Affordable Units is determined shall not include the Density Bonus Units; and (iii) the redevelopment and inclusionary incentives prescribed in subsections (B)(1)(e) and (f) of this section shall not be additive, rather, they shall be in place of the basic Density Bonus calculation. Except at the sole discretion of the Developer, Density Bonus Units shall be Non-Restricted Units.

 

 

Table 8: Density Bonus Calculations

Affordable Units as a Percent of the Total Residential Project

Required Density
Bonus1

Minimum No. of
Additional Incentives

Land
Donation

On-Site Construction

Column No.2

Col 1
Very Low Income

Col 2
Very Low Income

Col 3
Low
Income

Col 4 Moderate Income3

Col 5 Qualifying Resident

1

2

3

4

5

 

 

 

10%

 

5%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

11%

 

6%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

12%

 

7%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

13%

 

8%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

14%

 

9%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

15%

 

10%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

16%

 

11%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

17%

 

12%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

18%

 

13%

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

19%

 

14%

 

 

 

1

 

10%

 

 

20%

 

15%

2

 

 

2

 

11%

 

 

21%

 

16%

2

 

 

2

 

12%

 

 

22%

 

17%

2

 

 

2

 

13%

 

 

23%

 

18%

2

 

 

2

 

14%

 

 

24%

 

19%

2

 

 

2

 

15%

5%

10%

25%

100%

20%

3

1

1

2

 

16%

 

 

 

 

21%

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

11%

 

 

21.5%

 

 

1

 

 

17%

 

 

 

 

22%

3

 

 

 

 

 

6%

 

 

 

22.5%

 

1

 

 

 

18%

 

12%

 

 

23%

3

 

1

 

 

19%

 

 

 

 

24%

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

13%

 

 

24.5%

 

 

1

 

 

20%

7%

 

 

 

25%

3

1

 

 

 

21%

 

14%

 

 

26%

3

 

1

 

 

22%

 

 

 

 

27%

3

 

 

 

 

 

8%

15%

 

 

27.5%

 

1

1

 

 

23%

 

 

 

 

28%

3

 

 

 

 

24%

 

 

 

 

29%

3

 

 

 

 

25%

9%

 

 

 

30%

3

1

 

 

 

 

 

17%

 

 

30.5%

 

 

1

 

 

26%

 

 

 

 

31%

3

 

 

 

 

27%

 

18%

 

 

32%

3

 

1

 

 

 

10%

 

 

 

32.5%

 

2

 

 

 

28%

 

 

 

 

33%

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

10%

 

 

33.5%

 

 

1

 

 

29%

 

 

 

 

34%

3

 

 

 

 

30%

11%

20%

 

 

35%

3

2

2

 

 

 

15%

30%

30%

 

 

 

3

3

3

 

Footnotes:

1. The actual number of Density Bonus Units for a specific Residential Project is determined according to the following formula: Density Bonus Units = Required Density Bonus x Maximum Residential Density

2. Column No. corresponds to the columns under the heading “Affordable Units as a Percent of the Total Residential Project.”

3. Common interest development only.

 

        a.     Additional Incentive(s). Upon the written request of a Developer, the city shall provide Additional Incentive(s) in accordance with Table 7 unless the city makes a written finding that the Additional Incentive(s) is/are not: (i) required to provide Affordable Units; or (ii) would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety, the physical environment or historical resource that cannot otherwise be mitigated without rendering the Residential Project infeasible. The need for incentives will vary for different Residential Projects and shall be determined on a case-by-case basis as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section. The Additional Incentive(s) may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: (i) a reduction of site development standards including, but not limited to, lot sizes and/or dimensions, setbacks, open space, lot coverage, building height, structural separation, street widths and architectural design; (ii) a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code; (iii) allowing the Residential Project to include nonresidential uses and/or allowing the Residential Project within a nonresidential zone if the mix of land uses are deemed compatible with the Residential Project and necessary to achieve economic feasibility; (iv) other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the Developer or the city which result in identifiable cost reductions or avoidance; (v) waived, reduced, or deferred planning, plan check, construction permit, and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, or traffic fees); and/or (vi) direct financial assistance in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on or off site improvements, land or construction costs. In the case of waiver or modification of zoning standards, the written request submitted by a Developer shall be accompanied with supporting evidence showing that: (i) such waivers or modifications are necessary to make the Residential Project economically feasible; and (ii) application of the development standard will have the effect of precluding construction of the Residential Project with the Density Bonus authorized under this section.

        b.     Off-Street Parking Requirements. Upon the request of a Developer, off-street parking requirements for a Residential Project shall be reduced to the following maximums: (i) for dwelling units with zero to one bedrooms—one onsite parking space for each such dwelling; (ii) for dwelling units with two to three bedrooms—two onsite parking spaces for each such dwelling; and (iii) for dwelling units with four or more bedrooms—two and one-half parking spaces for each such dwelling. If the total number of parking spaces required for a Residential Project is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subdivision, a Residential Project may provide onsite parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. Furthermore, the reduced parking requirement: (i) shall only apply to Residential Projects which receive a Density Bonus under this section; (ii) must be specifically requested by a Developer; and (iii) is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the granting of Additional Incentives as provided in subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section.

        c.     Child Care Facilities. Unless the city council finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate Child Care Facilities, the city shall grant the following special incentives when a Child Care Facility is proposed as part of a Residential Project for which a Density Bonus is granted under the provisions of this section, and such facility will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the Residential Project: (i) an additional Density Bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the Child Care Facility; or (ii) an Additional Incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the Child Care Facility. In exchange for these special incentives, the following conditions shall be imposed upon the Residential Project: (i) the Child Care Facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the Retention Period for the Density Bonus Units; and (ii) enrollment at the Child Care Facility shall be allocated among the Target Households in proportion to occupancy and reservation of Affordable Units within the Residential Project.

        d.     Condominium Conversions. Where a Residential Project consists of converting apartments to condominiums, and the Developer agrees to provide at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total condominiums as Affordable Units for Lower or Moderate Income Households, or fifteen (15) percent of the total condominiums as Affordable Units for Lower Income Households, and agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred in processing the request, the city shall: (i) grant a Density Bonus of twenty-five (25) percent over the number of existing apartments; or (ii) provide an Equivalent Financial Incentive. A Developer, at its discretion, may submit a preliminary proposal in advance of formal entitlement and subdivision applications. In such event, the city shall process the request as provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums, provided, further that: (i) the city may place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a Density Bonus or Equivalent Financial Incentive as it finds appropriate; and (ii) a Developer shall not be eligible for more than one Density Bonus or Additional Incentive under this section.

        e.     Redevelopment Incentive. The city council, at its sole discretion, may grant a Density Bonus in excess of the allowances appearing in Table 7 when a Residential Project is located within a redevelopment project area and all of the following findings can be made:

        i.      The revitalization objectives of the Buellton redevelopment plan will be expressly furthered including, but not limited to, the eradication of blight, development of underutilized property, elimination of nonconforming uses, provision of needed infrastructure, implementation of urban design plans and enhancement of economic vitality;

        ii.     The affordable housing objectives of the city’s Housing Element are expressly furthered including, but not limited to, accommodating the special needs of identified population segments (i.e., handicapped, elderly, farm workers and single-family Households);

        iii.    The Density Bonus and Additional Incentives, alone, are insufficient to make the Residential Project economically feasible in accordance with Government Code Section 65915(e); and

        iv.    The Residential Project will not be a hazard or nuisance to the community, establish a use inconsistent with the General Plan or exceed existing or planned infrastructure capacities.

        f.      Inclusionary Incentive. For each Affordable Unit that a Developer provides in accordance with the provisions of Section 19.16.014, such Developer shall be entitled to a Density Bonus of two Non-Restricted Units for each Affordable Unit that is produced or required for a Lower or Very Low Income Household, up to a maximum combined density (inclusive of Density Bonus Units) of: (i) fifty (50) percent above the base density for property zoned multifamily residential (RM); and (ii) twenty-five (25) units per acre for property zoned general commercial (CR). To further induce the production of Affordable Units, and subject to development plan approval under the provisions of Section 19.02.120(D)(2), an Additional Incentive for multifamily dwellings on property zoned multifamily residential (RM) may be granted pursuant to subsection (B)(1)(a) of this section.

        2.     Target Households. In determining the number of Affordable Units to be provided pursuant to subsection B of this section, the Maximum Residential Density shall be multiplied by the Density Bonus percentages appearing in Table 7. The Density Bonus Units shall not be included when determining the total number of Affordable Units in the Residential Project. When calculating the required number of Affordable Units, any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer.

        3.     Production Schedule. Affordable Units shall be constructed concurrently with Non-Restricted Units as part of the Residential Project unless both the city and the Developer agree within the Affordable Housing Agreement to an alternative schedule for development. Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the Affordable Units associated with one Residential Project to be produced and operated at an alternative development site. When the Developer and the city form such an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single Residential Project for purposes of this chapter. Under these circumstances, the Developer shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter for the Affordable Units to be provided on the alternative site.

        4.     Retention Period. Affordable Units for which a Density Bonus is granted under the provisions of this section shall remain restricted and affordable to Target Households for the time periods set forth below (or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program).

        a.     Basic Incentive. Except as provided in subsections (B)(4)(b) and (c) of this section, all Affordable Units shall remain restricted and affordable to Target Households for a minimum period of thirty (30) years. Owner-occupied units, including Affordable Units within common interest subdivision reserved for Moderate Income Households, shall be: (i) initially occupied at an affordable Housing Cost and thereafter remain restricted for the duration of the Retention Period; and (ii) governed by the terms and conditions of an Affordable Housing Agreement which includes equity share provisions as stipulated in California Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).

        b.     Redevelopment Incentive. Affordable Units shall remain restricted and affordable to Target Households for a period of forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied units and fifty-five (55) years for renter-occupied units under the following circumstances: (i) the Additional Incentive(s) granted under this section includes a Density Bonus in excess of thirty-five (35) percent; or (ii) the Residential Project receives financial assistance from the Agency.

        c.     Inclusionary Incentive. Affordable Units shall remain restricted and affordable to Target Households for a period of forty-five (45) years for owner-occupied units and fifty-five (55) years for renter-occupied units in which a Density Bonus is granted under the provisions of subsection (B)(1)(f) of this section.

        C.     Development Standards. The Affordable Units resulting from Density Bonuses granted under this section may either be rental or for-sale dwellings. The Affordable Units should be built on-site wherever possible and, when practical, be dispersed within the Residential Project. Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the Affordable Units should be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the Non-Restricted Units of the Residential Project; except that the Developer may include a higher proportion of Affordable Units with more bedrooms. The design and appearance of the Affordable Units shall be compatible with the design of the total Residential Project. Except and unless an Additional Incentive is granted by the city council pursuant to subsection (B)(1)(b) of this section, at its sole discretion, all Residential Projects shall comply with all development standards set forth in Section 19.16.014(C) of this chapter.

        D.    Miscellaneous.

        1.     Affordable Housing Agreement. An Affordable Housing Agreement shall be made a condition of land use permit approval for all Density Bonuses granted pursuant to this section. The Affordable Housing Agreement shall: (i) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the Affordable Units will be constructed; and (ii) be consistent with Section 19.16.022(B) of this chapter.

        2.     Application Requirements and Review. An application pursuant to this section shall be processed concurrently with any other application(s) required for the Residential Project. Final approval or disapproval of an application (with right of appeal) shall be determined by the decision-making body having jurisdiction over the matter unless the Developer requests: (i) a Financial Equivalent Incentive in lieu of a Density Bonus and/or Additional Incentive; (ii) a fee waiver or direct financial assistance is requested as part of an Additional Incentive; (iii) an Redevelopment Incentive; or (iv) Inclusionary Incentive. In either of these events, the decision-making body with permit jurisdiction shall make a recommendation to the city council who will have the authority to make the final decision on the application. A Developer proposing a Residential Project pursuant to this section may submit its proposal for conceptual review by the city council prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a Residential Project. The purpose of the conceptual review is to identify issues, concerns and recommendations preparatory to making formal application. The conceptual review process, including form of application and processing fees, if any, shall be determined by the city council. The granting of Density Bonuses under this section are expressly subject to and contingent upon satisfying: (i) all entitlement permit, development review and zoning clearance requirements applicable to the Residential Project; and (ii) the California Environmental Quality Act including, as appropriate, the preparation of necessary reviews and documentation in conjunction with Entitlement applications for each Residential Project. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(D)(8), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.020 Accessory dwelling units.
        Applicability. Procedures and standards for accessory dwelling units are set forth in Section 19.06.1 80. (Ord. 19-03 § 2, 2019; Ord. 07-01 § 4, 2007; Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(B)(1), (2), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

 

19.16.021 Residential development capacity.
        A.    Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all zoning ordinance amendments and rezonings (as authorized and regulated in Section 19.10.110) which are initiated by a Developer; and result in a reduction of residential development capacity by virtue of: (i) a redesignation of land use from residential to a nonresidential; or (ii) a decrease in residential density (i.e., downzoning). The provisions of this section do not apply to zone changes and ordinance amendments that are initiated by the city council.

        B.     Basic Provisions. No amendment to the municipal code or rezoning of residentially designated property shall be permitted which results in a reduction of residential development capacity unless: (i) the city council determines that such change is consistent with findings required by Section 19.10.110(C); and (ii) the Developer compensates for the difference between the number of Affordable Units computed pursuant to Section 19.16.014(B) prior to the change compared to the number of Affordable Units computed after the change based on maximum allowable densities (hereinafter referred to as the “inclusionary differential”).

        1.     Illustrative Calculation. By way of example, and for illustrative purposes only, where a parcel of ten acres is presently zoned RM-16, the maximum allowed density would be one hundred sixty (160) units and the inclusionary requirement is computed as twenty-four (24) dwellings (i.e., ten acres times sixteen (16) du/acre times fifteen (15) percent equals twenty-four (24) Affordable Units). If a Developer requests a zone change to RS-10, the maximum allowed density would be reduced to one hundred (100) units and the resulting inclusionary requirement is computed as fifteen (15) dwellings (i.e., ten acres times ten du/acre times fifteen (15) percent equals fifteen (15) Affordable Units). The inclusionary differential is computed as nine dwellings (i.e., twenty-four (24) units minus fifteen (15) units equals nine Affordable Units). Except as provided in Section 19.10.013(B)(8)(a)(2), the affordable unit differential shall be satisfied by construction on-site as part of, and concurrent with development of, a Residential Project.

        2.     Equivalent Action. Subject to review and approval by the city council, a Developer may satisfy the inclusionary differential through one or more of the following means:

        a.     Construction of Affordable Units on the site which is rezoned or otherwise reduced in density;

        b.     Dedication of vacant land;

        c.     Construction of Affordable Units on another site;

        d.     Acquisition and enforcement of rental/sales price restrictions on existing standard dwelling units;

        e.     Substantial Rehabilitation of existing substandard dwellings; or

        f.      Payment of a Housing In-Lieu Fee. (Ord. 06-10 § 2(C), 2006)

 

19.16.022 Administration (Affordable Housing Trust Fund, Affordable Housing Agreement, Income Verification and Appeals).
        A.    Affordable Housing Trust Fund. All Housing In-Lieu Fees collected under this chapter shall be deposited into an Affordable Housing Fund (“Housing Fund”). Separate accounts within such Housing Fund may be created from time to time to avoid commingling as required by law or as deemed appropriate to further the purposes of the Fund. The Housing Fund shall be administered by the city manager who shall have the authority to govern the Housing Fund consistent with this chapter, and to prescribe procedures for said purpose, subject to approval by the city council. Expenditures by the housing director from the Housing Fund shall be controlled, authorized and paid in accordance with general city budgetary policies. Execution of contracts related to the use or administration of Housing Fund monies shall be in accordance with standard city council policy.

        1.     Purposes and Use of Funds. Monies deposited in the Housing Fund along with any interest earnings on such monies shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to Households of Very Low, Lower and Moderate Income including, including, but not limited to (i) acquisition of real property, buildings and structures; (ii) completion of on and off-site improvements; (iii) donation of real property to private or public entities; (iv) construction and rehabilitation of buildings and structures; (v) payment of insurance premiums, principal and interest, debt financing and carrying charges; (vi) subsidization of market rate housing; (vii) preservation of mobile homes and subsidized housing “at risk” of Conversion to market rates; and (viii) reasonable planning and administrative expenses. In addition, monies deposited in the Housing Fund may be used for the special purposes set forth below.

        a.     Relocation Assistance. If Affordable Units are not otherwise available, monies deposited in the Housing Fund may be used to provide relocation assistance for Very Low, Lower and Moderate Income Households that are involuntarily displaced from housing as a direct result of its Conversion or Demolition. This includes Target Households displaced from housing not otherwise subject to Replacement Housing requirements prescribed in Section 19.16.016(A) of this chapter. Such assistance may only be provided to Displaced Persons: (i) who are Very Low, Lower or Moderate Income Households and for whom replacement housing is not immediately available; (ii) who lawfully inhabited the demised premises a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the date of displacement; and (iii) who are not otherwise entitled to relocation assistance prescribed by state or federal law. Relocation assistance, if provided, shall be subject to availability and based on need, not to exceed the lesser of: (i) the amount of Housing In-Lieu Fees assessed for one dwelling; or (ii) the unencumbered balance of monies in the Housing Trust Fund, net of funds expressly reserved for Affordable Units for which the Agency is obligated. Relocation payments, when disbursed from the Housing Trust Fund, shall automatically defer the timetable required to provide Affordable Units of equivalent value.

        b.     Rental Loss Compensation. In exchange for exercising its right of first refusal pursuant to Section 19.16.022(B)(1) of this chapter, the city may disburse monies deposited in the Housing Fund to compensate Developers for a sum equal to the total lost rent incurred from the date that an Affordable Unit becomes vacant until it is reoccupied by a Target Household. The city’s obligation to pay rental loss compensation shall only apply if the city notifies the Developer in writing of its intent to exercise its right of first refusal within ten calendar days after the date the city receives written notification from the Developer as to the vacancy of an Affordable Unit.

        2.     Planning and Programming. Monies in the Housing Fund shall be used in accordance with the goals, policies, programs and priorities identified in the City’s Housing Element and the Agency’s Implementation Plan. Monies in the Housing Fund may be disbursed, hypothecated, collateralized or otherwise employed for these purposes from time to time as the city council determines is appropriate to accomplish the purposes of the Housing Fund. These uses include, but are not limited to, assistance to private, public and non-profit housing sponsors, equity participation loans, grants, pre-homeownership co-investment, pre-development loan funds, participation leases, or other public/private partnership arrangements.

        B.     Affordable Housing Agreement. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Agreement is to create easements, conditions, covenants, restrictions, liens, servitudes, and charges upon and subject to which Affordable Units and each and every part and portion thereof shall be occupied, owned, maintained, held, leased, rented, sold, and conveyed. An Affordable Housing Agreement shall be required for all Residential Projects governed by this chapter. Each Agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the city council prior to execution. Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy or approval of the final inspection for Affordable Units, Affordable Housing Agreements and, if the Affordable Units are owner-occupied, resale restrictions, deeds of trust and/or other such documents, shall be recorded against parcels having such Affordable Units. The form and content of the Affordable Housing Agreement shall be determined by the city and, among other things, the items listed below.

        1.     Occupancy Preferences. The city shall have the right of first refusal to occupy any and all Affordable Units with Target Households of its choosing. This right shall be: (i) defined in the Affordable Housing Agreement; and (ii) effective upon issuance of certificates of occupancy and anytime thereafter should any Affordable Unit become vacant. In exchange for the city exercising its right of first refusal, the Developer shall be entitled to a rental loss compensation payable by the city in a sum equal to the total lost rent incurred from the date that an Affordable Unit becomes available until it is occupied. In exercising this prerogative, the city shall give preference to the following Target Households, in the order listed: (i) Displaced Persons whose dislocation involves a Residential Project within the city; (ii) Disabled Persons; (iii) population groups with special needs as identified in the city’s Housing Element (e.g., handicapped, elderly, farm workers, and single family Households); and (iv) all other Very Low, Lower and Moderate Income Households. Within these categories, preference will be given to current residents of the city and priority will be assigned based on date of application.

        2.     Resale of Affordable Units. The maximum sales price permitted on resale of an Affordable Unit intended for owner-occupancy shall not exceed the seller’s purchase price, adjusted for the percentage increase in the Area Median Income since the seller’s purchase, plus the value of substantial structural or permanent fixed improvements to the property and the cost of reasonable seller’s broker fee as determined by the housing director. For purposes of this subparagraph, Area Median Income shall be calculated based upon the occupancy levels used to determine the original affordable sales price. The resale restrictions shall provide that in the event of the sale of an Affordable Unit intended for owner-occupancy, the city shall have the right to purchase or assign its right to purchase such Affordable Unit at the maximum price that could be charged to an eligible Household. In-lieu of resale and re-occupancy by a Target Household, the city may permit sale of owner-occupied Affordable Units prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) year period pursuant to an adopted program which protects the city’s investment of moneys from the Housing Trust Fund, including, but not limited to, equity sharing which that permits retention by the seller of a portion of sales proceeds based on the length of occupancy. The remainder of the excess proceeds of the sale shall be allocated to the city and deposited in the Housing Trust Fund.

        3.     Target Household Eligibility. No Household shall be permitted to occupy an Affordable Unit, or purchase an Affordable Unit for owner-occupancy, unless the city has approved the Target Household’s eligibility. If the city maintains a list of eligible Households as provided in Section 19.16.22(B)(1) of this chapter, Households selected to occupy Affordable Units shall be selected first from that list to the extent provided in the Affordable Housing Agreement or resale restrictions.

        4.     Annual Monitoring and Transfer Fees. For each rental Affordable Unit required under this chapter, the Developer (and his or her successor’s and assigns) may be required to pay an annual monitoring fee for the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the Housing Affordability Agreement. For each owner-occupied Affordable Unit, the current owner may be required to pay a transfer fee for any change of ownership during the term of required affordability. Such fee shall be specified in the resale restrictions required by Section 19.16.022(B)(2) of this chapter.

        5.     Deferral of Development Impact Fees. To the maximum extent feasible, the city will defer Development Impact Fees for each Affordable Unit until issuance of certificates of occupancy. The type of Development Impact Fees to be deferred shall be determined on a case-by-case basis taking into account specific costs and impacts uniquely attributable to each Residential Project. In general, the policy of the city shall be to defer payment of Development Impact Fees until the time that actual costs or impacts arise for which the fees are assessed including, for example, delaying payment of sewer and water connection fees until these utilities are actually placed in service.

        6.     Fair Employment and Housing Act. The Fair Employment and Housing Act prohibits discrimination in all aspects of housing (rental, lease, terms and conditions, etc.) because of a person’s disability. Disabled Persons have the right to use the services of a guide, signal or service dog or other such designated animal and to keep such animals in or around their dwellings. At the request of a Disabled Person (or by someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent), the Developer of each Affordable Unit (and each subsequent owner thereof) must make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a Disabled Person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The Developer (and each subsequent owner of an Affordable Unit) must allow a Disabled Person (at the tenant’s expense or at the expense of someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent) to reasonably modify existing premises if the modifications are necessary to afford the Disabled Person full enjoyment of the premises. These provisions shall be stipulated in the Affordable Housing Agreement.

        7.     Affirmative Marketing. The following requirements shall be incorporated into all Affordable Housing Agreements:

        a.     Fair Housing. The Developer shall carry out an affirmative program to attract tenants, regardless of sex, of all minority and majority groups to the encumbered property, publicizing to minority persons the availability of housing opportunities regardless of race, color, religion, sex or national origin, through the type of media customarily utilized by the qualified tenants, including minority publications or other minority outlets which are available in the housing market area, and all advertising shall include either the HUD-approved equal housing opportunity logo or slogan or statement and all advertising depicting persons shall include persons of majority and minority groups, including both sexes;

        b.     EEO Notice (Office). The Developer shall prominently display in all offices in which sale or rental activity pertaining to the encumbered property takes place the HUD-approved Fair Housing Poster and include in any printed material used in connection with said sales or rentals, the HUD-approved equal housing opportunity logo or slogan or statement;

        c.     EEO Notice (Property). The Developer shall post in a conspicuous position within the encumbered property a sign displaying prominently either the HUD-approved equal housing opportunity logo or slogan or statement; and

        d.     Fair Housing Compliance. As part of the annual reporting process, the Developer shall document any and all claims of housing discrimination filed in regard to the encumbered property and the disposition of such claims.

        8.     Expiration Notice. Prior to expiration of the retention period for Affordable Units, written notice shall be given by the Developer to the city a minimum of two years before termination of the Affordable Housing Agreement.

        C.     Income Verification. In determining the income, occupancy and eligibility of Target Households, data shall be obtained and verified by such methods as may be necessary and reasonable to ensure full, true and complete information from which to base determinations under this chapter. The Developer or Target Household, as the case may be, shall certify, under penalty of perjury, that all information furnished as part of the application is true and complete. Resultant determinations of eligibility shall remain in full force and effect for a period of six months from the date of initial application, after which time new application and verification shall be required. Income verification shall be performed in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth below.

        1.     Income Basis. If circumstances are such that it is not reasonably feasible to anticipate a level of income over a twelve (12) month period, a different basis may be used including, but not limited to, a shorter time frame of projection for a period of time preceding the date of application. Circumstances wherein an adjustment in the basis of determining Household Income is warranted include:

        a.     Unemployment. A person is unemployed at the time of application and there are no anticipated prospects of re-employment.

        b.     Self-Employment. A person is self-employed and annual income is either inconstant due to fluctuations in business or undeterminable due to the recentness of such employment.

        c.     Seasonal and Temporary Employment. The conditions of employment and/or receipt of income are so unstable as to invalidate usual and normal standards of determination.

        2.     Verification Standards. The following, although not all inclusive, represent the types of verification required for various sources and elements of Household Income:

        a.     Regular Employment. Letters and statements from employers, pay stubs and similar such receipts evidencing compensation, and/or IRS Tax Returns.

        b.     Self-Employment. Statements from Certified Public Accountants, notarized declarations, and/or IRS Tax Returns for three years preceding the date of application.

        c.     Social Security Benefits. Award letter, bank statement evidencing direct deposit of benefits, and/or verification statement from the Social Security Administration.

        d.     Aid to Families With Dependent Children. Award letter and/or verification statement from the Public Social Services Agency.

        e.     Child Support/Alimony. Copy of divorce papers and/or verification statement from ex-spouse.

        f.      Veterans Benefits. Award letter, statement from bank evidencing direct deposit of benefits, and/or verification statement from the Veterans Administration.

        g.     Disability Benefits. Award letter, bank statement evidencing direct deposit of benefits, and/or statement of verification of payer.

        h.     Unemployment Benefits. Award letter, bank statement evidencing direct deposit of benefits, and/or verification statement from the California State Department of Employment Development.

        i.      Retirement/Pension Benefits. Award letter, check stub, and/or verification statement from the pension fund.

        j.      Savings Account Interest. Copy of quarterly statement, IRS tax returns, and/or verification statement from bank or savings and loan.

        k.     Dividends. Copy of statement with amount received and/or IRS tax returns.

        l.      Rental Income. Statement of net cash flow as verified by IRS tax returns.

        m.    Liquid Assets (i.e., Savings and Checking Accounts). Copy of savings passbook showing current balance, month or quarter-ending bank statement, and/or verification statement from financial institution.

        n.     Marketable Securities. Copy of stock/bond and/or verification statement from benefactor.

        o.     Equity in Real Estate. Copy of deed verification statement from mortgagor as to mortgage balance together with assessor’s valuation records, verified purchase price and/or independent appraisal.

        D.    Appeals. A developer of any residential project subject to the requirements of this chapter may appeal to the city council for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of the requirement(s) based upon a showing by the developer that imposition of such requirement(s) on the residential project will: (1) cause undue hardship and that such residential project will contribute significantly to affordable housing opportunities in the city; or (2) defeat the general purposes of this chapter. Examples of residential projects for which a reduction, adjustment or waiver may be appropriate include, but are not limited to, sweat equity homeownership programs and similar special purpose government and nonprofit programs with statutory constraints that conflict with the technical requirements of this chapter. Appeals under this chapter shall be filed and processed in the time and manner prescribed in Chapter 1.24 of the Buellton Municipal Code. The appellant shall bear the burden of presenting substantial evidence to support the appeal including comparable technical information to support appellant’s position: (1) identifying all overriding conditions impacting the residential project that prevent developers from meeting the requirements of this chapter; (2) sufficient independent data, including appropriate financial information, that supports the developer’s claim that it is not feasible to construct the required affordable units or pay requisite fees; and (3) a detailed analysis of why the various concessions and incentives identified in Section 19.16.018 of this chapter cannot mitigate the developer’s identified conditions that are preventing him or her from complying with the requirements of this chapter.

        E.     Enforcement. It is unlawful, a public nuisance and a misdemeanor for any person to sell or rent an affordable unit at a price or rent exceeding the maximum allowed under this chapter or to a household not qualified under this chapter. The remedies provided for in Section 19.10.300 of this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. (Ord. 06-10 §§ 2(F)(2), (3), (H), (I), 2006; Ord. 02-03 Exh. A, 2002)

Chapter 19.18 MIXED USE REGULATIONS
19.18.010 Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide an opportunity for mixed-use development with a combination, in part or in whole, of residential, commercial, office, industrial, live/work uses within a livable urban environment. It is intended to provide standards for projects that include a combination of permitted uses applicable to the underlying zoning designations. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.012 Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

        A.    Infill Development. Infill development refers to construction of new housing, workplaces, shops, and other facilities within existing built-up areas. The development can be of several types: building on vacant lots, reuse of underutilized sites (such as parking lots and old industrial sites), and rehabilitation or expansion of existing buildings.

        B.     Live-Work/Work-Live Units. Live-work/work-live units are single tenant spaces that include both a residential unit and a commercial or light industrial use such as an artist studio, photography studio, craftsperson shop (woodworking, ceramics, etc.), or similar use. This differs from other types of mixed-use developments where the residential use and commercial or other nonresidential use is in different tenant spaces. Live-work units comprise one or more rooms with cooking space and sanitary facilities in conformance with the California Building Code (CBC) and adequate working space available for and regularly used by persons residing therein.

        C.     Mixed-Use. Mixed-use refers to the development of a building or buildings, or a lot, with a variety of integrated and complementary uses, such as but not limited to, residential, office, retail, light industrial, public, and recreation in one of the following ways:

        1.     Vertical Mixed-use. Structure(s) in which multiple and separate uses occupy different floors/levels.

        2.     Horizontal Mixed-use–Attached. Structure(s) in which multiple and separate uses occupy different attached buildings on the same lot or within the same project.

        3.     Horizontal Mixed-use–Detached. Structure(s) in which multiple and separate uses occupy different detached buildings on the same lot or within the same project.

        D.    Primary Use. The allowed and permitted residential, commercial or industrial use guided by the zoning designation.

        E.     Secondary Use. The accompanying mixed-use component of an allowed and permitted residential, commercial or industrial use guided by the zoning designation. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.014 General requirements.
        Unless otherwise specifically required by this chapter, a development plan (DP) shall be required for all mixed-use developments. The city council shall be the decision-maker on all mixed-use projects upon recommendations from the planning commission. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.016 Allowable mix of uses.
        A.    At the time of application of the development plan for a mixed-use project, the applicant shall declare from Figure 18-1 the proposed mix of uses for the project. The matrix in Figure 18-1 identifies which mix of uses are allowed together.

        Example: a property zoned CR (general commercial) by the city of Buellton’s zoning map shall be known as the base zone. Allowable mix of uses in the CR base zone are found in the vertical column below the CR designation. In this example, the allowable mix of uses are: RM (residential multifamily); CN (neighborhood commercial); CS (service commercial); and M (manufacturing). The mix of uses that are NOT allowed are: RS (single-family residential); PRD (planned residential development); and MHP (mobilehome park).

        B.     For both the primary use and secondary use components of a mixed-use project, the specific allowable uses shall be found in Sections 19.02.110 and 19.02.210 of the city of Buellton Municipal Code. Uses not allowed as part of any mixed-use project are mini-storage warehouses. In addition, the following uses have been determined to be incompatible and shall not be part of a mixed-use project that includes a residential component:

        1.     Agricultural uses.

        2.     Auto and vehicle sales.

        3.     Auto body and repair.

        4.     Auto parts sales.

        5.     Chemical storage or manufacturing.

        6.     Columbariums and mortuaries.

        7.     Construction contractors and yards.

        8.     Gas/service stations.

        9.     Heavy manufacturing.

        10.   Kennels and animal boarding.

        11.   Laundries and dry cleaning facilities.

        12.   Metal manufacturing.

        13.   Recycling collection stations.

        14.   Scrap and wrecking yards.

        15.   Slaughterhouses.

        16.   Truck stops.

        17.   Vehicle and freight terminals.

        Other uses may be deemed incompatible through the development plan process.

 

Figure 18-1 Allowed Mix of Uses

 

Secondary Uses

Primary Uses (Base Zone)

Zone

RS

RM

PRD

MHP

CN

CR

CS

M

RS

 

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

RM

X

 

X

X

DP

DP

DP

DP

PRD

X

X

 

X

X

X

X

X

MHP

X

X

X

 

X

X

X

X

CN

X

DP

X

X

 

DP

DP

DP

CR

X

DP

X

X

DP

 

DP

DP

CS

X

DP

X

X

DP

DP

 

DP

M

X

X

X

X

DP

DP

DP

 

DP – Allowed subject to approval of a development plan

X – Not allowed

 

(Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.018 Development standards.
        The following development standards shall apply to all mixed-use projects within the city of Buellton. For each mixed-use project, the development standards that apply are from the primary use (base zone) zoning.

        A.    General Requirements for All Zoning Districts.

        1.     The primary use must be consistent with the underlying zoning designation and must be equivalent to fifty (50) percent or greater of the total floor space.

        2.     Tentative and final or parcel maps shall be required for all mixed-use projects that include the creation of lots, condominiums, stock cooperatives, community apartments, and planned unit developments, both new and conversion.

        3.     Mixed-use projects along the Avenue of Flags and certain portions of State Highway 246 are also subject to the development standards contained in the Avenue of Flags/Highway 246 Urban Design Plan.

        4.     Mixed-use projects are subject to the design requirements of the Community Design Guidelines.

        B.     RM (Residential Multi-Family) Zoning District.

 

 

Minimum Lot Area

8,000 square feet

Residential Density

Pursuant to Section 19.02.120(C)

Height Limit

35 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

10 feet

Side

5 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

10 feet

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

5 feet between a habitable building and any other building

Parking Areas

15 feet from street property line, 5 feet from all other property lines

Site Coverage

50% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

        C.     CN (Neighborhood Commercial) Zoning District.

 

Minimum Lot Area

None

Residential Density

8 dwelling units per acre

Height Limit

30 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

5 feet

Side

None

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

5 feet

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

None unless required by the California Building Code

Parking Areas

5 feet from all property lines

Site Coverage

60% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

        D.    CR (General Commercial) Zoning District—Avenue of Flags Urban Design Area.

 

Minimum Lot Area

None

Residential Density

10 units per acre; density may be increased to 12 units per acre if 60% of the units are 1 bedroom or less

Height Limit

35 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

First floor, none; second floor, 5 to 10 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 5 feet); third floor, 10 to 15 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 10 feet)

Side

None

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

Avenue of Flags Urban Design Area: first floor, none; second floor, 5 to 10 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 5 feet); third floor, 10 to 15 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 10 feet)

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

None unless required by the California Building Code

Parking Areas

5 feet from all property lines

Site Coverage

60% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

        E.     CS (Service Commercial) Zoning District—Outside of Avenue of Flags Urban Design Area.

 

Minimum Lot Area

None

Residential Density

8 dwelling units per acre

Height Limit

30 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

First floor, 15 feet; second floor, 15 to 20 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 15 feet); third floor, 20 to 25 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 20 feet)

Side

None

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

First floor, 10 feet; second floor, 10 to 15 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 10 feet); third floor, 15 to 20 feet (a minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the frontage shall be at 15 feet)

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

None unless required by the California Building Code

Parking Areas

5 feet from all property lines

Site Coverage

60% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

        F.     CS (Service Commercial) Zoning District.

 

Minimum Lot Area

None

Residential Density

8 units per acre, subject to Section 19.18.028

Height Limit

40 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

10 feet

Side

None

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

10 feet

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

None unless required by the California Building Code

Parking Areas

5 feet from all property lines

Site Coverage

60% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

        G.    M (Industrial) Zoning District.

 

Minimum Lot Area

None

Residential Density

8 dwelling units per acre, subject to Section 19.18.028

Height Limit

45 feet

Setbacks

Refer to Section 19.04.160 for the measurement of, and exceptions to, setback requirements

Front

10 feet

Side

None

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height

Street Side

10 feet

Rear

10 feet

Exception: mixed-use projects adjoining an R-1 zone shall provide one-half foot of setback for each foot of building height (minimum of 10 feet)

Interior

None unless required by the California Building Code

Parking Areas

5 feet from all property lines

Site Coverage

60% of net site area

Landscaping/Open Space

See Section 19.18.022

 

(Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.020 Parking standards.
        A.    Parking for the individual land uses shall first be established in accordance with Section 19.04.142 of this title. For illustrative purposes, a mixed-use project with twenty (20) one-bedroom apartments and five thousand (5,000) square feet of retail space would require twenty (20) parking spaces for the residential units and seventeen (17) parking spaces for the retail use. The base number of parking spaces would therefore be thirty-seven (37).

        B.     Parking Reduction. A twenty-five (25) percent reduction in the number of parking spaces from the base number for the project as calculated in subsection A may be granted through the development plan process if a city of Buellton owned parking lot is located within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the project site. No more than fifty (50) percent of the public parking lot spaces shall be encumbered for this purpose on a cumulative project basis. All projects granted this parking reduction will be tracked in order to monitor this standard.

        1.     If an applicant uses a city parking lot to satisfy a portion of their parking requirement, then a parking fee of eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00) per space shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits for the project. The fee is based on the engineers cost to pave one parking space and the funds will be used to offset the maintenance costs of the city parking lot.

        In no case shall the amount of parking be reduced to less than one space for every residential unit.

        C.     Shared Parking. Parking requirements may be partially satisfied through a shared parking agreement with properties within five hundred (500) feet of the project site. This may only be allowed through the development plan if the shared parking lot has parking spaces in excess of that required for the uses on that property, or that the shared parking is intended for use during the non-peak hours of the uses on the shared parking property.

        D.    Parking structures may be allowed in conjunction with a mixed-use project provided that the parking structure is architecturally integrated into the architectural theme of the project. Parking structure massing shall be at an appropriate scale and shall visually conceal the automobiles from adjoining roadways.

        E.     Unless otherwise permitted by prior land use entitlements, sixty (60) percent of the parking spaces shall be located to the rear of a mixed-use development. Parking areas and driveways adjoining streets, alleys, sidewalks, and/or dwelling units shall be screened with a decorative low wall, fence, or landscaped berm of sufficient size and density to partially screen automobiles. Space defining elements such as trellises, columns, walls, arbors, and hedges shall be provided to enhance the appearance of parking lots. These elements shall be consistent with the development’s architectural theme and the community design guidelines.

        F.     All mixed-use projects with residential units shall provide a minimum of one covered or uncovered parking space per unit. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.022 Landscape and open space standards.
        A.    Landscaping. The amount of landscaped area in a mixed-use project shall be thirty (30) percent of the net site area for projects located in a base zoning district of RM, and fifteen (15) percent of the net site area for all other base zoning districts. Landscaping shall follow the standards outlined in the community design guidelines. Up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscaped area may be decorative hardscape, including, but not limited to, decorative paving, fountains, statues or other artwork, and seating areas.

        B.     Residential Open Space. An open space area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet per residential unit, exclusive of the required landscaping, shall be provided. These open space areas shall contain usable amenities, including, but not limited to, outdoor seating areas, barbeques, child play areas, water features, pools/spas, basketball or volleyball courts, and similar amenities. Private patio or balcony areas can be included in the required area.

        C.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be included with all development plan submittals.

        D.    If the façade of an existing mixed-use building is renovated in accordance with the community design guidelines when not required by the municipal code, then the open space requirements required by this chapter may be waived. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.024 Performance standards.
        A.    CC&Rs are required for all mixed-use projects and shall include provisions notifying future residential tenants and owners of the potential noise and nuisance impacts of living in a mixed-use project.

        B.     Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting shall be shielded in a manner that prevents a direct line between its luminary and any residentially zoned or residentially developed parcel. Within fifty (50) feet of a residentially zoned parcel, lighting shall be installed no higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground directly below the light fixture. Outdoor lighting shall not exceed the following levels:

        1.     One-half foot-candles at the property line if the subject property abuts a residential zoning district.

        2.     Two foot-candles at the property line if the subject property abuts a nonresidential zoning district.

        C.     Glare and Heat. Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting, or similar processes shall be contained within a completely enclosed and vented building.

        D.    Odors. The odors released from any operation or activity shall not exceed detectable concentrations beyond any lot lines. Commercial or industrial uses with attached residential units provide state-of-the-art ventilation systems to prevent odors from penetrating the attached residential units.

        E.     Vibration. No use, activity, or process shall produce vibrations that are perceptible without instruments at the property line for more than three minutes in any one hour of the day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No use, activity, or process shall produce any vibrations between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

        F.     Hours of Operation. Unless otherwise approved through a Development Plan, the hours of operation for any commercial or industrial component of a mixed-use project with a residential component, except live-work/work-live units, shall not begin before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 9:00 p.m. These hours of operation shall include other activities directly related to the operation of the commercial or industrial component, including, but not limited to, deliveries and cleaning activities. Projects within the Avenue of Flags Urban Design Area are exempt from the time limitations of this section, except that deliveries and cleaning activities shall not occur before 6:00 a.m. or after midnight. However, normal indoor cleaning functions are not subject to these time limitations.

        G.    All work shall be performed entirely indoors unless otherwise approved through the development plan. Any outdoor work allowed through a development plan shall not be performed in designated parking areas, drive aisles, or landscape areas. All approved outdoor work areas shall not be counted as required open space or landscaping.

        H.    Flammable, Explosive, and Combustible Materials. The use or storage of flammable, explosive, or combustible materials shall at all times comply with the adopted Uniform Fire Prevention Code, California Building Code, and all other applicable adopted ordinances or regulations of the city of Buellton, county of Santa Barbara, state of California, and the federal government.

        I.      Noise. All mixed-use projects shall comply with the adopted noise regulations of the city of Buellton.

        J.      Staircases. All stairways that connect adjacent levels, stories or floors shall be provided with an intermediate landing at the mid-height level and shall otherwise comply with all other applicable building code provisions in effect at the time of submittal application. Alternatively, elevators may be provided.

        K.    Three-bedroom Units. A maximum of five percent of the dwelling units may be three-bedroom units. Percentages shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. Four-bedroom and more units are prohibited. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.026 Live-work/work-live units.
        A.    Live-work/work-live units are allowed in the CN, CR, CS, and M zoning districts. Uses allowed in these units include, but are not limited to, photographers and photographic studios, artists and artist studios, craftspersons and workshops, professional-technical service trades and researchers (i.e., architects, engineers, drafters, accountants, bookkeepers, appraisers), and are allowed in an approved mixed-use live-work/work-live project subject to issuance of a zoning clearance.

        B.     CS and M Zoning Districts. Live-work/work-live units are the only residential units permitted in the CS and M zoning districts.

        C.     Unit Size Restrictions. Live-work/work-live units shall be limited to studios or one-bedroom units. No more than fifty (50) percent of the unit shall be devoted to living space.

        D.    Location Restrictions. Live-work/work-live units shall be incorporated into the commercial or industrial building and shall not be standalone units or buildings.

        E.     Any building containing a live-work/work-live occupancy shall comply with the standards of the latest adopted edition of the California Building Code (CBC), including standards for habitability.

        F.     Performance Standards. Any live-work/work-live unit shall comply with the performance standards set forth in Section 19.18.024, along with the following standards:

        1.     The combined area of each unit shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet or less. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the square footage shall be devoted to the nonresidential use associated with the business.

        2.     Units shall be classified as a Group R occupancy when the work areas are deemed accessory to the primary residential occupancy.

        3.     Units shall be classified as B, M, or F occupancy according to the primary work use when the residential area is deemed as accessory to the work occupancy.

        4.     Buildings with three or more live-work/work-live units shall be classified as R-1 occupancies pursuant to the CBC.

        5.     All live-work/work-live units shall be separated from each other and the rest of the building by not less than one-hour fire resistive occupancy separation and sound transmission control assembly per the CBC.

        6.     The residential area of the unit shall meet the requirements of the CBC for efficiency dwelling units, Section 310.7.

        7.     All units shall comply with the California Energy Code for residential buildings.

        8.     The buildings containing the units shall comply with the requirements of CBC Chapters 11A and 11B (Disabled Access for Newly Constructed Buildings).

        9.     Consistent with Title 24 of the California Code or Regulations and requirements of federal law, in lieu of an accessible public restroom in each live-work/work-live unit, fully accessible restroom facilities may be provided in common areas located on an accessible route of travel within a reasonable distance of the accessible units as defined in Title 24, Part 5, Sections 413.5.2 and 413.5.3 of the California Plumbing Code.

        10.   Parking shall be accessible per CBC, Chapters 11A and 11B. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be required for each unit.

        11.   Construction materials and methods of construction shall be governed by and in accordance with the CBC.

        12.   Live-work/work-live activities may start at 7:00 a.m. and shall end at 9:00 p.m. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011; Ord. 08-07 § 3, 2008)

 

19.18.028 Incentive program.
        A.    Mixed-use projects may receive fee reductions if additional public benefits above those required in the Buellton Municipal Code are included in the project.

        B.     Procedures. Fee reductions specified in subsection C may be permitted upon approval of a development plan or conditional use permit by the city council, on the recommendation of the planning commission, if public benefits as specified in subsection D are provided. The following findings are also required:

        1.     That the proposed project is of excellent design quality.

        2.     That the proposed project will provide significant public benefits substantially beyond normal requirements in one or more of the areas listed in subsection D.

        C.     Fee Reductions. If certain public benefits selected in subsection D are provided then reductions in the park and traffic fees may be granted by the city council in accordance with the procedures described in subsection B.

        D.    Public Benefits. To be eligible for fee reductions, a project must provide significant public benefits substantially beyond municipal code requirements in one or more of the following areas:

        1.     Sustainable Design. A project that is certifiable as LEED Gold or Platinum or equivalent may be entitled to a ten percent reduction in park and traffic fees. A project that receives LEED Gold or Platinum certification may be entitled to a fifteen (15) percent reduction in park and traffic fees.

        2.     Utility Wires. If existing overhead utility wires that are not adjoining the project’s frontage are placed underground, then the project may be entitled to a ten percent reduction in park and traffic fees. The amount of undergrounding shall be no less than the linear street frontage of the project site.

        3.     On-Site Child Care. A project that provides on-site child care may be entitled to a five percent reduction in park and traffic fees. First priority shall be given to residents and employees of the building.

        4.     Public Open Space. If an additional ten percent of the project area is provided as public open space on the project site or within five hundred (500) feet of the project site, then the project may be entitled to a five percent reduction in park and traffic fees. Public open space includes park or plaza areas.

        5.     Recycled Water/Water Reuse. If a project provides dual plumbing in buildings for the future use of recycled water for toilet flushing, cooling towers, and other appropriate uses or provides on-site gray water or rain water collection and reuse facilities, then the project may be entitled to a five percent reduction in park and traffic fees.

        6.     Public Restrooms. If a project provides private restroom facilities that are open to the public then the project may be entitled to a ten percent reduction in park and traffic fees.

        7.     Alternative Public Benefit. The city council, on the recommendation of the planning commission, may consider a currently undefined public benefit as proposed by the applicant that provides a public benefit which is significant and substantially beyond normal requirements so as to warrant the granting of fee reductions. (Ord. 11-07 § 3, 2011)

Chapter 19.20 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES AND CANNABIS CULTIVATION
19.20.010 Purpose.
        The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prohibit any commercial cannabis facility and to regulate cannabis cultivation within the city limits. It is recognized that it is a federal violation under the Controlled Substances Act to possess or distribute cannabis even if for medical purposes. Additionally, there is evidence of an increased incidence of crime-related secondary impacts in locations associated with a cannabis facility, which is contrary to policies that are intended to promote and maintain the public’s health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)

 

19.20.020 Definitions.
        As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:

        “Cannabis” or “marijuana” has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f) and includes all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” or “marijuana” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” or “marijuana” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” or “marijuana” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

        “Commercial cannabis activity” has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k).

        “Commercial cannabis facility” means any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any commercial cannabis activity that requires a state license or nonprofit license under Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq., including, but not limited to, cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis transportation, cannabis storage, manufacturing of cannabis products, cannabis processing, the sale of any cannabis or cannabis products, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness.

        “Cultivation” has the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(l) and includes any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

        “State Cannabis Laws” shall mean and include California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45; California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996); California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act); California Health and Safety Code Sections 26000 through 26211 (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”)); California Health and Safety Code Sections 26220 through 26231.2; the California Attorney General’s Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use issued in August, 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from time to time by action of the Attorney General; California Labor Code Section 147.5; California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 31020 and 34010 through 34021.5; California Fish and Game Code Section 12029; California Water Code Section 13276; all state regulations adopted pursuant to MAUCRSA; and all other applicable laws of the state of California. (Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)

 

19.20.030 Prohibition of commercial cannabis facilities.
        A.    Commercial cannabis facilities, except state licensed cannabis testing laboratories, are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city and may not be established or operated anywhere in the city. State licensed cannabis testing laboratories may be permitted pursuant to Section 19.02.210 of this title.

        B.     The prohibition in subsection A of this section shall not prohibit a state licensed retailer located outside the city from delivering to customers in the city, provided that such deliveries are in strict compliance with State Cannabis Laws. (Ord. 19-02 § 4, 2019; Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)

 

19.20.040 Regulation of cannabis cultivation.
        No person or entity may cultivate cannabis at any location in the city, except that a person may cultivate no more than six living cannabis plants inside his or her private residence, or inside an accessory structure to his or her private residence located upon the grounds of that private residence that is fully enclosed and secured against unauthorized entry, provided that the owner of the property provides written consent expressly allowing the cannabis cultivation to occur, the person conducting the cannabis cultivation complies with all applicable Building Code requirements set forth in Title 17 of this code, there is no use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) on the property for purposes of cannabis cultivation, and the cannabis cultivation complies with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(a)(3). (Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)

 

19.20.050 Enforcement.
        Any violation of this chapter shall be enforced pursuant to Section 19.10.300. (Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)


