
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    General Penalty

1.10    Administrative Citations

1.12    Ordinances

1.16    General Municipal Elections

1.20    Fee Establishment

1.24    Miscellaneous Provisions

1.32    Claims for Money or Damages

1.36    Voluntary Code of Fair Campaign Practices

1.40    Disclosure of Contributions and Expenditures in Candidate and Ballot Measure Elections

1.42    Contribution and Voluntary Spending Limits

1.44    Appeals

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION1
Sections:

1.01.010  Adoption of code.

1.01.020  Effect of adoption.

1.01.030  Continuation of existing law.

1.01.040  Repeal of existing ordinances.

1.01.050  Exclusions from code.

1.01.070  Maintenance and distribution of the code.

1.01.010 Adoption of code.
There is adopted that certain recodification of certain ordinances of the city entitled "Benicia Municipal Code" published by order of the city council by the Code Publishing Company and bearing the date of 2005. Three copies of the code are on file in the office of the city clerk and are open for public inspection. The municipal code and the secondary codes adopted by reference in the municipal code are adopted by reference under the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 07-10 § 1; Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 1, 1981).

1.01.020 Effect of adoption.
The adoption of the municipal code and repeal of ordinances by the municipal code do not affect the following matters:

A. Actions and proceedings which began before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

B. Prosecution for ordinance violations committed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

C. Licenses and penalties due and unpaid at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the collection of these licenses and penalties;

D. Bonds and cash deposits required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance;

E. Matters of record which refer to or are connected with an ordinance the substance of which is included in the municipal code. These references shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions of the municipal code. (Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 2, 1981).

1.01.030 Continuation of existing law.
Where they are substantially the same as existing law, the municipal code shall be considered a continuation of existing law and not a new enactment. (Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 3, 1981).

1.01.040 Repeal of existing ordinances.
Every ordinance which is not excluded from the municipal code by BMC 1.01.050, or which is not specifically continued in force by this code, is repealed. This section does not revive an ordinance which was repealed before the adoption of the code. (Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 4, 1981).

1.01.050 Exclusions from code.
Every ordinance governing the following subject matter is excluded from the municipal code and is not affected by the repeal provisions of it:

A. Alteration of city boundaries;

B. Contracts to which the city is a party;

C. Elections to which the city is a party;

D. Fixing the rate and making a levy of city taxes;

E. Granting, altering or withdrawing a franchise;

F. Land use classifications of specific property;

G. Naming roads and streets. (Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 5, 1981).

1.01.070 Maintenance and distribution of the code.
A. Not less than three copies of the municipal code, certified by the city clerk, shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for examination and use by the public. Amendments to this code shall be noted, by ordinance number, on the appropriate pages of all three copies of the code, and three complete files of amendatory ordinances, indexed for ready reference, shall be maintained in the office of the clerk for use and examination by the public.

B. Distribution or sale of additional copies of the code shall be made as directed by the city council. (Ord. 81-6 N.S. § 8, 1981).

1 For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt by reference a code of existing ordinances, see Government Code §§ 50022.1 – 50022.10.


Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010  Citation.

1.04.020  Definitions.

1.04.030  Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.040  Applicability.

1.04.050  Effect of headings.

1.04.060  Construction.

1.04.070  Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering.

1.04.080  Acts of deputies.

1.04.090  Notices.

1.04.100  Repealed.

1.04.110  Severability.

1.04.120  Acts of officers, agents, or employees directory.

1.04.010 Citation.
This code may be cited as the municipal code of the city of Benicia. It may be so cited in any prosecution for violation of this code. An ordinance amending this code may be designated as an amendment to the municipal code of the city of Benicia. Every reference to this code or any portion of this code applies to this code as now or hereafter amended. (Prior code § 1-201).

1.04.020 Definitions.
In this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. "City" means the city of Benicia.

B. "City administrator" means the appointed official of the city who occupies the position as chief administrative officer of the city.

C. "City council" means the city council of the city of Benicia.

D. "County" means the county of Solano.

E. "Oath" means and includes affirmation.

F. "Owner" as applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part.

G. "Person" means and includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation.

H. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.

I. "State" means the state of California.

J. "Street" means and includes a highway, avenue, lane, alley, court, place, square, curb, and other public way in the city which is dedicated and open to public use. "Street" also includes such other public property designated as such by law.

K. "Tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land means and includes a person who occupies the whole or part of the building or land, whether alone or with others. (Prior code §§ 1-202, 1-206).

1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation.
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present.

B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular. (Prior code §§ 1-203, 1-204, 1-205).

1.04.040 Applicability.
This code refers only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by the Constitution, law or ownership or control of property. (Prior code § 1-209).

1.04.050 Effect of headings.
Title, chapter, article and section headings shall not govern, limit, modify or affect the scope, meaning or intent of this code. (Prior code § 1-208).

1.04.060 Construction.
The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it shall be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Prior code § 1-207).

1.04.070 Prohibited acts include causing, permitting or suffering.
Whenever in this code an act or omission is made unlawful, it includes causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of the act or omission. (Prior code § 1-210).

1.04.080 Acts of deputies.
Where this code grants a power to a public officer or employee or imposes a duty on him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or employee or by any person authorized by law or ordinance, unless the code specifically provides otherwise. (Prior code § 1-211).

1.04.090 Notices.
Where the code requires that notice be given, unless the code specially provides otherwise, notice shall be given in writing and may be delivered either personally or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known business or residence address appearing in the public records or in other records, of the matter for which notice is given. Notice by mail is considered served at the time of deposit in the United States mail. (Prior code § 1-212).

1.04.100 Appeal.
Repealed by Ord. 07-11. (Prior code § 1-214).

1.04.110 Severability.
If a title, division, chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, that holding does not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remainder of this code. The city council declares that it would have adopted each part of this code irrespective of the validity of any other part. (Prior code § 1-213).

1.04.120 Acts of officers, agents, or employees directory.
Any provision of this code or any ordinance, ordinance adopting uniform codes by reference, resolution, rule, or other regulation which governs the conduct of the city, or any of its officers, agents or employees, shall in all instances be deemed to be directory, rather than mandatory. It is the intent of this section to preserve the immunities provided by the Tort Claims Act and not to impose on the city or its officers, agents or employees, a mandatory duty of care toward persons and property so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages. (Ord. 85-19 N.S. § 1, 1985).

Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY1
Sections:

1.08.010    Violation declared misdemeanor.

1.08.020    Each day considered separate offense.

1.08.030    Penalty.

1.08.040    Nuisances.

1.08.050    Misdemeanor/infraction.

1.08.010 Violation declared misdemeanor.
No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this code. A person violating a provision or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 1-301).

1.08.020 Each day considered separate offense.
Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by that person. (Prior code § 1-303).

1.08.030 Penalty.
A person convicted of a misdemeanor under this code, unless specific provision is otherwise made, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or both. Under Section 36903 of the Government Code, imprisonment in the county jail is prescribed as a place for imprisonment for each violation of this code and of any ordinance. The penalties imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other prescribed penalties, costs, fees or civil actions and the city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, witness fees, court costs, and fees and all other expenses of litigation incurred by the city and resulting from any action brought against a person violating this code. (Ord. 03-9 § 1; prior code § 1-302).

1.08.040 Nuisances.
In addition to the penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of a provision of the code is a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such. Each day that the condition continues is a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 1-304).

1.08.050 Misdemeanor/infraction.
A violation of this code may be made an infraction instead of a misdemeanor by:

A. The city attorney filing a complaint in court specifying that the offense is an infraction;

B. The issuing of a citation specifying that the violation is an infraction; or

C. The city attorney making a motion in court to reduce a misdemeanor to an infraction if such motion is made prior to the trial on the matter. (Ord. 03-9 § 2).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose fines up to $500.00 or imprisonment up to six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, see Government Code § 36901; for statutory provisions authorizing the reduction of city ordinance violations to infraction, see Government Code § 36900.


Chapter 1.10
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Sections:

1.10.010    Title and purpose.

1.10.020    Applicability.

1.10.030    Definitions.

1.10.040    Administrative citation.

1.10.050    Contents of citation.

1.10.060    Service of citation.

1.10.070    Amount of fines.

1.10.080    Payment of fines.

1.10.090    Administrative hearing request.

1.10.100    Advance fine deposit hardship waiver.

1.10.110    Administrative hearing procedure.

1.10.120    Decision of the hearing officer.

1.10.130    Right to judicial review.

1.10.140    Recovery of fines and administrative charges.

1.10.150    Allocation of recovered fines and administrative charges.

1.10.160    Failure to comply with final order to correct violation.

1.10.010 Title and purpose.
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of the Benicia Municipal Code and other city standards, regulations and policies to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. The council finds and declares that an appropriate method of enforcement for these violations and to encourage compliance is an administrative citation program. The council further finds that continued violations are a drain on personnel and resources, require resources over and above the level of enforcement services usually provided, and constitute a public nuisance. These costs should be paid by the responsible person or persons. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for an administrative process that has objective criteria for the imposition of fines and provides for a fair process to appeal the issuance of administrative citations. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.020 Applicability.
A. This chapter provides for administrative citations which are in addition to all other legal remedies, including criminal, civil or other legally established procedures, which may be pursued to address violations identified in this chapter.

B. This chapter applies to the following acts or omissions:

1. All violations of the Benicia Municipal Code;

2. All violations of city standards, regulations and policies;

3. All violations of the uniform, technical or other codes or ordinances adopted or incorporated by reference by the city;

4. All other state laws applicable to and enforced by the city of Benicia;

5. Failing to comply with any order or condition issued by a commission, board, hearing officer or city staff authorized to issue orders and conditions, including but not limited to the city’s building official, code enforcement official, fire marshal, fire chief, public works director, planning commission, historic preservation review commission, or city council; and

6. Failing to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, contract or environmental document issued or approved by the city.

C. This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of fines and penalties imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.

D. Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Civil fine” is the monetary sanction established by resolution by the city council that is imposed by the issuance of a citation.

“Days” shall mean calendar days. In the event a specified time period ends on a weekend or city holiday, then the time period shall end on the next business day.

“Director” shall mean any department head in the city, including the following: city manager, assistant city manager, police chief, fire chief, community development director, public works director, finance director, parks and community services director, library director and any of their designated agents or representatives.

“Enforcement officer” shall mean any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this chapter.

“Hearing officer” shall mean any person appointed by the city manager to preside over the hearings described in this chapter. The hearing officer can have no pecuniary interest in the outcome of the hearing, or interest in or bias regarding the case. If the appointee is a city employee, the appointee cannot work in the department that is administering the citation, nor can any decision of the hearing officer be made subject to the employee’s performance evaluation in his/her regular job.

“Responsible person” shall mean the person or persons whom the director or designee determines is responsible for causing or maintaining any violation of this code or other provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to a property owner, tenant, person with legal interest in real property, or person in possession of real property and their employees and agents to whom a citation has been issued. The term “person” means any natural person, firm, association, business, trust, organization, corporation, partnership, company or any other legal entity. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.040 Administrative citation.
A. Authority to Issue Citation. Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of this code has determined that a code violation has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation, on a form approved by the city manager, to any responsible person, imposing civil fines for the violations.

B. Prior Written Warning Requirement. When the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that create an immediate danger to health or safety, a citation may be issued without a warning notice. For all other violations, a citation shall not be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the responsible person has first been personally served or sent via first class mail a written warning notice providing the following information:

1. Date and approximate time the violation was observed by the enforcement officer;

2. Name and address of the responsible person and address or definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

3. Section or sections of the municipal code violated and a short description of the facts that create the violation;

4. Action required to correct the violation and a reasonable period by which such action must be completed to prevent the imposition of an administrative citation;

5. The consequences of failing to correct the violation, including the amount of fines that can be imposed for each violation; that each day a violation exists can be considered a separate violation; and that unpaid fines are subject to administrative late fees and interest charges.

Service of the written warning notice will be deemed complete if personally served on the responsible party or mailed to the responsible person’s address shown on the last Solano County equalized property tax assessment rolls or to any other address known for the responsible person. The notice shall become effective on the date of personal service or first class mailing. The failure of a responsible person to receive a warning notice shall not invalidate any proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter if service was given in the manner set forth in this section.

C. Citations for Acts Committed Outside Enforcement Officer’s Presence. An officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in the officer’s presence if the officer has determined through investigation that the responsible person did commit or is otherwise responsible for the violation.

D. Continuing Nature of Violations. Each municipal code section violated is a separate offense with an independent fine. Each day a prohibited condition, use or activity under the code exists is a separate and distinct offense. A single citation may charge multiple violations covered by this chapter. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.050 Contents of citation.
Each citation shall include all of the following information:

A. Date and, if applicable, approximate time the violation was observed by the enforcement officer;

B. Name and address of the responsible person in violation and address or definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

C. Section or sections of the municipal code violated and a short description of the facts that create the violation;

D. Action required to correct the violation and the date by which such action must be completed to prevent the imposition of the next administrative fine;

E. Amount of the fine for each violation and procedure to pay the fine;

F. Consequences of failing to correct the violation, including any late fees and interest charges that will accrue if not timely paid, and which shall constitute a civil debt;

G. A description of the administrative citation appeal process and the manner by which a hearing on a citation may be obtained (including the form to be used, where it may be procured from, and the period in which a request must be made in order to be timely);

H. Description of the procedure, including the time within which to make a request for a hardship waiver of the advance fine deposit when requesting an appeal hearing; and

I. The name and signature of the officer, and the signature of the responsible person, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a responsible person to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person has committed a violation of the code. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.060 Service of citation.
An administrative citation shall be served in one of the following methods:

A. An enforcement officer may personally serve the citation on the responsible person. The citation shall become effective on the date of personal service.

B. An enforcement officer may mail the citation by first class mail and certified mail, return receipt requested, to the responsible person. The citation shall be mailed to the responsible person’s address shown on the last Solano County equalized property tax assessment rolls or to any other address known for the responsible person. The citation shall become effective on the date of the first class mailing. The failure to serve any responsible person shall not invalidate any proceeding taken pursuant to this chapter.

C. An enforcement officer shall post the property where the violation occurs in a conspicuous place with the citation when the responsible person resides at an unknown address. A copy of the citation shall also be mailed by first class mail to the responsible person at the property where the violation occurs. The citation shall become effective on the date of the first class mailing.

D. Failure of a responsible person to receive a citation or notice shall not invalidate any fine, late charge, action or proceeding that is imposed or brought pursuant to this chapter, if service was given in a manner stated in this section. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.070 Amount of fines.
A. The amounts of fines for violations imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be established by resolution by the city council, including escalating fine amounts for repeat violations within a 12-month period. The director of the department issuing the citation shall have the discretion to reduce the total fine amounts when there are multiple violations, keeping in mind the ultimate goal is abatement of the violations. In no case can the fines for each violation exceed the amounts established by city council resolution, which shall be in conformance with state law.

B. An administrative late fee charge established by city council resolution shall be owed for fines not paid within 30 days of their due date.

C. The city council may, by resolution, also establish and impose a daily interest charge on fines that are not fully paid to the city within 45 calendar days of their issuance when they are not contested, or within 45 calendar days of their nonpayment following the decision of a hearing officer or judicial officer to uphold or confirm the fine. Interest shall not be imposed on a late charge and shall not exceed the maximum rate allowed by law. The rate of interest and the commencement of its accrual may be modified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.080 Payment of fines.
A. The fine shall be paid to the city finance department within 15 calendar days from the effective date of the citation.

B. Any administrative citation and/or administrative charge paid shall be refunded if it is determined after a hearing that the person issued the administrative citation was not the responsible person or that there was no violation as identified in the administrative citation.

C. Payment of a fine shall not excuse the responsible person from correcting the violation. The issuance of a citation and/or payment of a fine does not bar the city from taking any other enforcement action regarding a violation that is not corrected, including issuing additional administrative citations, taking city abatement action, and/or filing civil and/or criminal complaints. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.090 Administrative hearing request.
A. Any responsible person receiving an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation pursuant to this chapter or that he or she is the responsible person and may request an appeal hearing as follows:

1. A request for hearing form shall be obtained from the city clerk, and shall be completed and returned to the city clerk’s office along with the entire amount of the fine (or request for a hardship waiver pursuant to BMC 1.10.100) within 15 calendar days from the issuance of the citation. If the office of the city clerk does not receive the request with the total fine amount or a request for a hardship waiver within the required period, the responsible person shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed final.

2. The request for hearing form shall contain a brief statement outlining the responsible person’s basis for contesting the citation and an address at which notice of any additional proceeding, correspondence or the decision of the hearing officer may be received.

3. Only after a completed request for hearing form has been filed with the city clerk, and the responsible person has submitted the advance fine deposit or has obtained a hardship waiver, shall the city set the date, time and place for the hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days after the city clerk received the request and the advance fine deposit or an approved hardship waiver.

4. The responsible person requesting the hearing shall be notified by first class mail of the time and place set for the hearing at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall be sent to the address provided on the request for hearing form filed by the responsible person. Service shall become effective on the date of first class mailing. Failure of the responsible person requesting the hearing to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken.

5. The responsible person or the city may request one continuance, but in no event may the hearing be continued more than 30 days after the date of the originally scheduled hearing unless the hearing officer finds circumstances warrant a longer continuance not to exceed 90 days after the date of the originally scheduled hearing.

6. All reports or documentation supporting the issuance of the administrative citation shall be served on the responsible person at the address provided on the request for hearing form as soon as possible after the completed request is received, but at least five days before the hearing. Failure to receive such reports or documentation shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

7. The responsible person requesting the hearing shall provide any supporting documentation to the city clerk at least five days before the hearing. The hearing officer shall have the latitude to accept additional documentation at the hearing as needed to conduct a fair hearing.

B. A timely request for a hearing shall not excuse a responsible person from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.

C. The failure of any responsible person to file a request for hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing and the citation will be deemed final. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.100 Advance fine deposit hardship waiver.
Any responsible person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative citation and is financially unable to deposit the fine as required in BMC 1.10.090 may file a request for hardship waiver as follows:

A. The request for waiver shall be made on a form obtained from the city clerk and shall be submitted to the city clerk along with all supporting documentation within 15 days of the effective date of the citation.

B. The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as required by BMC 1.10.090 shall be stayed unless or until the city makes a determination not to issue the hardship waiver.

C. To be considered for a hardship waiver, the application must be complete and signed and must be accompanied by documents that enable the city manager or designee to reasonably determine the responsible person’s financial inability to pay the full amount of the fines in advance of the hearing. The owner may be granted a reasonable extension to supply supporting documentation by the city manager or designee. Documents suitable for consideration may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns, and all schedules for the preceding tax year, financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for the 12 months preceding submittal of the waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the responsible person’s financial hardship. The city may, at a time chosen in its sole discretion and after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy or discard the documents submitted for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the responsible person.

D. The city manager or designee shall issue a written decision specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the hardship waiver. The written determination of the city manager or designee shall be final and shall be served by first class mail upon the responsible person who applied for the waiver. The decision regarding the request for a waiver shall become effective on the date of the mailing.

E. Approval of the hardship waiver will result in the city setting a hearing pursuant to this chapter.

F. If the city manager or designee decides not to issue a waiver, the responsible person shall remit the advance fine deposit within 10 days of the decision. If the advance fine deposit is not received by the city clerk by this date, the request for hearing shall not be accepted and the responsible person shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to an administrative hearing and the citation shall be deemed final. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.110 Administrative hearing procedure.
A. No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with BMC 1.10.090 or an advance fine deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with BMC 1.10.100.

B. Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and who is responsible by a preponderance of the evidence.

C. The city and the responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the administrative citation. The responsible person may represent themselves or be represented by any person of their choice.

D. The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer and/or the responsible person or to conduct an inspection of the building and/or property involved in the hearing prior to concluding the hearing and issuing a written decision.

E. If desired, an inspection of the building and/or property by the hearing officer during the hearing may occur if the responsible person consents to the inspection, is given notice of the date and time of the inspection, and both parties are permitted to be present during the inspection. If the building, structure and/or property can be inspected from areas in which the general public has access, or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the building and/or property, then notice to and consent of the responsible person are not required. The hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing the material facts observed and conclusions drawn from the inspection and the responsible person and enforcement officer shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer.

F. The failure of the responsible person to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and shall be deemed a waiver of his or her right to an administrative hearing. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.120 Decision of the hearing officer.
A. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within 15 days of the conclusion of the hearing either upholding, reducing, conditionally reducing or canceling the fines stated in the citation or any administrative charges imposed. The decision shall state the reasons for that decision and the right to judicial review of the decision pursuant to BMC 1.10.130. The hearing officer’s decision is final.

B. If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the advance fine deposit shall be retained by the city. If a hardship waiver was issued, the written decision shall require the fine to be paid within 30 days of the date of service of the decision. If the fine is not paid within the time specified, the fine shall be subject to the imposition of an administrative late fee charge and interest as set forth in BMC 1.10.070.

C. If the hearing officer determines the administrative citation should be canceled and the advance fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall refund the amount of the deposited fine. If the fine is reduced by the hearing officer, the city shall make a partial refund of the advance fine deposit.

D. The decision should indicate that the hearing officer’s decision is the final decision for the city and that the responsible party has 20 days from the effective date of the decision to file a petition for judicial appeal as set forth in BMC 1.10.130.

E. The responsible person shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision by first class and by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided on the request for hearing form by the responsible person requesting the hearing. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a responsible person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.130 Right to judicial review.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4(b), decisions of the hearing officer are appealable to the superior court within 20 days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the responsible person of this appeal right and the court filing fee as set forth in Government Code Section 70615. The responsible person shall serve a copy of the court filed notice of appeal on the Office of the City Clerk, Benicia City Hall, 250 E L St, Benicia, CA 94510 by personal service or first class mail within five calendar days of filing the notice of appeal. If the hearing officer’s decision is not appealed in a timely manner, it shall be deemed confirmed. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her court filing fee, as well as the fine deposit in accordance with the court judgment. The reimbursement shall be mailed to the responsible person within 30 days of the city’s receipt of a notice of judgment or ruling from the superior court clerk. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.140 Recovery of fines and administrative charges.
The unpaid civil fines, administrative charges and accrued interest shall constitute a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by the owner and/or responsible parties. At its discretion, the city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the recovery of all fines, administrative charges and interest owed to the city. Any property owner or responsible party who fails to pay the fines, administrative charges, or interest owed to the city may be liable in any action brought by the city for costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amounts to the extent allowed by law. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total of all fines, administrative charges and interest has been recovered. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.150 Allocation of recovered fines and administrative charges.
Fines and administrative charges collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the city’s general fund to support city enforcement efforts. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

1.10.160 Failure to comply with final order to correct violation.
Failure of a responsible person to comply with a corrective action stated in any uncontested citation, or with regard to a correction order in any hearing officer decision that is deemed confirmed and not appealed to the superior court, shall constitute a new and separate violation and misdemeanor offense. (Ord. 18-18 § 1).

Chapter 1.12
ORDINANCES1
Sections:

1.12.010    Reading and publication.

1.12.020    Recordkeeping.

1.12.030    Signature and attestation.

1.12.010 Reading and publication.
A. Any ordinance of the city presented for passage and adoption shall first be read at a regular meeting of the council and shall be laid over to a regular meeting of the council not less than five days thereafter, at which time it shall be read for the second time before its passage and adoption; provided, that in cases of emergency, the existence of which emergency shall be declared in such ordinance, any ordinance may be passed and adopted upon the first reading thereof.

B. A brief notice of each ordinance passed and adopted shall be thereafter published once, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, within 15 days from the date it was adopted. Such notice shall state the date of the passage and adoption of the ordinance, refer to it by its number and title, contain a brief summary of the ordinance’s contents, and state that copies thereof may be obtained from the city clerk upon request. (Ord. 76-28 N.S. § 1, 1976).

1.12.020 Recordkeeping.
All ordinances passed by the city council shall be entered by the clerk in the record book of ordinances with his certificate annexed to each stating the foregoing ordinance is a true and correct copy of an ordinance of this city, giving the number and title of said ordinance and date of its passage, and stating that the same has been published according to law, giving the date of said publication. (Ord. 344 M.C. § 2, 1893).

1.12.030 Signature and attestation.
All ordinances passed by the city council shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk, and published at least once in a newspaper published and circulated in the city. Ordinances shall take effect 30 days after final passage, except that those types of ordinances listed in Government Code Section 36937 shall take effect immediately. (Ord. 344 M.C. § 1, 1893; amended during 1980 codification).

1
    For statutory provisions on passage, adoption and publication of city ordinances, see Government Code § 36931 et seq.


Chapter 1.16
GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS1
Sections:

1.16.010  General municipal election.

1.16.010 General municipal election.
The city shall hold its general municipal election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. (Ord. 13-04 § 2; Ord. 07-09 § 1; amended during 2004 republication; Ord. 97-7 N.S.; Ord. 95-3 N.S.; Ord. 311 M.C. § 1, 1890; amended during 1980 codification).

1 For statutory provisions on municipal elections, see Election Code § 1301 et seq.; for provisions on notice of elections, see Election Code § 12101 et seq.


Chapter 1.20
FEE ESTABLISHMENT
Sections:

1.20.010  Council resolution.

1.20.020  Increases.

1.20.030  Capital improvement license tax – Increase.

1.20.010 Council resolution.
Where an ordinance, rule or regulation requires a person to file an application or request a permit, the city council may, by resolution, fix the fee to be charged for the filing and processing of the application and the request for permit, including an appeal from the decision of a subordinate body. (Ord. 73-17 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 1-501).

1.20.020 Increases.
In addition to the fees set forth in the parkland dedication ordinance, sewer ordinance and water fee ordinance, there should be added thereto a sum equal to that part of said fee which is in direct proportion to the increase in the cost of living index over the said index as established for June, 1978. Said increase shall be determined on July 1st of each year and applied throughout the next 12-month period, if the city council, by minute action, explicitly orders said increase for said 12-month period. (Ord. 83-13 N.S. § 2, 1984; Ord. 78-10 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 1-502).

1.20.030 Capital improvement license tax – Increase.
In addition to the fees set forth in BMC 5.36.060, there shall be added thereto a sum equal to that part of said fee which is in direct proportion to the annual increase in the construction cost index. Said increase shall be determined and set annually by resolution of the city council passed prior to the adoption and passage of the annual budget. (Ord. 83-13 N.S. § 3, 1984).

Chapter 1.24
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.24.010  Sale of city land for post office construction.

1.24.010 Sale of city land for post office construction.
At its meeting of November 20, 1984, the city council, city of Benicia, found that city land, commonly known as Sanborn Field, has since its acquisition been used for a ball field and other recreational uses, and that the city has been approached by the United States Postal Service to acquire a portion of Sanborn Field for the construction of a new city postal facility, and, whereas, in order to accomplish this goal it is necessary that the city convey the property to the United States Postal Service in order to establish a more convenient location and to provide more efficient service to the residents of the community; and pursuant to the findings and Government Code Section 37111, the city council does authorize the sale of a portion of the Sanborn Field to the United States Postal Service for the purpose of construction and erection of a post office facility; provided, however, that the sale of the parcel be conditioned upon the following:

A. That the city reserves the right to participate in architectural review of any building on the parcel;

B. That the agreement of sale contain a provision allowing the city the first right to purchase the property and improvements from the postal service in the event it ceases use as a post office;

C. That the proceeds derived from the sale of the parcel be used to develop softball fields and other recreational facilities at the Benicia Middle School, and that any excess proceeds after such expenditure shall be placed in the recreation department budget for further development and maintenance of recreational facilities. (Ord. 84-11 N.S. § 1, 1984).

Chapter 1.32
CLAIMS FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES
Sections:

1.32.010  Authority.

1.32.020  Claims required.

1.32.030  Form of claim.

1.32.040  Claim prerequisite to suit.

1.32.050  Suit.

1.32.010 Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 01-9 N.S., 2001).

1.32.020 Claims required.
All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. Unless otherwise provided by the California Government Code, a claim governed by this section shall be presented not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action. (Ord. 01-9 N.S., 2001).

1.32.030 Form of claim.
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 01-9 N.S., 2001).

1.32.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
In accordance with California Government Code Section 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirement of BMC 1.32.020. (Ord. 01-9 N.S., 2001).

1.32.050 Suit.
Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 01-9 N.S., 2001).

Chapter 1.36
VOLUNTARY CODE OF FAIR CAMPAIGN PRACTICES
Sections:

1.36.010  Findings.

1.36.020  Purpose.

1.36.030  Qualification for compliance.

1.36.010 Findings.
The city council finds as follows:

A. There are basic principles of honesty, fairness, responsibility and respect to which every candidate for public office should adhere in order to be worthy of the public office that that candidate seeks.

B. Campaign communications should present only information that is fair, relevant and truthful to the voters for their consideration.

C. Candidates who fall short of adhering to such principles alienate the public from the electoral process and erode the public’s trust and confidence in the offices that those candidates seek.

D. Electoral campaigns are subject to unacceptable levels of negativism, attack advertising and other practices that demean representative democracy and undermine elected officials’ ability to serve in the public interest.

E. Negative, attack-oriented campaigns are a major factor in the growing cynicism, alienation and nonparticipation among American voters, striking at the heart of the American system of government.

F. Candidates have a responsibility to conduct civil, issue-oriented debates with fellow candidates and provide opponents with a meaningful opportunity to respond to any claims concerning their positions or qualifications to hold office.

G. Candidates for public office should have the ability to conduct clean and ethical campaigns. (Ord. 07-01 § 1).

1.36.020 Purpose.
The city council enacts this chapter to accomplish the following purposes:

A. To promote the principles of honesty, fairness, responsibility and respect in campaigning for public office.

B. To promote campaign communications to the public that are fair, relevant and truthful.

C. To induce candidates to adhere to principles which enhance the electoral process and build the public’s trust and confidence.

D. To eliminate unacceptable levels of negativism, attack advertising and other practices that demean representative democracy and undermine an elected official’s ability to serve the public interest.

E. To promote responsible civil conduct and issue-oriented debates.

F. To promote candidates for public office to conduct clean and ethical campaigns. (Ord. 07-01 § 1).

1.36.030 Qualification for compliance.
A candidate (or controlled committees of such candidates running for office or a committee formed for the purpose of a recall) qualifies as a participating candidate for an election campaign period if the following requirements are met:

A. The candidate voluntarily endorses, subscribes to, and solemnly pledges to conduct his or her campaign in accordance with the current version of the Benicia Code of Fair Campaign Practices.

B. The candidate will immediately and publicly repudiate those who take actions that either help a candidate’s candidacy or hurt an opponent’s candidacy, which are inconsistent with the Benicia Code of Fair Campaign Practices.

C. At the time an individual files his or her declaration of candidacy, nomination papers, or any other paper evidencing an intention to be a candidate for public office, the elections official shall give the individual a blank form of the Benicia Code of Fair Campaign Practices and a copy of this chapter. The elections official shall inform each candidate for public office that subscription to the code is voluntary.

D. If the candidate agrees to voluntarily endorse, subscribe to, and solemnly pledge to conduct their campaign in accordance with the current version of the Benicia Code of Fair Campaign Practices:

1. The cost for setup and printing of each candidate’s statement will be borne by the city; and

2. The cost of printing the statement of qualifications in English and inspection costs to determine the accuracy and legal form of the nomination papers shall be borne by the city.

E. Candidates for public office who do not voluntarily endorse, subscribe to, and solemnly pledge to conduct their campaign in accordance with the current version of the Benicia Code of Fair Campaign Practices will be responsible for any and all cost for the setup and printing of each candidate’s statement and the printing of the statement of qualifications in English and inspection costs to determine the accuracy and legal form of the nomination papers. (Ord. 07-01 § 1).

Chapter 1.40
DISCLOSURE OF CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES IN CANDIDATE AND BALLOT MEASURE ELECTIONS
Sections:

1.40.010    Purpose.

1.40.020    Definitions.

1.40.030    Additional campaign statements.

1.40.040    Supplemental independent expenditure reports in candidate elections.

1.40.041    Independent expenditure in 45 days preceding election.

1.40.042    Disclaimer requirements for campaign communications funded by independent expenditures.

1.40.050    Access to records.

1.40.060    Ballot measure finance disclosure.

1.40.070    Contributor occupation and employer.

1.40.080    Campaign literature – Filing with city clerk.

1.40.090    Recordkeeping.

1.40.100    Disclaimers on campaign communications.

1.40.110    Duties of city clerk and city attorney.

1.40.120    Enforcement.

1.40.140    Verification.

1.40.150    Injunction.

1.40.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act of 1974. (Ord. 09-08 § 1; Ord. 07-18 § 1).

1.40.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in the Political Reform Act of 1974 as amended (Government Code Sections 82000 through 82055) shall govern the interpretation of this chapter, unless otherwise specified herein. (Ord. 09-08 § 1; Ord. 07-18 § 1).

1.40.030 Additional campaign statements.
A. In addition to the campaign statements required to be filed pursuant to the Political Reform Act, commencing with Government Code Section 8100, as amended, candidates for mayor and city council, their controlled committees and committees primarily formed to support or oppose these candidates shall file an additional pre-election statement by 4:30 p.m. on the Wednesday immediately preceding the election. This statement shall have a closing date of the prior Sunday and shall cover activity and payments occurring from the closing date of the last report filed by the candidate or committee through and including that Sunday.

B. In addition to the campaign statements required to be filed pursuant to the Political Reform Act, commencing with Government Code Section 8100, as amended, candidates for mayor and city council, their controlled committees and committees primarily formed to support or oppose these candidates shall file a post-election statement by 4:30 p.m. on the Friday immediately following the election. This statement shall include all activity and payments occurring from the closing date of the last report filed by the candidate or committee through and including Election Day. (Ord. 09-08 § 1; Ord. 07-18 § 1).

1.40.040 Supplemental independent expenditure reports in candidate elections.
Any person or committee making independent expenditures totalling $1,000 or more in a calendar year, supporting or opposing a candidate for mayor or city council, regardless of where or when it files its campaign reports under the Political Reform Act, the Federal Election Campaign Act, or any similar law, shall file a California Supplemental Independent Expenditure Report (Form 465) with the city clerk at the same time as the mayoral and city council candidates, covering the same period and disclosing the information required by that statement. (Ord. 09-08 § 1; Ord. 07-18 § 1).

1.40.041 Independent expenditures in 45 days preceding election.
A. Disclosure of Expenditures. Any person, including any committee, that makes or incurs independent expenditures of $1,000 or more in support of or in opposition to any city measure or candidate for mayor or city council, in the 45 days before an election in which the measure or candidate appears on the ballot, shall notify the city clerk within 24 hours by personal delivery, fax or email each time one or more expenditures which meet this threshold are made.

B. Contents of Notice.

1. The notice shall specify:

a. Each candidate or measure supported or opposed by the expenditure;

b. The amount spent to support or oppose each candidate or measure;

c. Whether the candidate or measure was supported or opposed;

d. The date and amount of each expenditure;

e. A description of the type of communication for which the expenditure was made;

f. The name and address of the person making the expenditure; and

g. The name and address of the payee.

2. The notice shall include a statement that the expenditure was not made at the behest of any candidate or ballot measure proponent who benefited from the expenditure.

3. The notice shall be signed under penalty of perjury by both a responsible officer and the treasurer of the committee making the expenditure.

C. Notification to Candidates of Expenditures. The city clerk will notify all candidates by fax or e-mail in the affected race within one business day after receiving the notice of independent expenditures of $1,000 or more. The notification will indicate the candidate who was supported or opposed by the expenditure and include a copy of the communication provided by the person or group making the expenditure.

D. Exemption for Regularly Published Newsletters. For purposes of the notification required by subsection (A) of this section, payments by an organization for its regularly published newsletter or periodical, if the circulation is limited to the organization’s members, employees, shareholders, other affiliated individuals and those who request or purchase the publication, shall not be required to be reported. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.042 Disclaimer requirements for campaign communications funded by independent expenditures.
A. Campaign communications funded by an independent expenditure supporting or opposing city candidates or city measures shall include the phrase “Not authorized by a candidate,” and shall also include the name of any contributor of $2,500 or more made in the past six months to a committee funding the independent expenditure, in the phrase “Major Funding Provided By [Name of Contributor(s)].” Expenditures of $2,500 or more that are earmarked for any other candidate or ballot measure outside of the city of Benicia need not be disclosed.

B. The disclosures required by this section shall be presented in a clear and conspicuous manner to give the reader, observer or listener adequate notice, as specified below:

1. For printed campaign communications that measure no more than 24 inches by 36 inches, all disclosure statements required by this section shall be printed using a typeface that is easily legible to an average reader or viewer, but is not less than 10-point type in contrasting color to the background on which it appears. For printed campaign communications larger than this size in area, all disclosure statements shall constitute at least five percent of the height of the material and shall be printed in contrasting color.

2. For video broadcasts including television, satellite and cable campaign communications, the information shall be both written and spoken either at the beginning or at the end of the communication, except that if the disclosure statement is written for at least five seconds of a broadcast of 30 seconds or less or 10 seconds of a 60-second broadcast, a spoken disclosure statement is not required. The written disclosure statement shall be of sufficient size to be readily legible to an average viewer and air for not less than four seconds.

3. For audio, telephone call or radio advertisement campaign communications, the disclosures shall be spoken in a clearly audible manner at the same speed and volume as the rest of the telephone call or radio advertisement at the beginning or end of the communication and shall last at least three seconds.

C. For purposes of this section, “campaign communication” means any of the following items:

1. More than 200 substantially similar pieces of campaign literature distributed within a calendar month, including but not limited to mailers, flyers, faxes, pamphlets, door hangers, e-mails, campaign buttons 10 inches in diameter or larger, and bumper stickers 60 square inches or larger;

2. Posters, yard or street signs, billboards, supergraphic signs and similar items;

3. Television, cable, satellite and radio broadcasts;

4. Newspaper, magazine, Internet website banners and similar advertisements;

5. Two hundred or more substantially similar live or recorded telephone calls made within a calendar month.

D. For purposes of this section, “campaign communication” does not include: small promotional items such as pens, pencils, clothing, mugs, potholders, skywriting or other items on which the statement required by this section cannot be reasonably printed or displayed in an easily legible typeface; communications paid for by a newspaper, radio station, television station or other recognized news medium; and communications from an organization to its members other than a communication from a political party to its members.

E. The disclaimer on campaign communications must be updated when a new person qualifies as a disclosable contributor or when the committee's name changes. Broadcast advertisement disclosures must be amended within five calendar days after a new person qualifies as a disclosable contributor or a committee’s name changes.

A committee shall be deemed to have complied with this section if the amended advertisement is mailed, containing a request that the advertisement immediately be replaced, to all affected broadcast stations by overnight mail no later than the fifth day. For printed campaign communications and other material, disclosure information must be amended to reflect accurate disclosure information every time an order to reproduce the communication is placed. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.050 Access to records.
All campaign reports required to be filed by any candidate or committee with the city clerk shall be scanned and stored in .pdf format. The reports shall be posted on the city’s website no later than two working days after filing. (Ord. 09-08 § 1; Ord. 07-18 § 1).

1.40.060 Ballot measure finance disclosure.
Unless otherwise indicated, if a recall, referendum or initiative petition impacting city elected officials or city law is filed, the proponent shall be subject to the same provisions of this chapter as are applicable to candidates for elective city office, and any committee supporting or opposing the measure shall be subject to the same disclosure provisions as are applicable to committees making contributions or expenditures in connection with city candidate elections. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.070 Contributor occupation and employer.
No contribution shall be deposited into a campaign checking account of a candidate for mayor or city council unless the name, address, occupation and employer of the contributor are on file in the records of the recipient of the contribution. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.080 Campaign literature – Filing with city clerk.
An independent expenditure committee that makes an expenditure for 200 or more recorded telephone calls or any other forms of electronic or facsimile transmission of substantially similar content, or that makes an expenditure of $1,000 or more for a radio or television advertisement, or that mails or otherwise distributes more than 200 substantially similar pieces of campaign literature in support of or opposition to any candidate for mayor or city council, shall give a copy of the literature or script used for each communication to the city clerk within 24 hours of the first time the mailings, calls, transmissions, or advertisements are made or aired. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.090 Recordkeeping.
Candidates for mayor and city council, and committee treasurers, shall maintain such detailed accounts, records, invoices and receipts as are necessary to prepare campaign statements and to comply with the Political Reform Act, the regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission and this chapter. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.100 Disclaimers on campaign communications.
Any committee who mails or otherwise distributes more than 200 substantially similar pieces of campaign literature shall print, display or incorporate the following words anywhere within the communication: “Paid for by” immediately followed by the name, address and city of that committee. If the sender of a mass mailing is a controlled committee, the name of the person controlling the committee shall also be included. If an acronym is used to specify a committee name, the full name of any sponsoring organization of the committee shall be included in the campaign communication disclaimer required by this section. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.110 Duties of city clerk and city attorney.
The city clerk shall administer the provisions of this section. In addition to other duties required under this chapter, the clerk shall:

A. Report apparent violations of this section and applicable state law to the city attorney.

B. Conduct audits of reports and statements filed by candidates and committees supporting or opposing candidates for mayor and city council, as well as proponents and committees supporting or opposing city ballot measures. The city clerk may employ or contract with auditors when necessary to audit reports filed under this chapter.

C. The city attorney and city clerk may subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance and testimony, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and require by subpoena the production of any books, papers, records or other items necessary to the audit and investigation of candidates and committees. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.120 Enforcement.
A. Criminal Enforcement. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who causes any other person to violate any provision of this chapter, or who aids and abets any other person in the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be liable under the provisions of this section. Prosecution for violation of any provision of this chapter must be commenced within two years after the date on which the violation occurred.

B. Civil Enforcement.

1. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney. Where no specific civil penalty is provided, a person may be liable for an amount up to $2,000 for each violation.

2. Any person who intentionally or negligently makes or receives a contribution, or makes an expenditure, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to three times the amount of the unlawful contribution or expenditure.

3. If two or more persons are responsible for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.

4. In determining the amount of liability under this subsection, the court may take into account any mitigating factors and any aggravating factors.

5. No civil action alleging a violation of this chapter shall commence more than two years after the date of the election for which the funds at issue were contributed or expended. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.140 Verification.
All notices, reports and statements filed under this chapter shall be signed and verified by the filer under penalty of perjury. The person signing shall read, know and understand the contents of all such documents. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

1.40.150 Injunction.
The city attorney on behalf of the people of the city of Benicia may sue for injunctive relief to enjoin violations or threatened violations or to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 09-08 § 1).

Chapter 1.42
CONTRIBUTION AND VOLUNTARY SPENDING LIMITS
Sections:

1.42.010    Purpose.

1.42.020    Definitions.

1.42.030    Campaign contribution limitations.

1.42.040    Loans.

1.42.050    Use of personal funds.

1.42.060    Voluntary expenditure limits.

1.42.070    Lifting of voluntary expenditure limits.

1.42.080    Notification by non-participating candidate regarding expenditure ceiling.

1.42.090    Candidate acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure limit.

1.42.100    Adjustment of limits for inflation.

1.42.110    Candidate forum.

1.42.120    Enforcement.

1.42.010 Purpose.
This chapter is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act of 1974. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.020 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in the Political Reform Act of 1974 as amended (Government Code Sections 82000 through 82055) shall govern the interpretation of this chapter, unless otherwise specified herein.

“Debate” means a discussion between two or more candidates who have qualified to appear on a ballot for an elective city office that is moderated by an independent third party and that is attended by the public.

“Election” means any candidate election held for elective city office in the city of Benicia, including a general municipal election, a run-off election, a special election and a recall election.

“Elective city office” means the offices of mayor, city council member, city clerk and city treasurer.

“Elective city officer” means any individual who is a mayor, city council member, city clerk or city treasurer, whether appointed or elected.

“Qualified campaign expenditure” means:

1. Any expenditure made by a candidate for city council or mayor, or by a committee controlled by such a candidate, for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence the actions of the voters for or against the election of a candidate for city council or mayor.

2. A nonmonetary contribution provided at the behest of or with the approval of the candidate or committee controlled by the candidate. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.030 Campaign contribution limitations.
No person shall contribute a total of more than $250.00 to any candidate for city council, mayor, city clerk or city treasurer and to his or her controlled committee for a single election. A candidate for city council, mayor, city clerk or city treasurer, and his or her controlled committee together shall not accept any contribution or contributions totaling more than $250.00 from any person for a single election. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the amount a candidate may contribute to his or her campaign from his or her personal funds. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.040 Loans.
No person shall make, and no person or candidate shall solicit or accept, any loan for a period of more than 30 days in connection with an election for city council or mayor. Loans to a candidate or to a candidate’s controlled committees shall be counted against the contribution limitations applicable to the candidate. A candidate is not prohibited from obtaining a personal loan of any amount from a licensed financial lending institution in the regular course of business, unless the loan is made for political purposes. This section shall not limit the amount or duration of loans from the candidate to his or her own campaign. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.050 Use of personal funds.
No candidate shall expend more than $5,000 in personal funds, whether contributed or loaned, in connection with his or her campaign for elected city office until the following conditions have been met:

A. All personal funds to be expended by the candidate shall first be deposited in the candidate’s campaign contribution checking account at least 30 days before the election.

B. The candidate shall mail or personally deliver a letter noting the depositing of personal funds exceeding $5,000 and the amount of the deposit by guaranteed overnight mail to the city clerk within 48 hours of the deposit date. The city clerk shall notify all other candidates running for that office of the deposit and amount within 24 hours. The hour limits exclude weekends and city holidays. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.060 Voluntary expenditure limits.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any candidate for city council or mayor who files a statement of acceptance of the voluntary expenditure limits specified in this section shall be allowed to collect contributions or loans in twice the amounts specified in BMC 1.42.030.

B. The maximum qualified campaign expenditures for a candidate for mayor or city council shall be $28,000. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.070 Lifting of voluntary expenditure limits.
If a candidate for mayor or city council declines to accept the voluntary expenditure limit and makes qualified campaign expenditures in excess of the expenditure limit, or if a committee makes independent expenditures in the aggregate of more than the same limit in support of or in opposition to any such candidate, the applicable expenditure ceiling shall no longer be binding on any candidate running for the same office. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.080 Notification by non-participating candidate regarding expenditure ceiling.
A candidate for mayor or city council who decides not to accept the voluntary expenditure limits shall notify the city clerk by telephone and by confirming telegram, fax or e-mail on the day the candidate raises more than 100 percent of the applicable expenditure ceiling and again on the day the candidate spends more than 100 percent of the applicable expenditure limit. The city clerk shall notify all other candidates for the same office by telephone, fax or e-mail within one business day. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.090 Candidate acceptance or rejection of the voluntary expenditure limit.
At the time of filing his or her declaration of intention, each candidate for city council or mayor shall also file a letter with the city clerk indicating acceptance or rejection of the applicable voluntary expenditure limit. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.100 Adjustment of limits for inflation.
Beginning January 1, 2011, the contribution and voluntary expenditure limits established by this chapter shall be adjusted biennially by a percentage equal to the change in the San Francisco Bay Area All Urban Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the previous two years. The amounts shall be rounded to the nearest $10.00. The city clerk shall calculate such increase and post the new limits in a conspicuous place in the city clerk’s office. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

1.42.110 Candidate forum.
The open government commission shall sponsor a forum on the Friday, Saturday or Sunday before the general election for all candidates for city council or mayor who meet the criteria of this section. Although Saturday is strongly preferred, Friday or Sunday may be selected to prevent a conflict with other events of general interest occurring in, or of interest to, the voters of the city of Benicia. The commission shall be responsible for selecting the date of the forum after discussion and consideration of potential conflicts. The chair of the commission shall moderate the forum or shall select another member of the commission to serve as moderator. The questions shall relate to last minute “hit pieces,” and will allow candidates the opportunity to respond to inflammatory statements and misinformation. All questions asked shall be selected from questions submitted by residents of, and nonprofit organizations and business entities located in, the city of Benicia. The forum may be canceled in its entirety by unanimous consent of the candidates, delivered to the chair of the commission at least 24 hours before the scheduled forum date. (Ord. 11-07 § 1).

1.42.120 Enforcement.
A. Criminal Enforcement. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who causes any other person to violate any provision of this chapter, or who aids and abets any other person in the violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be liable under the provisions of this section. Prosecution for violation of any provision of this chapter must be commenced within two years after the date on which the violation occurred.

B. Civil Enforcement.

1. Any person who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney. Where no specific civil penalty is provided, a person may be liable for an amount up to $2,000 for each violation.

2. Any person who intentionally or negligently makes or receives a contribution, or makes an expenditure, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action brought by the city attorney for an amount up to three times the amount of the unlawful contribution or expenditure.

3. If two or more persons are responsible for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.

4. In determining the amount of liability under this subsection, the court may take into account any mitigating factors and any aggravating factors.

5. No civil action alleging a violation of this chapter shall commence more than two years after the date of the election for which the funds at issue were contributed or expended. (Ord. 09-12 § 1).

Chapter 1.44
APPEALS
Sections:

1.44.010    Purpose.

1.44.020    Definitions.

1.44.030    City council review requests.

1.44.040    Procedure for appeal.

1.44.050    Procedure for rehearing.

1.44.060    Time limitations for appeals, rehearings, and reviews.

1.44.070    Time limitation for issuance of permits.

1.44.080    Fees.

1.44.090    Notice of appeal, rehearing or review.

1.44.100    Person or body to hear an appeal or review a decision.

1.44.110    Exhaustion of administrative remedies.

1.44.120    Exclusive procedures.

1.44.130    Accrual of certain claims.

1.44.140    Limitations on judicial review.

1.44.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an orderly and fair method of appeal, rehearing and review of decisions in order to avoid results inconsistent with the rules and regulations governing the decisions. Decisions of staff, boards, commissions, and committees may be appealed in accordance with this chapter. Decisions of boards, commissions and committees may be reviewed or reheard in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 18-21 § 1; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein below:

“Appeal” means reconsideration, by a higher authority, of the specific facts and circumstances of any final decision made by the city, any of its employees, committees or commissions.

“Applicant” means the person who applied for or requested the decision or action which is the subject of the appeal, rehearing or review.

“Decision” means any final decision, finding, ruling, order or action.

“Interested person” means any person, including the applicant, any city staff member, committee, or commission who has an interest in the matter at issue or whose health, safety, or welfare may be affected by the decision.

“Permit,” as used in BMC 1.44.070, means anything referred to elsewhere in this code as being a “permit” or “license.”

“Rehearing” means reconsideration of a decision by the person or body having made the decision.

“Review” means reconsideration of the decision of any city employee, committee, or commission requested by the city council, on its own motion, or upon request of any council member, in order to consider the decision and any broad legislative and policy factors involved. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.030 City council review requests.
Within the time limits set forth in BMC 1.44.060, the city council or any council member may request that a decision, pertaining to BMC Title 17, of any city employee, committee, or commission be reviewed to consider the decision and any broad legislative and policy factors involved by filing an application with the city clerk stating the reasons for the requested review. Said review will be conducted according to the procedures specified in BMC 1.44.040 and 1.44.100. The person or body to hear the review will be designated in the application by the city council or individual council member seeking such review and shall be as specified in BMC 1.44.100, unless the council as a whole specifies a higher level of review in the first instance. (Ord. 18-21 § 2; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.040 Procedure for appeal.
A. Any interested person may, within the time limits set forth in BMC 1.44.060, file an application for appeal with the city clerk. Said application shall contain sufficient information to identify the party, its interest in the matter, and the reasons for requesting an appeal.

B. If the appeal is to be heard by a person or body which conducts regularly scheduled meetings, the appeal shall be considered at the first regular meeting which follows receipt of the application by 14 or more days, and which allows sufficient time for the giving of notice as required by BMC 1.44.090.

C. If the appeal is to be heard by an individual or body which does not conduct regularly scheduled meetings, the appeal shall be considered not more than 14 days following receipt of the application; provided, that the time period may be extended if necessary to allow the giving of notice as required by BMC 1.44.090.

D. An appeal hearing shall consist of a new (i.e., de novo) hearing on the matter by the person or body specified in BMC 1.44.100. The appeal hearing shall be based on the following evidence:

1. Any relevant evidence, including staff reports, etc., submitted at the time of the prior decision and at the appeal hearing, and

2. Findings, if any, and decision of the person or body whose decision is being appealed.

E. If the original decision being appealed involved issuance of any permit, license, or other entitlement or approval or requested some action by the city, the applicant for the original decision shall have the burden of proof to support the granting of the requested issuance, approval, or action at the appeal.

F. The time limits in this section may be extended if the applicant(s) and appellant(s) agree.

G. At the hearing, the appellate body shall review the record and hear testimony of the appellant, the applicant, and any other interested party. Any interested party may appear in person or by agent or attorney to provide testimony.

H. After the hearing, the appellate body shall affirm, modify, or reverse, in whole or in part, the original decision and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as is appropriate. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant, the appellant, and any other party requesting such notice. (Ord. 07-27 § 1; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.050 Procedure for rehearing.
A. Within the time limits set forth in BMC 1.44.060, any member of a board, commission, committee or member of the city council who voted with the majority or who was absent, or any member of council in the case of a tie vote, may file an application for rehearing with the city clerk. The application shall contain sufficient information to identify the party, its interest in the matter, and the reasons for requesting a rehearing.

B. The application shall be considered at the first regular meeting which follows filing of the application by 14 or more days, or shall be considered within 14 days if the person or body to whom the application is made does not hold regular meetings.

C. To justify a rehearing the applicant must show in the application that there is new, relevant evidence which, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, could not have been produced, or which was improperly excluded, at the earlier hearing, or that the person or body failed to comply with the law, which contention was not asserted at the earlier hearing. The person or body may in its discretion decide whether to hear additional evidence than what is contained in the application. The decision whether to grant the rehearing is final and may not be appealed or reheard.

D. If the person or body concludes the applicant has met the burden of justifying the rehearing, the rehearing will be scheduled for the next regular meeting which allows sufficient time for the giving of notice as required by BMC 1.44.090.

E. No application for rehearing is required to be filed by any member of the city council to allow the council to take any new or different action on an item of city policy or a purely legislative function or decision, which does not involve a specific property owner, application, license or permit. The city council may establish reasonable rules to restrict the number of times a particular policy or legislative decision may be considered by the city council. (Ord. 18-21 § 3; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.060 Time limitations for appeals, rehearings, and reviews.
A. All applications for appeals, rehearings, and reviews must be filed, in writing, during regular business hours of 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays, and within 10 business days from the date of the final decision subject to appeal, rehearing or review.

B. For all matters requiring approval by the city, its employees, committees, commissions or council, the time limits for all applications shall begin on the date of the final decision by the city, its employees, committees, commissions or council.

C. If the final day for filing an application for appeal, rehearing or review falls on a holiday or weekend day when City Hall is closed, the application shall be filed no later than the next business day. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.070 Time limitation for issuance of permits.
A. Where a permit is sought and its issuance is contingent upon obtaining a prerequisite permit, the permit sought shall not be issued until the expiration of the time limit for seeking an appeal, rehearing, or review specified in BMC 1.44.060 applied to the prerequisite permit; provided, however, that if an application for appeal, rehearing, or review of the prerequisite permit is filed within the specified time limits, the permit sought shall not be issued until seven days following the final decision on the appeal, rehearing, or review. Any permit issued in violation of the provisions of this section shall be void.

B. This section does not apply to building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing permits. An applicant, however, proceeds at his or her own risk prior to the expiration of any appeal, rehearing or review time. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.080 Fees.
Each application for appeal or rehearing shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 17-10 § 1; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.090 Notice of appeal, rehearing or review.
Notice of the hearing for the appeal, rehearing, or review shall be given in the same manner as any required notice for the hearing at which the decision subject to the appeal, rehearing, or review was made. In all cases for the hearing for an appeal, rehearing, or review, written notice of the date, time, and place shall be given to the original applicant, if any, any prior applicant for appeal or rehearing regarding the same matter, and for appeals and rehearings the person requesting the current appeal or rehearing. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.100 Person or body to hear an appeal or review a decision.
The person or body to hear an appeal or review a decision shall be the following:

A. From a decision of the city staff to the department head;

B. From a decision of the department head to the city manager; except that (1) an appeal from a decision of the community development director on planning matters pursuant to BMC Title 17 shall be made to the planning commission; (2) an appeal from a decision of the building official on building matters pursuant to BMC Title 15 or the fire chief on the fire prevention and life safety code shall be to the building board of appeals; (3) an appeal from the decision of the license collector or tax administrator pursuant to Chapter 3.24 BMC or BMC Title 5 shall be to the city council; (4) an appeal from the decision of the chief of police regarding card room matters pursuant to Chapter 5.08 BMC shall be to the city council; (5) an appeal of the decision on trees shall be to the parks, recreation and cemetery commission; and (6) an appeal of the decision on complaints concerning library materials shall be to the board of library trustees.

1. Decisions of the fire chief regarding a notice to abate weeds or rubbish are final and not appealable to the city manager or city council;

2. Decisions of the hearing officer regarding BMC 8.38.121 on recovery of funds related to graffiti are final and not appealable to the city manager or city council;

C. From a decision of the city manager to the city council;

D. From a decision of any city committee or commission to the city council, except:

1. Decisions of the historic preservation review commission shall be to the planning commission;

2. Decisions of the parks, recreation and cemetery commission on tree appeals are final and not appealable to the city council; and

3. Decisions of the board of library trustees in all book and materials selection and retention decisions are final and not appealable to the city council;

E. Decisions of the city council are final unless appealed, reviewed, or reheard in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 18-21 § 4; Ord. 16-04 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 13-09 § 2; Ord. 09-14 § 1; Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.110 Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
Unless appealed, reheard, or reviewed as provided herein, any decision becomes final for all purposes when made. To constitute the exhaustion of administrative remedies and as a condition precedent to filing any court action thereon, there must be filed and considered an application for rehearing of the council action in any case where any of the factors set forth in BMC 1.44.050(C) are contended to exist. If an application for rehearing a council decision is filed, the council’s decision becomes final when either (A) the application is denied, or (B) a decision is made at the rehearing. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.120 Exclusive procedures.
The procedures set forth in this chapter are the exclusive methods by which appeals, rehearings and reviews may be pursued and none of the steps set forth herein may be waived or omitted. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.130 Accrual of certain claims.
No claim for violation of constitutional rights for deprivation of economic use of property shall arise until and unless a claimant has secured a final decision on a permit application for a plan of development and on a request for a variance or similar relief from the zone or other development standard for a plan of development as specified in BMC Title 17. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

1.44.140 Limitations on judicial review.
Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, no court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision or procedure of the city of Benicia, its council, commissions, boards or officers, which has become administratively final shall be maintained by any aggrieved person unless duly commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction within 90 days, as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.6, incorporated herein by reference, and/or as provided in California Government Code Section 65009, or any shorter statute of limitations provided by law. (Ord. 07-11 § 2).

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

Division 1. Organization

2.04    City Council

2.08    City Manager

2.12    City Clerk

2.16    Director of Finance

2.20    Officers’ Bonds and Compensation

2.24    Fire Department

2.28    Police Officer Standards and Training

2.32    Planning Department

2.36    Emergency Organization

2.40    Personnel System

2.44    Retirement System

2.48    City Treasurer

2.52    Design Immunity

2.56    (Reserved)

Division 2. Boards and Commissions

2.60    Advisory Bodies

2.64    Board of Library Trustees

2.68    Civil Service Commission

2.72    Repealed

2.76    Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Commission

2.80    Planning Commission

2.84    Historic Preservation Review Commission

2.88    Repealed

2.92    Repealed

2.96    Building Board of Appeals

2.100    Economic Development Board

2.104    Arts and Culture Commission

2.108    Community Sustainability Commission

Chapter 2.04
CITY COUNCIL1
Sections:

2.04.010    Meeting time and place.

2.04.020    Filling vacancies.

2.04.030    Compensation and reimbursement of councilpersons.

2.04.040    Additional compensation of the mayor.

2.04.010 Meeting time and place.
A. The regular meeting of the city council shall be held the first, third and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 6:00 p.m. The hour from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. shall be reserved for closed sessions on the first and third Tuesdays. If a closed session is not required, the regular meeting shall start at 7:00 p.m. The fourth Tuesday will be devoted to workshops, study sessions, or closed sessions to the extent possible and will be canceled if not required.

B. The place of the first and third Tuesday regular meeting is the Council Chamber, City Hall, 250 East L Street, Benicia, California. The place of the fourth Tuesday regular meeting is the Community Center, 370 East L Street, Benicia, California. The location of the meeting may be changed by the city manager if it appears:

1. The council chamber or the Community Center is not large enough to accommodate the number of persons likely to attend any meeting; or

2. Special facilities in accordance with BMC Title 4 are required for a particular meeting.

C. Special meetings shall be held in accordance with BMC Title 4. (Ord. 12-05 § 1; Ord. 12-01 § 1; Ord. 06-01 § 1; Ord. 84-4 N.S. § 1, 1984; prior code § 2-101).

2.04.020 Filling vacancies.
A. A special election shall be immediately called by the city council to fill every city council vacancy, except as set forth below, where the unexpired term of the former incumbent is greater than six months. The special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than 114 days from the date of the vacancy.

B. Every city council vacancy created when a council member is elected to the mayor’s seat shall be filled by appointment by the city council within 30 days of the vacancy. Such appointee shall be the person who received the highest number of votes as a council member candidate at the same election as the mayor’s election but who was not elected to a city council seat. (Ord. 01-14 N.S., 2001; Ord. 81-10 N.S. § 1, 1981).

2.04.030 Compensation and reimbursement of councilpersons.
Commencing on the date that one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, all city council persons, including the mayor, shall receive a salary of $418.00 per month, and in addition, shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. (Ord. 92-2 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 89-14 N.S. § 1, 1989; Ord. 88-3 N.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 85-23 N.S. § 1, 1986).

2.04.040 Additional compensation of the mayor.
Commencing on the date that one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, the mayor shall receive in addition to the salary and reimbursement set forth in BMC 2.04.030, the sum of $140.00 per month. (Ord. 92-2 N.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 89-14 N.S. § 2, 1989; Ord. 88-3 N.S. § 2, 1988; Ord. 85-22 N.S. § 1, 1986).

1
    For statutory provisions on city council meetings, see Government Code § 36801 et seq.; for provisions requiring meetings of local agencies to be open to the public, see Government Code § 54950 et seq.


Chapter 2.08
CITY MANAGER1
Sections:

2.08.010    Office created.

2.08.020    Eligibility.

2.08.030    Acting city manager.

2.08.040    Bond.

2.08.050    Compensation.

2.08.060    Residence requirement.

2.08.070    Powers and duties generally.

2.08.080    Attendance at commission meetings.

2.08.090    Council-manager relations.

2.08.100    Departmental cooperation.

2.08.110    Removal – Procedure.

2.08.120    Removal – Council discretion.

2.08.130    Removal – Limitation.

2.08.140    Additional regulations.

2.08.010 Office created.
The office of the city manager is created. The city council appoints the city manager and shall make the appointment wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications. The city manager holds office at the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2-201).

2.08.020 Eligibility.
A member of the city council is not eligible for appointment as city manager until one year elapses after the council member ceases to be a member of the council. (Prior code § 2-203).

2.08.030 Acting city manager.
The assistant city manager serves as manager pro tempore during the temporary absence or disability of the city manager. If there is no assistant city manager, the city manager shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence or disability by filing a written notice with the city clerk. If the city manager’s absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may appoint an acting city manager. (Prior code § 2-205).

2.08.040 Bond.
The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond approved by the city council in such sum as the city council determines. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager. The premium for the bond is a proper charge against the city. (Prior code § 2-204).

2.08.050 Compensation.
A. The city manager receives such compensation as the city council determines from time to time.

B. The city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 00-2; prior code § 2-206).

2.08.060 Residence requirement.
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of the city manager is not a condition of the appointment; however, within 180 days after reporting for work the city manager shall become a resident of the city unless the city council approves his residence outside the city. (Prior code § 2-202).

2.08.070 Powers and duties generally.
The city manager is the administrative head of the government of the city, subject to the direction and control of the city council. He is responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head and not as a limitation on them, the city manager shall:

A. Enforce the laws and ordinances of the city and see that the franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the council are faithfully observed;

B. Control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city who are subject to removal by him;

C. Appoint, remove, promote and demote each officer and employee of the city, excepting the city attorney and city auditor and excepting the chief of police when the city council has appointed the same person to the positions of chief of police and city manager, subject to personnel ordinances, rules and regulations;

D. Conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions and units under his direction as are in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

E. Recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he considers necessary;

F. Attend all meetings of the council unless he is excused by the mayor individually or the council, except when his removal is under consideration;

G. Keep the council advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city;

H. Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the council for its approval;

I. See that no expenditures are submitted or recommended to the council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. The city manager or his authorized representative is responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments and divisions of the city;

J. Make investigations into the affairs of the city and each department and division of it and each contract and its proper performance by the city. The city manager shall investigate all complaints of matters concerning the administration of the city government and of the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

K. Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property under the control and jurisdiction of the council;

L. Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as the city council delegates to him from time to time. (Ord. 99-2 N.S; prior code § 2-207).

2.08.080 Attendance at commission meetings.
The city manager may, and upon request of the city council shall, attend meetings of the planning commission, and other commissions, boards and committees created by the council. At these meetings which the city manager attends, boards or committees shall hear the city manager upon matters which he wishes to address the members and he shall inform the members as to the status of matters being considered by the council. He shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of each commission, board and committee appointed by the council. (Prior code § 2-210).

2.08.090 Council-manager relations.
Each member of the city council shall deal with the administrative services of the city through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry. Neither the council nor a member of the council shall give orders or instructions to subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the council only when the council is sitting in a duly convened meeting and no individual councilman shall give orders or instructions to the city manager. (Prior code § 2-208).

2.08.100 Departmental cooperation.
Each subordinate officer and the city clerk, city auditor, city treasurer and the city attorney shall assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Prior code § 2-209).

2.08.110 Removal – Procedure.
The city manager may be removed only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting. In case of his removal by the council, the council shall furnish the city manager with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him at least 30 days before the effective date of his removal. If the city manager so requests, the council may provide in writing reasons for the removal. The council may provide the city manager with these written reasons within seven days after the receipt of a request from the city manager. The city manager may make his request for the reasons in writing at least 15 days before the effective date of his removal. (Prior code § 2-211).

2.08.120 Removal – Council discretion.
In removing the city manager, the council has absolute discretion and its action is final and conclusive and does not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing. (Prior code § 2-212).

2.08.130 Removal – Limitation.
The city manager may not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during the period of 90 days following:

A. A general municipal election held in the city at which a member of the city council is elected; or

B. The time when a new city councilman is appointed.

The purpose of this section is to allow each newly elected or appointed member of the council or a reorganized council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. (Prior code § 2-213).

2.08.140 Additional regulations.
This chapter is not a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into a supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with this chapter. (Prior code § 2-214).

1
    For statutory provisions on the city manager, see Government Code § 34851 et seq.


Chapter 2.12
CITY CLERK1
Sections:

2.12.010    Transfer of assessor’s duties.

2.12.020    Duties – Generally.

2.12.010 Transfer of assessor’s duties.
The duties performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of property in the city and the duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property and the collection of special assessments for municipal purposes are transferred to the city clerk. (Prior code § 2-221).

2.12.020 Duties – Generally.
The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows:

A. To keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the city council in minute books devoted exclusively to such purposes, which shall also contain a comprehensive index;

B. To keep a book of ordinances recording all city ordinances and bearing those certifications required by law;

C. To keep and maintain custody of the city seal;

D. To administer oaths or affirmations;

E. To take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining to city affairs and business;

F. To take acknowledgement of instruments within the city;

G. To serve as clerk to the council;

H. To attest, index and file resolutions of the city council;

I. To administer and file oaths of office;

J. To conduct municipal elections;

K. To receive petitions relating to initiative, referendum or recall;

L. To conduct annexation proceedings to countersign general obligation bonds of the city;

M. To attest to subpoenas;

N. To file affidavits of completion;

O. To file name change instruments for various purposes;

P. To perform duties concerning improvement district proceedings, street vacations, and filing claims as may from time to time be prescribed by the city council;

Q. To give notice of public hearings;

R. To receive objections to public destruction of bonds;

S. To act as the financial disclosure officer for statements of economic interest;

T. To perform such other general secretarial skills as designated by the city council and necessary to the day-to-day operation of his/her office;

U. To perform such other duties as from time to time the city council so directs. (Amended during 2004 republication; Ord. 83-16 N.S. § 1, 1984).

1
    For statutory provisions on the city clerk, see Government Code § 40801 et seq.


Chapter 2.16
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE1
Sections:

2.16.010    Office established.

2.16.020    Appointment.

2.16.030    Appointment of deputies.

2.16.040    Bond.

2.16.050    Powers and duties generally.

2.16.060    Preparation of reports.

2.16.070    Transfer of duties.

2.16.080    Additional duties.

2.16.010 Office established.
There is established in the government of the city the office of director of finance. (Prior code § 2-241).

2.16.020 Appointment.
The director of finance is appointed by the city manager and serves at the pleasure of the city manager. In the absence of an appointment by the city manager, the city manager serves as the director of finance. (Prior code § 2-246).

2.16.030 Appointment of deputies.
With the consent of the city manager the director of finance may appoint one or more deputy directors of finance. Each deputy director shall perform the duties prescribed by the director and the city manager. (Prior code § 2-247).

2.16.040 Bond.
When the director enters upon his duties he shall execute a bond to the city required by Sections 37209 and 36518 of the Government Code. The bond shall conform to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds for public officers. The penal sum of the bond is fixed at $10,000. (Prior code § 2-248).

2.16.050 Powers and duties generally.
The director of finance has the following duties and responsibilities:

A. Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective divisions and services of the city;

B. Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses;

C. Maintain, or prescribe and require the maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices;

D. Perform the functions and duties relating to the administration and collection of taxes, licenses and permit fees levied by the city;

E. Perform the duties relating to preparing, auditing, presenting, and disbursing claims and demands against the city, including payrolls;

F. Assist in the purchase of supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and materials required by the city;

G. Assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration of the budget; and

H. Cooperate with the city treasurer and other officials of the city in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions and services of the city in accordance with modern municipal accounting practice. (Prior code § 2-242).

2.16.060 Preparation of reports.
The director of finance shall prepare and present to the council in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city, the following reports:

A. Quarterly or more frequently as requested, a statement of all receipts, disbursements and balance of the city;

B. An annual statement or report of the financial condition of the city; and

C. Such other financial reports as the council or city manager directs. (Prior code § 2-243).

2.16.070 Transfer of duties.
In accordance with Sections 40805.5 and 37209 of the Government Code, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 37201 through 37210 and Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code are transferred to the director of finance. (Ord. 76-17 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 2-245).

2.16.080 Additional duties.
The director of finance shall perform other additional duties and functions which the council or city manager prescribes. (Prior code § 2-244).

1
    For statutory provisions on the director of finance, see Government Code §§ 40805.5 and 37209.


Chapter 2.20
OFFICERS’ BONDS AND COMPENSATION1
Sections:

2.20.010    Bond – Amount.

2.20.020    Bond – Person holding more than one office.

2.20.030    Blanket bond.

2.20.040    Conditions.

2.20.050    Bond – City to pay premium.

2.20.060    Compensation.

2.20.070    Crime and dishonesty insurance policy.

2.20.010 Bond – Amount.
Each of the following officers and employees shall execute an official bond to the city in the amount specified:

A. City manager: $1,000,000.

B. City clerk: $1,000,000.

C. Finance officer: $1,000,000.

D. Treasurer: $1,000,000.

E. Chief of police: $1,000,000.

The bond for each of the above officers and employees may be in the form of a master bond or master official bond and may be combined with the bond required by BMC 2.20.030. (Ord. 97-9 N.S.; prior code § 2-401).

2.20.020 Bond – Person holding more than one office.
If a person holds more than one of the offices specified in BMC 2.20.010, he shall execute a bond in the amount which is the highest amount required for the offices held. (Prior code § 2-402).

2.20.030 Blanket bond.
There shall be a blanket bond in the amount of $1,000,000 covering all other officers and employees of the city. (Ord. 97-9 N.S.; prior code § 2-403).

2.20.040 Conditions.
The form of such a master official bond or insurance policy shall meet the following minimum for standards:

A. The amount shall not be in amount less than $1,000,000.

B. The bond or insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state of California.

C. The bond or insurance policy shall be issued by a company with a Best’s rating of no less than A-:VII.

D. The bond or insurance policy shall encompass claims for forgery or alteration; theft, disappearance, or destruction; robbery and safe burglary; public employee dishonesty; computer fraud; and fund transfer fraud.

E. The bond or policy may be issued on an annual or longer basis.

F. The form of the bond or policy shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. (Ord. 07-20 § 1; prior code § 2-404).

2.20.050 Bond – City to pay premium.
The city shall pay the premium for each bond required for an officer or employee. (Prior code § 2-405).

2.20.060 Compensation.
The city council is authorized by resolution to fix the compensation of all city employees and officers subject to its jurisdiction. (Ord. 790-B M.C. § 5, 1952).

2.20.070 Crime and dishonesty insurance policy.
Use of a commercial government crime insurance policy or employee dishonesty policy to provide coverage on the officers and employees of the city of Benicia in lieu of a bond or master bond is hereby approved and authorized. (Ord. 07-20 § 2).

1
    For statutory provisions on the bonds of city officers, see Government Code § 36518 et seq.; for provisions on official bonds generally, see Government Code § 1450 et seq.; for provisions on compensation of the city clerk and treasurer, see Government Code § 36517.


Chapter 2.24
FIRE DEPARTMENT1
Sections:

2.24.010    Establishment of fire department.

2.24.020    Establishment of a fire and life safety division – Duties of fire and life safety personnel.

2.24.030    Office of fire chief.

2.24.040    Mission statement.

2.24.010 Establishment of fire department.
There is established a fire department for the city. The department consists of a chief, paid firefighters, such companies of volunteer firefighters and clerical personnel as the city council from time to time determines. The city council shall fix and pay the compensation of the chief and other paid personnel. (Ord. 88-2 N.S. § 1, 1988).

2.24.020 Establishment of a fire and life safety division – Duties of fire and life safety personnel.
The Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city shall be enforced by the fire and life safety division, which is established in the fire department, and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the fire department. In the absence of the chief of the department, the fire marshal shall serve as the authority having jurisdiction on matters relative to fire and life safety. (Ord. 88-2 N.S. § 1, 1988).

2.24.030 Office of fire chief.
There is created the office of fire chief before the city. The city manager shall appoint the fire chief and exercise necessary supervision over the general operation of the fire department. The fire chief has charge of the enforcement of state laws, this municipal code and other ordinances and regulations of the city pertaining to fire prevention or fire protection. The fire chief is charged with the responsibility of establishing goals for each program to provide an element of service that contributes toward a safe working and living environment in the most effective and efficient manner possible. (Ord. 88-2 N.S. § 1, 1988).

2.24.040 Mission statement.
The primary mission of the fire department is to provide a range of programs designed to protect the lives and property of the inhabitants of the city from the adverse effects of fire, sudden medical emergencies or exposure to dangerous conditions created by either man or nature. (Ord. 88-2 N.S. § 1, 1988).

1
    For statutory provisions requiring the establishment of a fire department, see Government Code § 38611. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 78-18.


Chapter 2.28
POLICE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING1
Sections:

2.28.010    Declaration.

2.28.020    Adherence to standards.

2.28.030    Inquiries by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.

2.28.010 Declaration.
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 91-15 N.S. § 1, 1991; prior code § 2-261).

2.28.020 Adherence to standards.
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1 of the California Penal Code, the Benicia police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST), while receiving aid from the state pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 91-15 N.S. § 1, 1991; prior code § 2-262).

2.28.030 Inquiries by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that public safety dispatcher personnel of the Benicia police department adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 91-15 N.S. § 1, 1991).

1
    For statutory provisions on standards and training of local law enforcement officers, see Penal Code § 13520 et seq.


Chapter 2.32
PLANNING DEPARTMENT1
Sections:

2.32.010    Creation – Director.

2.32.020    Director – Duties.

2.32.030    Public hearings.

2.32.010 Creation – Director.
There is in the city government a department known as the planning department. The administrative officer of the department is the community development director. (Prior code § 2-271).

2.32.020 Director – Duties.
The community development director shall advise the planning commission and conduct investigations and make reports and recommendations on matters relating to zoning, subdivisions, land divisions, architectural and outdoor advertising controls and review, and such other matters as directed. (Prior code § 2-272).

2.32.030 Public hearings.
When a public hearing is required by law and the planning commission by resolution delegates the authority to fix hearing dates and give notice to him, the community development director may fix the time for the holding of the public hearing and give the notice required by law without further authorization from the commission. (Prior code § 2-273).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing creation of a planning department, see Government Code § 65200 et seq.


Chapter 2.36
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION1
Sections:

2.36.010    Purpose.

2.36.020    Emergency defined.

2.36.030    Disaster council – Membership.

2.36.040    Disaster council – Powers and duties.

2.36.050    Director and assistant director of emergency services – Powers and duties.

2.36.060    Emergency organization.

2.36.070    Emergency plan.

2.36.080    Expenditures.

2.36.090    Illegal acts.

2.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and execution of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency and to provide for the direction of the emergency organization and the coordination of the emergency function of this city with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-401. Formerly 2.64.010).

2.36.020 Emergency defined.
In this chapter “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by conditions such as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. “Emergency” includes conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war but does not include nor apply to any condition resulting from a labor controversy. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-402. Formerly 2.64.020).

2.36.030 Disaster council – Membership.
The disaster council is created and consists of the following:

A. The mayor, who shall be chairperson;

B. The director of emergency services, who is the city manager and who shall be vice-chairperson;

C. The assistant director of emergency services, who shall be the fire chief;

D. Chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city adopted pursuant to this chapter;

E. Representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans’, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 85-4 N.S. § 1, 1985; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-403. Formerly 2.64.030).

2.36.040 Disaster council – Powers and duties.
The disaster council shall develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-404. Formerly 2.64.040).

2.36.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services – Powers and duties.
A. There is created the office of director of emergency services. The director is the city manager. The director has the authority to:

1. Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” himself if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

2. Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when in the opinion of the director the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

3. Control and direct the efforts of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

4. Direct cooperation and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility arising among them;

5. Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

6. In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to:

a. Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by the emergency; however, these rules and regulations must be confirmed by the city council at the earliest practicable time,

b. Obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for their fair value and, if required immediately, to commandeer them for public use,

c. Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties. These persons are entitled to privileges, benefits, and immunities provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

d. Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

e. Execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, the special powers conferred on him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted under this chapter, powers conferred on him by statute, by agreement approved by the city council or by other lawful authority.

B. The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. The order of succession is subject to approval by the city council.

C. There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency services chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city and have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-405. Formerly 2.64.050).

2.36.060 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of this city, all volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of BMC 2.36.050(A)(6)(c), may be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during the emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of this city. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-406. Formerly 2.64.060).

2.36.070 Emergency plan.
The disaster council shall develop the city emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. The plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-407. Formerly 2.64.070).

2.36.080 Expenditures.
Expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of this city. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-408. Formerly 2.64.080).

2.36.090 Illegal acts.
It is unlawful for a person to:

A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued under this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed on him by this chapter;

B. Do any act prohibited by any lawful rule or regulation issued under this chapter, if the act is of a nature to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection of this city or the lives or property of inhabitants of this city;

C. Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 73-1 N.S. § 1, 1973; prior code § 12-409. Formerly 2.64.090).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing the creation of local disaster councils, see Government Code § 8610 et seq.


Chapter 2.40
PERSONNEL SYSTEM1
Sections:

2.40.010    Purpose.

2.40.020    Definitions.

2.40.030    Administration.

2.40.040    Civil service commission.

2.40.050    Powers and duties of civil service commission.

2.40.060    Competitive service.

2.40.070    Adoption and amendment of rules.

2.40.080    Appointments.

2.40.090    Probationary period.

2.40.100    Status of present employees.

2.40.110    Demotion – Dismissal – Reduction in pay – Suspension – Reprimand.

2.40.120    Appeals to civil service commission.

2.40.130    Layoff and reemployment.

2.40.140    Political activity.

2.40.150    Contracts for special services.

2.40.160    Discrimination.

2.40.010 Purpose.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to be sure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is adopted. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.010).

2.40.020 Definitions.
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.020).

2.40.030 Administration.
A. The city manager shall administer the city personnel system and serve as the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in BMC 2.40.150. The personnel officer shall:

1. Attend all meetings of the civil service commission and serve as its secretary;

2. Administer all provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council or the civil service commission;

3. Prepare and recommend to the civil service commission and city council personnel rules or revisions and amendments to such rules;

4. Prepare, or cause to be prepared a classification plan, including class specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon review by the civil service commission and approval by the city council;

5. Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor, the conducting and grading of tests, the certification of the list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service, and perform any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system;

6. Advise and keep the civil service commission routinely informed regarding recruitment, selection and appointment procedures for the competitive service and other matters related to personnel administration.

B. The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.030).

2.40.040 Civil service commission.
A civil service commission is established and shall function in accordance with Chapter 2.68 BMC. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.040).

2.40.050 Powers and duties of civil service commission.
The powers and duties of the civil service commission are contained in BMC 2.68.070. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.050).

2.40.060 Competitive service.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all officers, positions and employment in the service of the city except:

A. Elected officers and any deputies appointed thereto;

B. The city manager and any assistants to the city manager;

C. Secretary to the city manager;

D. The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys;

E. Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees;

F. All departments heads, assistant department heads and division heads excluding those positions that are currently in the civil service system. Those positions include:

1. Police captain,

2. Police lieutenant,

3. Recreation supervisor,

4. Water superintendent,

5. Wastewater superintendent;

G. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services;

H. Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen;

I. All council-appointed city officers;

J. Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property;

K. Employees who are hired for a definite term to perform services which are not needed on a constant, continuing basis. Such employees shall work less than 1,040 hours annually. Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. “Regularly employed in permanent positions” means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than 1,040 hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules;

L. Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program;

M. Employees not included in the competitive service under this section shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 92-17 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 89-8 N.S., 1989. Formerly 2.70.060).

2.40.070 Adoption and amendment of rules.
A. Personnel rules and any amendment thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. Notice of such action shall be publicly posted at least five days prior to city council consideration.

B. Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any employee and shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules. The personnel officer shall give written notice to each recognized employee organization affected by the adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any personnel rules proposed to be adopted by the city council. All amendments, changes and revisions to the personnel rules shall be reviewed by the civil service commission prior to adoption by the city council and made available to all employees of the city in the manner and form prescribed by the personnel officer.

C. The personnel rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system including:

1. Preparation, installation, revisions, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

2. Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment;

3. Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

4. Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of temporary or emergency appointments;

5. Establishment of probationary testing periods;

6. Evaluations of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter;

7. Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

8. Separation of employees from the city service;

9. The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for the purposes of accounting and legal requirements;

10. The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.070).

2.40.080 Appointments.
Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as part of any examination.

In any examination the personnel officer or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards thereof.

When appointment is made to a vacancy in the competitive service, the personnel officer shall transmit to the appointing authority the names, as prescribed by the personnel rules, of all persons on the appropriate certified employment lists, in the order in which they appear on the list. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.080).

2.40.090 Probationary period.
A. All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than one year. The appointing authority may extend such probationary period up to six additional months with approval of the personnel officer. The probationary period shall commence from the date of appointment. In the event of illness or injury requiring absence from work the number of days absent may be added to the length of the probationary period. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal, hearing or any grievance procedure.

B. At least 10 days prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the appointing authority must file a written statement with the personnel officer stating his recommendations for rejection or retention of a probationary employee. If the probationary employee is not accepted for permanent appointment, the personnel officer shall initiate procedures to release the probationary employee from his probationary appointment, prior to the expiration of the probationary term.

C. An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted unless he is discharged for cause from the city service as provided in the personnel rules and regulations. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 92-17 N.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.090).

2.40.100 Status of present employees.
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying tests, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.

Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.100).

2.40.110 Demotion – Dismissal – Reduction in pay – Suspension – Reprimand.
The city manager or any appointing power shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend without pay for up to 30 calendar days any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. Notice of such action must be in writing and served personally on such employee, except where an emergency situation exists, in which case the notice shall be served within three working days of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of reason or reasons therefor.

The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.110).

2.40.120 Appeals to civil service commission.
A. Right of Appeal. Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal to the civil service commission relative to any disciplinary dismissal, demotion, reduction in pay or suspension, or alleged violations of this code or the personnel rules; except in instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder or unless the employee elects in writing to waive the employee’s right to a hearing and decision by the civil service commission in favor of appeals rights under a specific grievance procedure.

B. Method of Appeal. Appeals shall be in writing, subscribed by the appellant and filed with the personnel officer who shall, within seven days after receipt of the appeal, inform each member of the civil service commission, the appointing power and other such persons or officers named or affected by the appeal or the filing of the appeal. The appeal shall be a written statement addressed to the civil service commission, explaining the matter appealed from and setting forth therein a statement of the action desired by the appellant with his reasons therefor.

C. Notice. Upon the filing of an appeal, the personnel officer shall set a date for a hearing on the appeal of not less than 10 days and no more than 30 days from the date of filing. The personnel officer shall notify all interested parties of the date, time and place of the hearing at such places as the civil service commission shall prescribe.

The personnel officer shall set a date for a hearing on the appeal and notify all interested parties in the manner prescribed by the personnel rules.

D. Investigation. Upon the filing of an appeal, the civil service commission may make such independent investigation of the matter as it may deem necessary. The results of such investigation shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings and the appellant shall have the right to have reasonable time in which to answer or present evidence in opposition to the findings of this independent investigation.

E. Hearings. The appellant shall appear personally, unless physically unable to do so, before the civil service commission at the time and place of the hearings. The appellant may be represented by any person or attorney as may be selected and may at the hearing produce relevant oral or documentary evidence. The appellant shall state the case first, and at the conclusion, opposition matter may then be presented. Rebuttal matter which is not repetitive may be allowed at the discretion of the civil service commission. Cross examination of the witnesses shall be permitted. The conduct and decorum of the hearing shall be under the control of the civil service commission by its chairman, with due regard to the rights and privileges of the parties appearing before it. Hearings need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Hearings shall be closed unless the appellant, in writing, requests an open hearing.

F. Findings and Recommendations. The civil service commission shall, within 10 days after the conclusion of the hearing, certify its findings and recommendations in writing to the appellant and to the city manager. The action of the civil service commission shall be final. Any member of the civil service commission may submit a minority or supplemental finding and recommendation. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.120).

2.40.130 Layoff and reemployment.
Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.130).

2.40.140 Political activity.
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provisions adopted pursuant to state law. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.140).

2.40.150 Contracts for special services.
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

A. The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

B. The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

C. The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

D. The conduct of employee training programs;

E. Special and technical services of an advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.150).

2.40.160 Discrimination.
No person in the competitive service or seeking admission thereto shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, ancestry, national origin, religious creed, sex, handicap, or because of the exercise of his rights under Section 3502 of the Government Code. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-8 N.S. § 2, 1989. Formerly 2.70.160).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing adoption of a personnel system, see Government Code § 45000 et seq.


Chapter 2.44
RETIREMENT SYSTEM1
Sections:

2.44.010    Contract with state.

2.44.020    Contract amendment.

2.44.010 Contract with state.
This contract between the city council and the Board of Administration of the California State Employees’ Retirement System is approved. A copy of the contract is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 81-1 N.S., 1981. Formerly 2.76.010).

2.44.020 Contract amendment.
A. An amendment to the contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System, is authorized, a copy of the amendment being attached to the ordinance codified in this section, marked “Exhibit A,” and by such reference made a part hereof as though set out in full in this chapter.

B. The mayor of the city council is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute said amendment for and on behalf of the agency. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 81-1 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1981. Formerly 2.76.020).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing a city to contract with the Public Employees’ Retirement System, see Government Code § 45345; for provisions on the Public Employees’ Retirement System generally, see Government Code § 20000 et seq.


Chapter 2.48
CITY TREASURER
Sections:

2.48.010    Powers and duties.

2.48.020    Compensation and benefits.

2.48.030    Qualifications.

2.48.010 Powers and duties.
All statutory duties and responsibilities not heretofore transferred to the county, the city manager or the finance director which are now performed by the city treasurer are transferred to the city clerk, who is ordered to perform all such duties, including but not limited to those duties required by law.

The city treasurer shall countersign warrants and serve on the finance committee. (Ord. 11-09 § 1).

2.48.020 Compensation and benefits.
The city treasurer shall receive a $200.00 per month stipend and related retirement benefit but no other benefits.(Ord. 11-09 § 1).

2.48.030 Qualifications.
The city treasurer is an elected position so the only qualifications are that the individual be a registered voter of the city. Therefore, the following qualifications are desirable, but not required.

A. Knowledge of:

1. Municipal revenue sources;

2. Methods, practices and principles related to the investment of city idle funds;

3. Basic assessment district and bond financing techniques; and

4. Methods, practices and principles related to evaluating municipal cash flow needs.

B. Ability to:

1. Invest city idle funds in a wise and prudent manner;

2. Meet the public and provide required information pleasantly and efficiently;

3. Communicate effectively and tactfully in both oral and written forms;

4. Establish and maintain complex and extensive financial record keeping systems and files;

5. Operate and use a variety of office equipment;

6. Establish and maintain effective work relationships with those contacted in the performance of required duties. (Ord. 11-09 § 1).

Chapter 2.52
DESIGN IMMUNITY
Sections:

2.52.010    Approval of plans and designs.

2.52.010 Approval of plans and designs.
The public works director/city engineer (or his/her designee provided that such designee holds a valid registration as a professional engineer in the state of California) is delegated the authority to exercise discretionary approval of plans, designs and any design amendments or addenda for public improvement or subdivision improvement projects. The plans and designs shall be signed by the public works director/city engineer or his/her designee. Such delegation of design approval authority does not change the city council’s discretion and authority to approve projects and appropriate project funding pursuant to other applicable city policies, procedures, and codes, or circumvent other established project design review and approval processes (e.g., design review and approval for conformance with discretionary permit requirements). (Ord. 19-05 § 1).

Chapter 2.56
(RESERVED)
Chapter 2.60
ADVISORY BODIES
Sections:

2.60.010    Purpose.

2.60.020    Eligibility.

2.60.030    Term of office.

2.60.040    Appointments, reappointments, and vacancies.

2.60.050    Attendance.

2.60.060    Quorum.

2.60.070    Rules of procedure.

2.60.080    Support staff.

2.60.090    Compensation.

2.60.100    Statement of economic interest.

2.60.110    Removal.

2.60.120    Application.

2.60.010 Purpose.
Boards, committees and commissions (hereinafter referred to as “advisory bodies”) play an important role in city government by obtaining community input, developing recommendations and providing information to the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.020 Eligibility.
All advisory body members must be residents of the city unless otherwise noted. The city council or state or federal law may establish additional requirements. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.030 Term of office.
A. The term of office for members of an advisory body is four years, unless otherwise noted. Each member serves until his or her successor is appointed and qualifies.

B. The following term limits are exceptions to the limits specified above:

1. Library Board of Trustees. The term of office for members of the library board of trustees is three years.1

2. Parks, Recreation and Cemetery Commission. The term of office for the student member is one year with the option of a second term at the recommendation of the commission and reappointment in accordance with BMC 2.60.040.

3. Repealed by Ord. 13-08.

4. Sustainability Commission. The term of office for the student member is one year with the option of a second term at the recommendation of the commission and reappointment in accordance with BMC 2.60.040.

C. Unless otherwise noted, there are no term limits for serving on an advisory body.

D. Staggered Terms. Terms of office for all new boards and commissions will be staggered. The terms of office shall be based on the number of members of the board or commission. For a five-member board or commission, the first appointment shall be for one year. The second appointment shall be for two years. The third appointment shall be for three years. All subsequent appointments shall be for four years. For a seven-member board or commission, the first appointment shall be for one year. The second and third appointments shall be for two years. The third and fourth appointments shall be for three years. All subsequent appointments shall be for four years unless otherwise noted. (Ord. 13-08 § 2; Ord. 10-01 § 1; Ord. 09-17 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.040 Appointments, reappointments, and vacancies.
Appointments shall be made in accordance with the city council’s rules and procedures for appointments. Reappointments of eligible advisory body members shall be made in accordance with the city council’s rules and procedures for appointments. Whenever a vacancy occurs within an advisory body, the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the city council’s rules and procedures for appointments. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.050 Attendance.
A. All members must be active participants in order for an advisory body to function effectively and accomplish its goals. This means all members must be present unless excused from attending a meeting by the chair. If a member is absent without cause from three successive regular meetings, the office becomes automatically vacant. The chair shall immediately notify the city council of the vacancy.

B. A member is not absent without cause if his or her absence is:

1. Due to illness; or

2. Unavoidable and the member gives the secretary of the advisory body written notice before the day of the meeting that he or she will be absent and giving the reason for the absence. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.060 Quorum.
A majority of the entire membership of the advisory body constitutes a quorum for the transaction of business. For example, if the body has five members, three members are a quorum. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.070 Rules of procedure.
Each advisory body must maintain rules of procedure that are in accordance with the Brown Act, the open government ordinance (BMC Title 4) and the council’s code of conduct. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.080 Support staff.
Staff support and assistance is provided, but advisory bodies do not have supervisory authority over city employees. Staff members remain responsible to their immediate supervisors and ultimately to the city manager and council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.090 Compensation.
Except as otherwise provided, advisory bodies do not receive compensation or city benefits for their service. Reimbursement for expenses in accordance with adopted city policy is allowed with prior approval. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.100 Statement of economic interest.
Certain advisory body members may be required to file statements of economic interest (also known as conflict of interest forms) upon taking office. Determination of the need to file such forms is made in accordance with the council’s conflict of interest code. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.110 Removal.
A member of an advisory body may be removed for cause by four affirmative votes of the council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.60.120 Application.
This chapter applies to the following advisory bodies:

A. Board of library trustees;

B. Civil service commission;

C. Repealed by Ord. 13-09.

D. Parks, recreation and cemetery commission;

E. Planning commission;

F. Historic preservation review commission;

G. Repealed by Ord. 13-08.

H. Repealed by Ord. 13-07.

I. Building board of appeals;

J. Economic development board;

K. Arts and culture commission;

L. Sustainability commission;

M. Open government commission. (Ord. 13-09 § 2; Ord. 13-08 § 2; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 10-01 § 2; Ord. 09-17 § 2; Ord. 09-16 § 1; Ord. 09-15 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 1).

1
    The term of the library board of trustees is three years per Section 18911 of the California Education Code which governs municipal libraries.


Chapter 2.64
BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES
Sections:

2.64.010    Established.

2.64.020    Members – Qualifications.

2.64.030    Meeting time and place.

2.64.040    Officers – Appointment.

2.64.050    Officers – Duties.

2.64.060    Powers and duties.

2.64.070    Annual report.

2.64.010 Established.
A board of library trustees of the city is established. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 84-9 N.S. § 1, 1984; prior code § 3-201. Formerly 2.36.010).

2.64.020 Members – Qualifications.
Each member of the board of library trustees shall be a qualified elector of the city. A person who holds any salaried public office or employment with the city is not eligible for the board. A member of the board of library trustees is not eligible for appointment to any salaried office or employment with the city during such time as he is a member of the board. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; prior code § 3-202. Formerly 2.36.020).

2.64.030 Meeting time and place.
The board shall meet on the second Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m. at the Benicia Library. (Ord. 14-01 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 99-3 N.S.; Ord. 97-14 N.S.; Ord. 94-7 N.S. § 1, 1994; Ord. 87-3 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 85-21 N.S. § 1, 1986; Ord. 85-1 N.S. § 1, 1985; prior code § 3-206. Formerly 2.36.050).

2.64.040 Officers – Appointment.
The board shall elect a president and president pro tem from among its members. The president and president pro tem serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each is appointed and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the board. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; prior code § 3-208. Formerly 2.36.080).

2.64.050 Officers – Duties.
A. President. The president shall preside at all meetings of the board. He shall appoint all committees and shall perform all the duties necessary or incidental to his office.

B. President Pro Tem. The president pro tem is president in the absence or inability of the president to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record each hearing and official action. On all official actions upon which a vote is taken, the secretary shall take the vote by voice vote unless a member requests the vote be taken by roll call. If a roll call vote is used, the vote shall be taken in alphabetical order with the president voting last. The secretary shall examine incoming mail for proper referral and answer correspondence for the board. The secretary shall maintain records of operations and shall perform such other duties as the board may assign. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 97-14 N.S.; prior code § 3-211. Formerly 2.36.090).

2.64.060 Powers and duties.
The board of library trustees shall:

A. Make and enforce rules, regulations and bylaws necessary for the administration, government and protection of the public library except for the powers delegated to the personnel officer under Chapter 2.40 BMC, relating to personnel administration;

B. Administer any trust declared or created for the library and received by property, by gift, demise, or bequest and hold it and, where not otherwise provided, dispose of the property for the benefit of the library;

C. Prescribe the duties and powers of the library director and other nonclassified officers and employees of the library and recommend to the city council the number and compensation of the library director, nonclassified library employees and classified library employees;

D. Purchase necessary books, journals and publications and other personal property;

E. Borrow books from and rent books to and exchange books with other libraries and allow nonresidents to borrow books set upon such conditions as the board prescribes;

F. Do all acts and things necessary or proper to carry out this chapter. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-10 N.S. § 1, 1989; prior code § 3-212. Formerly 2.36.120).

2.64.070 Annual report.
The board of library trustees shall on or before the first day of August of each year make a report to the city council giving the condition of the library on June 30th preceding, together with a statement of its proceedings for the year. The board shall forward a statement of its proceedings to the State Library at Sacramento. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 97-14 N.S.; prior code § 3-213. Formerly 2.36.130).

Chapter 2.68
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION1
Sections:

2.68.010    Establishment – Membership.

2.68.020    Members – Qualifications.

2.68.030    Meetings – Time and place.

2.68.040    Meetings – Conduct.

2.68.050    Officers – Appointment.

2.68.060    Officers – Duties.

2.68.070    Powers and duties.

2.68.010 Establishment – Membership.
The civil service commission of the city is established. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.010).

2.68.020 Members – Qualifications.
Members of the civil service commission shall be qualified electorates of the city. A person who holds any salaried public office or employment with the city is not eligible for the commission. A member of the civil service commission is not eligible for an appointment to any salaried office or employment with the city during such time as he/she is a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.020).

2.68.030 Meetings – Time and place.
The civil service commission shall hold regular meetings at such time and place within the city as shall be designated by the rules and regulations adopted by the civil service commission. Any regular meeting may be adjourned to a time certain and to a place designated by the chairman. In addition, the commission may hold special meetings upon the call of the chairman or a majority of the members of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.050).

2.68.040 Meetings – Conduct.
Meetings of the civil service commission shall be conducted in accordance with state law and such rules and procedures as may be adopted by the commission. Meetings shall be open and public; provided, that hearings related to the appointment, employment or dismissal of a city employee or a complaint or charge brought against an officer or employee of the city shall be held in private unless such officer or employee requests a public hearing. The commission may exclude from any such public or private meeting, during the examination of witnesses, any or all other witnesses in the matter being investigated by the body. The meeting need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.060).

2.68.050 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The chairman and vice-chairman serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each is appointed and qualified. The personnel officer or his/her designee shall serve as secretary to the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.080).

2.68.060 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the commission. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform all the duties necessary or incidental to his office.

B. Vice-Chairman. The vice-chairman is chairman in the absence or inability of the chairman to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record each hearing and official action. The secretary shall examine incoming mail for proper referral and answer correspondence for the commission. The secretary shall maintain records of operations and shall perform such other duties as the commission may assign. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.090).

2.68.070 Powers and duties.
A. The commission, as provided by this chapter and by the personnel rules, shall hear and make final determinations on appeals submitted by any person in the competitive service relative to any disciplinary action of dismissal, demotion, reduction in pay or suspension, or alleged violation of this chapter or the personnel rules, and to certify its findings and recommendations.

B. In any investigation or hearing conducted by the civil service commission, it shall have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoenas to be issued in the name of the city, and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and refusal of a person to attend or testify in answer to such a subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the civil service commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses.

C. The duties of the civil service commission shall otherwise include the following:

1. Review and approve class specifications for employees in the competitive service;

2. Make recommendations to the city council on adoptions and revisions to the classification plan;

3. Consider and recommend to the city council any adoption of and amendments to the personnel rules (pursuant to BMC 2.40.070);

4. Approve requests for any variances to the personnel rules related to selection and hiring procedures for employees in the competitive service; and

5. Advise the city manager and city council on matters related to recruitment and selection processes for employees in the competitive service and on any other matters related to personnel administration. In serving in such capacity, the commission may initiate inquiries and request investigations to be conducted in accordance with procedures outlined in the personnel rules and the civil service commission rules of conduct. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 89-9 N.S. § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.40.130).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to provide for the appointment of a civil service commission, see Government Code § 45004.


Chapter 2.72
MOBILE HOME RENT REVIEW COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. 13-09)

Chapter 2.76
PARKS, RECREATION AND CEMETERY COMMISSION
Sections:

2.76.010    Established – Membership.

2.76.020    Purpose.

2.76.030    Members – Qualification.

2.76.040    Meeting time and place.

2.76.050    Officers – Appointment.

2.76.060    Officers – Duties.

2.76.070    Powers.

2.76.080    Duties.

2.76.010 Established – Membership.
A parks, recreation and cemetery commission is established in the city. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 97-2 N.S.; Ord. 87-15 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 82-18 N.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. 80-8 N.S. § 2, 1980; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-301. Formerly 2.48.010).

2.76.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the commission is to develop and conduct all aspects of the city parks and recreation program, to advise the city council as to the city’s proper role and participation in the development and conducting of recreational programs, and to develop and conduct all aspects of the city cemetery program. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-313. Formerly 2.48.020).

2.76.030 Members – Qualification.
A. Each member of the parks and recreation commission shall be a resident of the city.

B. The student member shall be a junior or senior high school student. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-302. Formerly 2.48.030).

2.76.040 Meeting time and place.
The commission shall meet on the second Wednesday of every third month at 6:30 p.m. in program room 2 of the Benicia Community Center, 370 East L Street, Benicia, California. (Ord. 19-01 § 1; Ord. 14-12 § 1; Ord. 11-11 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 99-6; Ord. 84-12 N.S. § 1, 1984; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-306. Formerly 2.48.060).

2.76.050 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each takes office. The commission shall also appoint a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 87-15 N.S. § 4, 1987; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-307. Formerly 2.48.100).

2.76.060 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform the duties necessary or incidental to his office.

B. Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson is chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of the inability of the chairperson to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record the official action taken. On all official actions on which a vote is taken, the secretary shall take the vote by roll call, in alphabetical order, with the chairperson voting last. The secretary shall certify each official document and resolution of the commission. The secretary shall maintain records of operation and shall perform such other duties as the commission assigns. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 87-15 N.S. § 5, 1987; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-311. Formerly 2.48.110).

2.76.070 Powers.
A. The commission is advisory in character and may not be delegated administrative authority or responsibility beyond that which the city council may authorize.

B. The commission may assist and cooperate with any existing agency or group which has as its object the development or improvement of cemeteries, parks or recreational activities and programs.

C. The commission may plan for the orderly growth and development of cemetery, parks and recreational facilities and make recommendations to the city council.

D. The commission may accept gifts and grants from any source to assist it in the performance of its functions. These gifts and grants operate to augment any appropriation made for the support of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-314. Formerly 2.48.140).

2.76.080 Duties.
The commission shall:

A. Consider and study park, recreation and cemetery facilities within the city and the use and improvement of them;

B. Make investigations and studies for the purpose of recommending to the city council leisure time activities, recreational and social programs;

C. Hold public hearings on its studies;

D. Send to the city council annually a written report of its activities and recommendations for improvements and additions to existing city park and cemetery facilities and to existing recreational programs and for ways in which the city may encourage and promote these programs, services and facilities;

E. Assist and guide by consulting with the city council, city manager, director of parks, recreation and cemeteries and other groups interested in the development of recreational programs to meet the needs of the citizens;

F. Work closely with the director of parks, recreation and cemeteries and other departments and agencies of the city to the end that the resources of the city are used as effectively and efficiently as possible on behalf of parks, cemeteries and recreational activities;

G. Study, consider and recommend to the city council the taking of action with regard to:

1. Promoting cooperation among youth organizations in making the Benicia area a more wholesome place in which to live;

2. Coordinating efforts of youth organizations in the city in the interest of preventing delinquency;

3. Maintaining effective liaison between the city and public schools with regard to youth problems and opportunities;

4. Planning the study of resources, conditions and needs of youth;

5. Advancing the education of the general public regarding conditions to be improved and needs to be met;

6. Serving effective democratic action towards improving conditions and meeting the needs of youth;

7. Assisting in the creation of an atmosphere in which all youth feel they belong and are wanted;

8. Initiation and planning of joint activities around the needs of the youth;

9. Enabling the youth to aid in planning the future of the Benicia area;

10. Offering a means through which youth can join hands with adults in serving the area;

11. Affording youth an opportunity to gain experience by dealing with social problems at first hand;

12. Planning coordinated action in which representatives of all youth organizations can work together effectively;

H. Advise the city council with regard to youth programs and problems;

I. Coordinate the activities of youth organizations towards common goals;

J. Provide a forum for the presentation and discussion of youth plans, programs and problems;

K. Plan long-range programs of benefit to the youth and to the community;

L. Monitor the management and conduct of recreational activities on public property in the city;

M. Act as a clearing house and information center on all aspects of recreational activities. The commission shall make this information available to the public;

N. Formulate general policies relating to the duties and functions of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 87-15 § 7, 1987; Ord. 77-20 N.S. § 2, 1977; Ord. 76-10 N.S. § 2, 1976; prior code § 3-315. Formerly 2.48.150).

Chapter 2.80
PLANNING COMMISSION1
Sections:

2.80.010    Establishment – Membership.

2.80.020    Members – Qualifications.

2.80.030    Meeting time and place.

2.80.040    Officers – Appointment.

2.80.050    Officers – Duties.

2.80.060    Powers and duties.

2.80.010 Establishment – Membership.
The city planning commission is established. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 06-12 § 1; Ord. 06-03 § 1; Ord. 05-08 § 1; Ord. 84-9 N.S. § 3, 1984; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 101, 1970. Formerly 2.52.010).

2.80.020 Members – Qualifications.
A. It is the intent of the city council to have the planning commission composed of people from all geographical, social, environmental, and economic sectors of the community and to avoid potential conflicts with subsection (C) of this section.

B. Each member of the planning commission shall be a Benicia resident and registered voter, and shall be qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development.

C. Members shall not be severely constrained with potential conflicts of interest under the Political Reform Act or the Benicia open government ordinance (BMC Title 4). (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-08 § 2; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 102, 1970. Formerly 2.52.020).

2.80.030 Meeting time and place.
The commission shall meet on the second Thursday of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. at the Council Chambers, City Hall, 250 East L Street, Benicia, California. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 97-17 N.S.; Ord. 87-3 N.S. § 2, 1987; Ord. 77-11 N.S. § 1, 1977; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 106, 1970. Formerly 2.52.050).

2.80.040 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The chairman and vice-chairman serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each is appointed and qualified. The commission shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 108, 1970. Formerly 2.52.080).

2.80.050 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the commission. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform all the duties necessary or incidental to his/her office.

B. Vice-Chairman. The vice-chairman is chairman in the absence or inability of the chairman to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record each hearing and official action. On all official actions upon which a vote is taken the secretary shall take the vote by roll call vote in alphabetical order with the chairman voting last. The secretary shall examine incoming mail for proper referral and answer correspondence for the commission. The secretary shall maintain records of operations and shall perform such other duties as the commission may assign. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 112, 1970. Formerly 2.52.090).

2.80.060 Powers and duties.
In addition to the duties, rights and powers imposed by state law, the commission shall perform the duties and has the rights, powers and privileges provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 1261 M.C. § 110, 1970. Formerly 2.52.120).

1
    For statutory provisions on the planning commission, see Government Code § 65100 et seq. and § 65150.


Chapter 2.84
HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVIEW COMMISSION
Sections:

2.84.010    Purpose.

2.84.020    Established – Membership.

2.84.030    Members – Qualification.

2.84.040    Meeting time and place.

2.84.050    Tie vote.

2.84.060    Officers – Appointment.

2.84.070    Officers – Duties.

2.84.080    Powers and duties.

2.84.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the historic preservation review commission is to identify, register, designate, preserve, protect, enhance and perpetuate those historic structures, districts and neighborhoods which contribute to the cultural and aesthetic heritage of Benicia; to foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; to stabilize and improve the economic value of certain historic structures, districts and neighborhoods; to promote and encourage continued private ownership and utilization of such buildings and other structures now so owned and used; to conduct design review in historic overlay (H) districts as provided for in Chapter 17.108 BMC; and to advise and assist the city council in implementing the goals, policies and programs set forth in the city’s general plan relating to preservation and enhancement of the city’s historic character and protection of the city’s archaeological sites and resources. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.010).

2.84.020 Established – Membership.
A historic preservation review commission is established in the city. The commission consists of seven voting members. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.020).

2.84.030 Members – Qualification.
A. Each member of the historic preservation review commission shall be a Benicia resident and have a demonstrated special interest, competence or knowledge of historic preservation.

B. Members shall, to the extent possible, be:

1. Professionals in the disciplines of history, architecture, architectural history, planning, prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation, and landscape architecture or related disciplines, such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, or cultural geography, to the extent that such professionals are available in the community; or

2. Lay members who have demonstrated special interest, competence, experience, or knowledge in historic preservation.

C. At least two members shall be owners of a historic property within the historic district. One of these members shall be the owner of a residence in the historic district. The other member shall be the owner of either a residence or business property in the historic district. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.030).

2.84.040 Meeting time and place.
The commission shall meet as often as necessary, but at least four times a year, with meetings held in a public place, advertised in advance, and open to the public, pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) for open meetings. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.060).

2.84.050 Tie vote.
A tie vote on any matter before the commission shall be deemed to be a disapproval thereof. (Ord. 08-05 § 1).

2.84.060 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each takes office. The commission shall also appoint a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.100).

2.84.070 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform the duties necessary or incidental to his/her office.

B. Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson is chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of the inability of the chairperson to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting, shall record the official action taken and perform such other duties as the commission assigns. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.110).

2.84.080 Powers and duties.
The commission shall:

A. Conduct design reviews for restoration, remodeling and development projects in the historic overlay (H) zones in accordance with Chapter 17.08 BMC and/or Chapter 17.54 BMC, or which involve city-owned historical buildings. Ensure that restoration, remodeling and new development complies with the “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historical Properties,” the criteria contained in the general plan and the criteria in the adopted historic plans for each district. Support decisions by specific findings based on the “Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historical Properties,” the general plan and the adopted historic plans for each district, as detailed in the relevant sections of the Benicia Municipal Code, as they may be amended from time to time;

B. Maintain a program to compile, record and update an inventory of cultural resources within the city. The inventory shall be based on comprehensive surveys conducted in conformance with state survey standards and procedures;

C. Make policy recommendations to the city council on matters that relate to historic preservation and the restoration of designated buildings and districts;

D. Review and certify CEQA documents for projects which require only HPRC approval and review CEQA documents and make recommendations for approval to the planning commission and city council as appropriate;

E. Each commission member is expected to annually attend an informational or educational meeting, seminar, workshop or conference that pertains directly to the work of the commission or would be approvable by the State Office of Historic Preservation;

F. Produce an annual report, in accordance with the requirements of certified local government, on the activities of the commission;

G. Oversee and establish a program to assist owners of historic homes in lower-income areas to apply for low interest loans through community development block grants (CDGBs), when available;

H. Oversee the publicizing of opportunities and incentives for historic preservation to owners of historic buildings;

I. Oversee the maintenance of a list of historic preservation review commission educational materials. These items will have been determined by the commission as providing important background information necessary for commissioners to do the work of the commission. The commission may modify this list at its discretion. As soon as is practicable after appointment, commissioners are required to review the items on this list;

J. Pursuant to the program established by the city council, oversee a program for property tax incentives in accordance with the California Mills Act and recommend to the city council execution of Mills Act agreements. Provide potential buyers with information about the California Mills Act and federal investment tax credits;

K. Maintain a program to coordinate with the California Archaeological Inventory to develop and maintain an inventory of existing and potential archaeological sites;

L. Maintain a program to inform title companies that properties in Benicia may be affected by historic preservation regulations;

M. Work with Main Street, the Benicia Historical Society, the Benicia Historical Museum at the Camel Barns, and other community groups on historic preservation issues;

N. Recommend nomination of properties for the California and National Register;

O. Create, maintain and increase the community awareness of our historic resources;

P. Oversee the administration of the city’s official historic plaque program; and

Q. Perform other duties as provided by the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 05-01 § 1; Ord. 01-3. Formerly 2.56.140).

Chapter 2.88
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
(Repealed by Ord. 13-08)

Chapter 2.92
DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. 13-07)

Chapter 2.96
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
Sections:

2.96.010    Establishment – Membership.

2.96.020    Members – Qualifications.

2.96.030    Meeting time and place.

2.96.050    Officers – Appointment.

2.96.060    Officers – Duties.

2.96.070    Powers and duties.

2.96.010 Establishment – Membership.
The building board of appeals is established. The board shall consist of three members. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.010).

2.96.020 Members – Qualifications.
Each member of the board shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall have the experience and training to judge matters pertaining to building construction. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.020).

2.96.030 Meeting time and place.
The board shall meet as needed at the time and place noted on the board’s agenda. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.050).

2.96.050 Officers – Appointment.
The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The chairman and vice-chairman serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each is appointed and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.080).

2.96.060 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform all the duties necessary or incidental to his/her office.

B. Vice-Chairman. The vice-chairman is chairman in the absence or inability of the chairman to act.

C. Secretary. The building official is an ex officio nonvoting member and is the secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record each hearing and official action. On all official actions upon which a vote is taken the secretary shall take the vote by roll call vote in alphabetical order with the chairman voting last. The secretary shall examine incoming mail for proper referral and answer correspondence for the board. The secretary shall maintain records of operations and shall perform such other duties as the board may assign. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.090).

2.96.070 Powers and duties.
The primary duty of the building board of appeals is to hear appeals regarding the Uniform Code or California Code. In addition to this duty and any duties, rights and powers imposed by state law and the Uniform or California Codes related to building construction or safety, the board shall perform the duties and has the rights, powers and privileges provided by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-5 § 1. Formerly 2.88.120).

Chapter 2.100
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD
Sections:

2.100.010    Establishment – Membership.

2.100.020    Members – Qualifications.

2.100.030    Meeting time and place.

2.100.040    Officers – Appointment.

2.100.050    Officers – Duties.

2.100.060    Powers and duties.

2.100.010 Establishment – Membership.
There is created in the city of Benicia an economic development board. The board shall consist of seven members. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.010).

2.100.020 Members – Qualifications.
To be eligible for appointment to the board, an individual shall have demonstrated interest in, and commitment to, furthering the economic development of the city of Benicia. Appointments shall be to citizens living in or owning, managing or operating economic entities in Benicia. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.020).

2.100.030 Meeting time and place.
The board shall fix the time and place for its regular meetings. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.050).

2.100.040 Officers – Appointment.
The board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members. The chairman and vice-chairman serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each is appointed and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.080).

2.100.050 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board. He/she shall appoint all committees and shall perform all the duties necessary or incidental to his/her office.

B. Vice-Chairman. The vice-chairman is chairman in the absence or inability of the chairman to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record each hearing and official action. On all official actions upon which a vote is taken the secretary shall take the vote by roll call vote in alphabetical order with the chairman voting last. The secretary shall examine incoming mail for proper referral and answer correspondence for the board. The secretary shall maintain records of operations and shall perform such other duties as the board may assign. The secretary is a nonvoting member if not a member of the board. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.090).

2.100.060 Powers and duties.
The board shall have the following duties and powers:

A. Identify and investigate economic development needs and opportunities in the city and annually make recommendations to the city council regarding those needs and opportunities on both a short- and long-term basis;

B. Extend and promote an interest in new business relocation to the city;

C. Extend and promote the economic well-being and expansion of all existing businesses;

D. Promote downtown revitalization;

E. Investigate development of city-owned property and land disposition, and promote if appropriate. (Ord. 08-05 § 1; Ord. 04-6 § 1. Formerly 2.92.120).

Chapter 2.104
ARTS AND CULTURE COMMISSION
Sections:

2.104.010    Established – Membership.

2.104.020    Purpose.

2.104.030    Members – Qualification.

2.104.040    Meeting time and place.

2.104.050    Officers – Appointment.

2.104.060    Officers – Duties.

2.104.070    Powers.

2.104.080    Duties.

2.104.010 Established – Membership.
The arts and culture commission is established in the city. The commission consists of seven voting members. (Ord. 15-08 § 1; Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the commission is to:

A. Advise and inform the city council and staff on culture and arts related issues;

B. Evaluate the needs and resources of local culture and arts organizations;

C. Facilitate, encourage, promote and stimulate arts and culture in our community;

D. Promote and increase public awareness, locally and beyond the city, of arts and cultural resources and activities;

E. Support and promote the arts and culture as a major element in Benicia’s community identity;

F. Ensure that cultural and artistic elements are integral to the city’s quality of life and economic vitality; and

G. Engage youth in culture and arts. (Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.030 Members – Qualification.
A. Each member of the arts and culture commission shall have a demonstrated interest in promoting and sustaining the arts and cultural community of poetry, literacy, performing arts, music, theater, dance, film, visual arts, and cultural events.

B. At least one member shall be an artist or shall represent the visual arts community.

C. At least one member shall represent the cultural and/or performing arts community.

D. Members shall not be on other city boards or commissions nor board members of other organized art or cultural groups. (Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.040 Meeting time and place.
The commission shall meet on the second Thursday of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m in the Library’s Edna Clyne Conference Room, 150 East L Street, Benicia, California. (Ord. 15-05 § 1; Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.050 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each takes office. The commission shall also appoint a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.060 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission, appoint all committees, and perform the duties necessary or incidental to that office, and serve for a term of one year.

B. Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson is chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of the inability of the chairperson to act, and shall serve for a term of one year.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record the official action taken. On all official actions on which a vote is taken, the secretary shall take the vote by roll call, in alphabetical order, with the chairperson voting last. The secretary shall certify each official document and resolution of the commission. The secretary shall maintain records of operation and shall perform such other duties as the commission assigns. (Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.070 Powers.
A. The commission may assist and cooperate with any existing agency or group, which has as its object the development or improvement of art and culture activities and programs.

B. The commission may plan for the development of arts and culture activities and make recommendations to the city council.

C. The commission may accept gifts and grants from any source to assist it in the performance of its functions. These gifts and grants operate to augment any appropriation made for the support of the commission.

D. The commission may establish working committees as necessary to carry out the work of the commission. Examples of these include: the publicity committee, the grants committee, the events committee, and the annual report committee.

E. The commission will have the power to coordinate fundraising activities for arts and culture activities. (Ord. 11-10 § 1; Ord. 09-15 § 2).

2.104.080 Duties.
The commission shall:

A. Work cooperatively with city boards and commissions and other public and private organizations in creating and promoting art and cultural programs and activities within the city;

B. Make recommendations to the city council regarding the funding of community art projects, including the search for private and public grants, and regarding the disbursement of funds to arts and cultural organizations consistent with the needs of the community. The commission shall develop and adopt procedures for evaluating grant requests from the community prior to making recommendations on the requests to city council;

C. Provide information, including a community calendar of events, regarding performing arts, music, theater, dance, film, visual arts, nonpermanent exhibits and cultural events, such as celebrations of different cultures and culinary arts;

D. Encourage community involvement in the cultural arts by providing opportunities for local and area events and performances on behalf of the arts community;

E. Have the option to coordinate fundraising projects to augment city funding and to raise funds to be used to stimulate arts and culture activities, events and projects in the community;

F. Send to the city council annually a written report of its activities and recommendations for improvements and additions to existing art and culture programs;

G. Develop recommendations in which the city may encourage and promote related programs;

H. Advise the planning commission or the city council, as the case may be, on any required public art dedications pursuant to BMC 16.32.120; and

I. Work closely with the assigned department director and other departments and agencies of the city so that the resources of the city are used as effectively and efficiently as possible on behalf of art and culture entities within the city. (Ord. 11-10 § 2; Ord. 09-15 § 2).

Chapter 2.108
COMMUNITY SUSTAINABILITY COMMISSION
Sections:

2.108.010    Established – Membership.

2.108.020    Purpose.

2.108.030    Definitions.

2.108.040    Members – Qualification.

2.108.050    Members – Ex officio.

2.108.060    Meeting time and place.

2.108.070    Officers – Appointment.

2.108.080    Officers – Duties.

2.108.090    Duties.

2.108.100    Powers.

2.108.010 Established – Membership.
The community sustainability commission is established in the city. The commission consists of seven voting members, one of whom shall be a high school student. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.020 Purpose.
The purpose of the commission is to educate, advocate and provide oversight for integrated solutions that seek a sustainable equilibrium for economic, ecological, and social health and well-being, both now and in the future. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.030 Definitions.
“Sustainability,” as defined by the Benicia general plan and by the World Commission on Environment and Development (a.k.a. 1987 Brundtland Commission), is meeting the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs. Sustainability is an evolving concept and the definition will evolve over time. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.040 Members – Qualification.
A. Each member of the community sustainability commission shall have expertise and/or demonstrated interest in one or more of the following areas:

1. Water quality, water use efficiency and conservation;

2. Air quality;

3. Local and regional ecology;

4. Energy;

5. Mobility;

6. Land use/stewardship;

7. Green site planning and building;

8. Waste management;

9. Community and regional economics/finance;

10. Social justice;

11. Public relations;

12. Local based business management (merchants, etc.).

B. One member of the commission shall be a high school student with junior or senior standing who resides in Benicia. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.050 Members – Ex officio.
The commission shall have nonvoting ex officio members from:

A. Benicia Unified School District, President or designee;

B. Valero Refinery, General Manager or designee;

C. Amports, General Manager or designee;

D. Good Neighbor Steering Committee, Chair or designee.

To increase participation, an ex officio member may only represent one of the above categories. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.060 Meeting time and place.
The commission shall meet on the third Monday of every other month (bimonthly, six times per year) at the hour of 6:00 p.m. in the Commission Room, City Hall, 250 East L Street, Benicia, California. (Ord. 12-03 § 1; Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.070 Officers – Appointment.
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and vice-chairperson serve for a term of one year and until the successor of each takes office. The commission shall also appoint a secretary. The secretary need not be a member of the commission. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.080 Officers – Duties.
A. Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the commission, appoint all committees, and perform the duties necessary or incidental to that office.

B. Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson is chairperson in the absence of the chairperson or in case of the inability of the chairperson to act.

C. Secretary. The secretary shall keep minutes of each meeting and shall record the official action taken. On all official actions on which a vote is taken, the secretary shall take the vote by roll call, in alphabetical order, with the chairperson voting last. The secretary shall certify each official document and resolution of the commission. The secretary shall maintain records of operation and shall perform such other duties as the commission assigns. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.090 Duties.
The commission shall:

A. Advise the city council on implementation of the Benicia climate action plan and related city strategic plan performance measures, as appropriate.

B. Provide recommendations regarding the distribution of climate action and water conservation funds from the 2008 Valero Improvement Plan Settlement Agreement and from future funding sources allocated to support the efforts of making Benicia a more sustained community with reference to the climate action plan.

C. Advise the city council on matters related to sustainability, climate change and greenhouse gas reductions, including recommendations on forthcoming innovative programs and amendments to the climate action plan, if necessary.

D. Facilitate public outreach, education and collaboration with regards to community sustainability to guide Benicia’s transition towards being a sustainable, socially just, economically vibrant, and green community.

E. Prepare an annual report to city council on implementation of this chapter.

F. Make recommendations to the city council regarding funding, including the search for private and public grants consistent with the needs of the community. (Ord. 09-16 § 2).

2.108.100 Powers.
A. The commission may coordinate and hold fundraising activities related to its purpose as stated in BMC 2.108.020. The commission may also solicit and accept donations subject to approval of the city council. All net proceeds from such fundraising activities and donations shall be placed in a city sustainability fund and the city council shall have exclusive power to make distributions in furtherance of achieving sustainability goals, after recommendation from the commission.

B. The commission shall establish policies for raising, managing and distributing sustainability funds, subject to approved by the city council. (Ord. 15-07 § 1).

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.04    Transfer of Tax Functions to County

3.08    Purchasing Regulation

3.09    Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting

3.10    Contracting for Services

3.12    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.16    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.20    Sales and Use Tax

3.22    Transaction and Use Tax

3.24    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.25    Utility Users Excise Tax

3.26    Communication Users Tax

3.28    Unclaimed Property

3.32    Interim School Facilities

3.33    Cannabis Business Tax

Chapter 3.04
TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY1
Sections:

3.04.010  Statutory authority.

3.04.020  Abolition of offices of city assessor and city tax collector.

3.04.030  Transfer of duties.

3.04.010 Statutory authority.
The provisions of this chapter are adopted under Government Code Sections 51500 and 51520. (Prior code § 11-101).

3.04.020 Abolition of offices of city assessor and city tax collector.
The offices of the city assessor and the city tax collector are abolished effective July 1, 1968. After July 1, 1968, all duties performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of city property are transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk. After July 1, 1968, all duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of taxes are transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk. (Prior code § 11-103).

3.04.030 Transfer of duties.
The assessment and tax collection duties and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements now performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city are transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purposes of assessment and collection of and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after December 5, 1967, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1968. (Prior code § 11-102).

1 For statutory provisions authorizing a transfer of assessment and tax collection duties to the county, see Government Code § 51500 et seq.


Chapter 3.08
PURCHASING REGULATION1
Sections:

3.08.010    Adoption.

3.08.020    Definitions.

3.08.030    Purchasing officer duties.

3.08.040    Purchasing authority.

3.08.050    Purchase orders.

3.08.060    Encumbrance of funds.

3.08.070    Bidding for purchase of supplies and equipment – Use of not required when.

3.08.080    Bidding – Open market bidding.

3.08.090    Formal bidding – Procedure.

3.08.100    Preference for local business.

3.08.110    Inspection and testing.

3.08.120    Surplus supplies and equipment.

3.08.130    Recycled products.

3.08.140    Purchase card usage.

3.08.010 Adoption.
A purchasing regulation is adopted in order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with the required quality, to exercise positive financial control over purchases that meet legal requirements and to define authority for the purchasing function. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4).

3.08.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall be construed as herein stated, or have the meanings given herein:

“Awarding authority” means the city council or person authorized to award the contract and to execute the agreement unless delegated to another person.

“Bid” means an offer to sell supplies and equipment at a specified price.

“Bid security” means a guarantee, in the form of a bond or deposit, that the bidder, if awarded the contract, will accept the contract as bid, otherwise the bidder (in the case of a deposit) or his/her guarantor (in the case of a bond) will be liable for the amount of the bond or deposit.

“Bidder” means any person submitting a competitive bid in response to a solicitation.

“Bidders’ list” means a list maintained by the finance department setting out names and addresses of responsible prospective suppliers of various goods and services, from whom bids, proposals, and quotations can be solicited.

“Contract” means a binding agreement between the city and the company providing the goods or equipment, specifying needs, pricing, terms and conditions, insurance requirements, etc.

“Emergency purchase” means a purchase made without following normal purchasing procedures (competitive bidding) in order to obtain goods or services when time is of the essence. Emergency purchases shall be made only for the following reasons: (A) to preserve or protect life, health or property, (B) upon natural disaster or manmade disaster, (C) to correct or forestall a shutdown of public services.

“Equipment” means furnishings, machinery, vehicles, rolling stock, and other personal property used in the city’s business.

“Evaluation of bid” means the process of examining a bid after the opening to determine the bidder’s responsibility, responsiveness to requirements, and to ascertain other characteristics of the bid that relate to determination of the successful bidder.

“Formal bid” or “offer” means a bid that must be submitted in a sealed envelope and in conformance with a prescribed format, to be opened at a specific time.

“Governmental agency” means another governmental body other than the city of Benicia such as a public agency as defined by California Government Code Section 6500 including federal, state, county, city and local government agencies such as school districts and special districts.

“Informal bid” means an unsealed competitive offer conveyed by letter, telephone, facsimile/telegram, electronic mail or other electronic media format and under conditions different from those required of formal bidding.

“Negotiation” means contracting through the use of either competitive or other than competitive proposals and discussions. Any contract/purchase order awarded without using sealed bidding procedures is a negotiated contract/purchase order. Further, negotiation is a procedure that includes the receipt of proposals from offerors, permits bargaining, and usually affords an opportunity to revise offers before award of a contract/purchase order. Bargaining in the sense of discussion, persuasion, alteration of initial assumptions of positions, and give-and-take may apply to price, schedule, technical requirements, type of contract/purchase order, or other terms of a proposed contract/purchase order.

“Payment bond” means a contract of guarantee executed subsequent to award by the successful bidder to satisfy claims of material suppliers and of mechanics and laborers employed under the contract.

“Performance bond” means a contract of guarantee executed subsequent to award by the successful bidder to protect the city from loss due to contractor’s inability to complete the contract as agreed.

“Personal property” means everything that is not real property, is subject to ownership, and has exchange value.

“Purchasing officer” means the city manager and any person or persons authorized by the city manager to purchase or acquire supplies, services, or equipment on behalf of the city.

“Quotation” means a statement of price, terms of sale, and description of goods or services offered by a prospective seller to a prospective purchaser, usually for purchases below the amount requiring formal bidding.

“Request for proposal (RFP)” means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting competitive proposals. It is used in hiring consultants, professional services or general services.

“Request for quotation (RFQ)” means the document generally used for seeking competition on small purchases or on any purchase that does not require competitive sealed bidding. RFQs can be used for obtaining price and delivery information for sole source and emergency purchases.

“Responsible bidder or offeror” means a firm/person who has the capability in all aspects to successfully perform, in full, contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability that will assure good faith performance.

“Responsive bidder” means one that is in substantial conformance with all requirements of the invitation to bid, including specifications and the city’s contractual terms and conditions. Bidders who substitute terms and conditions or who qualify their bids in such a manner as to nullify their liability may be considered nonresponsive bidders. This may also include provision of insurance requirements, bonds, completion of all forms, inclusion of references and additional information as requested in bid documents.

“Sealed bidding” means a method of contracting that employs competitive bids, public opening of sealed bids and award.

“Sole source procurement” means an award for a commodity or service to the only known capable supplier, occasioned by the unique nature of the requirement, the supplier, or market conditions.

“Supplies” means all property, including, but not limited to, equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or permanent interest in land.

“Surplus property” means city-owned personal property that is not needed by the city at the present time or in the foreseeable future. This includes obsolete supplies, equipment, or scrap materials that have completed their useful life.

“Unencumbered” means that portion of an allocated appropriation which is immediately available for reservation against incoming purchase orders. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4).

3.08.030 Purchasing officer duties.
The duties of the purchasing officer shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Purchase and contract for supplies, services, equipment and public projects required by the operating departments;

B. Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

C. Take the necessary action to ensure that the city will receive the needed quality of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost to the city;

D. Maintain the highest levels of efficiency and effectiveness by assuring compatibility among the city’s equipment, such that existing parts inventory, tools inventory, and staff expertise are utilized to the greatest extent possible;

E. Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

F. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing prices, market conditions and new products;

G. Prescribe and maintain forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

H. Supervise the inspection of supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

I. Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed; and

J. Encourage competitive bidding as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.040).

3.08.040 Purchasing authority.
The purchasing officer is authorized and responsible for legally obligating the city in the purchase of supplies and equipment. The purchasing officer may authorize any officer or department employee to solicit prices, award and execute contracts and purchase orders for purchase of specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing officer, but all such solicitations, purchases and contracts shall conform to the procedures set forth herein. A listing of such delegated employees including the dollar limits associated with the purchase of supplies and equipment shall be maintained by the city manager and updated no less than biennially. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.050).

3.08.050 Purchase orders.
A purchase of supplies and equipment in the aggregate amount of $5,000 or more may be made only by purchase order. A purchase order shall not be issued until the purchasing officer first approves it. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.070).

3.08.060 Encumbrance of funds.
Except in case of an emergency, the purchasing officer may not issue a purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the budget account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.080).

3.08.070 Bidding for purchase of supplies and equipment – Use of not required when.
Each purchase of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures set forth in BMC 3.08.080 and 3.08.090. The purchasing officer may dispense with bidding when:

A. An emergency requires that an emergency purchase be placed with the nearest available source of supply; or

B. When the amount involved is less than $2,500; or

C. The commodity can only be obtained via sole source procurement. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.090).

3.08.080 Bidding – Open market bidding.
If the estimated value of the purchase of supplies and equipment is between $2,500 and $15,000, the purchasing officer may make the purchase in the open market under the following procedures:

A. Minimum Number of Bids. The purchasing officer shall obtain at least three informal or written bids.

B. Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by verbal or written request to prospective vendors, by telephone, electronic mail or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in City Hall.

C. Bid Award. The purchasing officer shall make the purchase from the lowest responsible bidder via purchase order or contract (if the aggregate amount of the procurement is $5,000 or more) with documentation of the bids received submitted to the purchasing officer. The department making the purchase shall keep a written record of all open market orders (informal bids) for a period of not less than two years after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record is open to public inspection. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.100).

3.08.090 Formal bidding – Procedure.
The purchase of supplies and equipment with an estimated value greater than $15,000 shall be by written contract and purchase order with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder after following this procedure:

A. Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall prepare a notice inviting bids. The notice shall include a general description of the article to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, the time and place for opening bids and the security required, if any.

1. Published Notice. The notice inviting bids shall set a date for the opening of bids. The first publication or posting of the notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city.

2. Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers, whose names are on the bidders’ list or who have made written request that their names be added to it.

3. Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall or on the city website.

B. Written Bids. For purchase of property estimated to cost over $25,000, written bids shall be submitted to the finance director or designated representative, who shall require all bids to be sealed, in writing, identified as “bids” on the envelope. The department making the purchase shall keep a written record of all bids received for a period of not less than two years after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record is open to public inspection.

C. Bidder’s Security. When the purchasing officer considers it necessary, he/she shall prescribe bidder’s security and a statement of the security shall be included in the notice inviting bids. Each bidder is entitled to a return of the bid security. However, a successful bidder forfeits the bid security if he/she refuses or fails to execute the contract within 10 days after the notice of award of contract is mailed. If the successful bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the purchasing officer may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder or readvertise.

If the purchasing officer awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the city shall apply the amount of the lowest bidder’s security to the contract price difference between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid. The surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the purchasing officer rejects all bids and readvertises, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

D. Bid Opening Procedures. For purchase of supplies and equipment estimated to cost over $25,000, the finance director or designated representative shall open the bids in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. The finance director or designated representative shall tabulate the bids received and shall keep the tabulation open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening.

E. Rejection of Bids. At his/her discretion, the purchasing officer may reject all bids presented and readvertise for bids.

F. Award of Contracts. For purchase of supplies and equipment costing more than $25,000, the city council shall award the contract to the responsive bidder who is also the lowest responsible bidder. For purchase of supplies and equipment costing less than $25,000, the city manager and finance director shall award the contract to the responsive bidder who is also the lowest responsible bidder.

G. Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the purchasing officer may accept the one he/she chooses or accept the lowest bid made after negotiation with the bidders at the time of the bid opening.

H. Payment and Performance Bonds. For purchase of supplies and equipment estimated to cost over $25,000, the city council may require a payment and/or performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city.

I. Use of Vendors Selected by Another Governmental Agency. The city purchasing officer may purchase supplies and equipment for which the city would normally follow its own bid procedures from a vendor awarded a bid by another governmental agency if said agency used procedures substantially the same as those normally used by the city. The amount of said purchase shall be based on the price bid in the other agency.

J. Joint Purchase with Other Governmental Agencies. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city may enter into lawful agreements with other governmental agencies for the joint purchase of equipment and supplies. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.110).

3.08.100 Preference for local business.
In the case of contracts for purchase of supplies and equipment, whether by formal bid or otherwise, a preference not to exceed 10 percent – with an absolute limit of $500.00 – shall be allowed to firms or individuals who regularly maintain a place of business and transact business in the city. In order to qualify for such a preference, a firm or individual shall have maintained a place of business in the city and have been issued a business license by the city for one year prior to the date for the opening of bids for the contract or prior to submission of the proposal by the firm or individuals in the case of contracts not subject to competitive bidding. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.120).

3.08.110 Inspection and testing.
The purchasing officer shall have the authority to inspect supplies, material and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.130).

3.08.120 Surplus supplies and equipment.
All departments shall submit to the finance director or designee, at such times and in such forms as he/she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment that are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The finance director or designee shall have authority to exchange for, or trade in on, new supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment that cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use. Surplus supplies and equipment with no appreciable value may be discarded as junk.

Supplies and equipment with an estimated value of $5,000 or less may be sold as surplus by the finance director. Supplies and equipment with an estimated value greater than $5,000 shall be placed with a duly licensed public auctioneer or reputable online auctioneer for disposal and sale on behalf of the city. Proceeds from such public auction sales shall be deposited into the city fund that was originally used to purchase the supplies or equipment.

Surplus supplies and equipment may be offered for sale to other public agencies without the use of a duly licensed public auctioneer or reputable online auctioneer. Sale of supplies and equipment with an estimated value of less than $25,000 may be offered for sale by the city manager. Sale of supplies and equipment with an estimated value greater than $25,000 shall be sold only upon city council approval.

All surplus or worn out supplies or equipment with an estimated value of $25,000 or less may be transferred, donated or dedicated to, or may be permitted to be used by, community service or public benefit organizations, which, in the opinion of the purchasing officer, would use such supplies or equipment exclusively to promote the general municipal welfare or otherwise use the surplus supplies or equipment for purposes that clearly are to the public benefit.

All surplus or worn out supplies or equipment with an estimated value of $25,000 or less may be transferred, donated or dedicated to, or may be permitted to be used by, community service or public benefit organizations, which, in the opinion of the city manager, would use such supplies or equipment exclusively to promote the general municipal welfare or otherwise use the surplus supplies or equipment for purposes that clearly are to the public benefit.

All surplus or worn out supplies or equipment with an estimated value greater than $25,000 may be transferred, donated, or dedicated to, or may be permitted to be used by, community service or public benefit organizations upon city council approval. (Ord. 13-02 § 1; Ord. 03-4. Formerly 3.08.140).

3.08.130 Recycled products.
It is the intent of the city council that the city take a leadership role not only in recycling its waste products but also in the purchase of recycled products for use in the delivery of city services. It is the purpose of this section to provide direction to the purchasing officer in the procurement and use of recycled products. For the purpose of this section, recycled materials are defined as any materials (e.g., glass, paper, plastic, etc.) that are separated by type, reprocessed by industrial methods, and used as raw materials for the manufacture of new products.

If, in procuring supplies, a recycled product can achieve the necessary city performance standard, and if such recycled product is readily available, specifications should, if economically feasible, require products made with recycled materials be bid. If the procuring department determines that (A) a recycled product lacks performance capabilities or needed quality level, or (B) a sufficient amount of said recycled or reusable product is not currently available in the market, then a reduced percentage can be required, or the supply specification can be limited to nonrecycled materials. When recycled products are required, reasonable efforts shall be made to label the products as containing recycled materials. (Ord. 13-02 § 1).

3.08.140 Purchase card usage.
The city utilizes purchase cards as part of its purchasing process. The use of purchase cards is intended to reduce the use of petty cash and small open purchase orders and to streamline the purchasing process and payment procedures. Use of purchase cards is not intended to circumvent the city purchasing regulations.

Purchase cards may be available to city employees for the conduct of official city business. Department heads may submit a request for purchase cards for their employees to the finance director. A listing of current authorized purchase cardholders is maintained in the city’s finance department. A purchase card manual has been established and each authorized cardholder has access to this manual. Under no circumstances shall a personal charge be made on a city purchase card. (Ord. 16-08 § 1; Ord. 13-02 § 1).

1
    Prior legislation: Ord. 99-4 N.S.; Ord. 87-8 N.S. §  2, 1987; amended during 1980 codification; prior code §§  2-601 – 2-613.


Chapter 3.09
UNIFORM PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION COST ACCOUNTING1
Sections:

3.09.010  Informal bid procedures.

3.09.020  Contractors list.

3.09.030  Notice inviting informal bids.

3.09.040  Award of contracts.

3.09.050  Emergency contracting procedures.

3.09.010 Informal bid procedures.
Public projects, as defined by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, of $100,000 may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. In the event that the monetary limits specified in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code are amended by the State Legislature or adjusted by the State Controller pursuant to Section 22020 of the Public Contract Code, such amendment or adjustment in monetary limits shall prevail and apply in place of the monetary limits specified herein. (Ord. 03-5).

3.09.020 Contractors list.
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. (Ord. 03-5).

3.09.030 Notice inviting informal bids.
A. Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, a notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown on the list developed in accordance with BMC 3.09.020, and/or to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be noticed at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting bids.

If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors.

B. The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

C. All mailing of notices to contractors and/or construction trade journals shall be completed not less than 10 calendar days before bids are due. For the purpose of this section, "mailing" shall include delivery by the United States Postal Service or equivalent delivery service, electronic facsimile transmissions, or personal service. (Ord. 03-5).

3.09.040 Award of contracts.
The city manager, finance director and the director of public works are each authorized to award informal contracts pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 03-5).

3.09.050 Emergency contracting procedures.
A. In the event of an emergency, the city council, pursuant to Section 22050(b)(1) of the Public Contract Code of California, delegates to the city manager or, in his/her absence, the public works director, the authority to repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes, without giving notice for bids to let contracts.

B. If the city manager or public works director orders any action specified in subsection (A) of this section, that person shall report to the city council, at its next meeting required herein, the reasons justifying why the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for bids and why the action is necessary to respond to the emergency.

C. The city council shall initially review the emergency action not later than seven days after the action, or at its next regularly scheduled meeting if that meeting will occur not later than 14 days after the action, and at least at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a four-fifths vote, that there is a need to continue the action, unless the city manager or public works director has terminated that action prior to the city council reviewing the emergency action and making a determination pursuant to this subsection.

D. When the city council reviews the emergency action pursuant to subsection (C) of this section, it shall terminate the action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed by giving notice for bids to let contracts. (Ord. 03-5).

1
Prior legislation: Ord. 95-13 N.S.; Ord. 90-2 N.S.


Chapter 3.10
CONTRACTING FOR SERVICES1
Sections:

3.10.010  Adoption.

3.10.020  Definitions.

3.10.030  Procurement of services.

3.10.040  Public projects.

3.10.050  Payment and performance bonds.

3.10.060  Use of consultants selected by another agency.

3.10.070  Award of professional service agreement.

3.10.010 Adoption.
A system of contracting for services is adopted in order to establish efficient procedures for the contracting of services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, and to exercise positive financial control over contracting for services. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall be construed as herein stated, or have the meanings given therein:

"Agency" means another governmental body other than the city such as a public agency as defined by California Government Code Section 6500, including federal, state, county, city and local government agencies such as school districts and special districts.

"Awarding authority" means the city council or person authorized to award a contract.

"Bidder" means any person submitting a competitive bid in response to a solicitation.

"Bidders’ list" means a list maintained by the purchasing officer setting out names and addresses of providers of various services, from whom bids, proposals, statements of qualifications, and quotations can be solicited.

"Consultants" means independent contractors of the city who perform a variety of services including all professional services such as accountants, appraisers, architects, attorneys, auditors, designers, engineers, inspectors, physicians, surveyors, as well as nonprofessional and technical services such as cleaning and maintenance and other work that is not a public project as defined by the Public Contract Code.

"Contract" means a binding agreement based upon mutual assent of the parties, made for a lawful purpose, between competent parties, in the form required by law, and generally supported by consideration.

"Negotiation" means contracting through the use of either competitive or other than competitive proposals and discussions. Any contract/purchase order awarded without using sealed bidding procedures is a negotiated contract/purchase order. Further, negotiation is a procedure that includes the receipt of proposals from offerors, permits bargaining, and usually affords an opportunity to revise offers before award of a contract/purchase order. Bargaining in the sense of discussion, persuasion, alteration of initial assumptions of positions, and give-and-take may apply to price, schedule, technical requirements, type of contract/purchase order, or other terms of a proposed contract/purchase order.

"Payment bond" means a contract of guarantee executed subsequent to award by the successful bidder to satisfy claims of material suppliers and of mechanics and laborers employed under the contract.

"Performance bond" means a contract of guarantee executed subsequent to award by the successful bidder to protect the city from loss due to contractor’s inability to complete the contract as agreed.

"Professional services" means services, such as, but not limited to, the services of accountants, appraisers, architects, attorneys, auditors, designers, engineers, inspectors, physicians, surveyors, and other professional and technical callings.

"Responsible bidder or offeror" means a firm/person who has the capability in all aspects to perform, in full, contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability that will assure good faith performance.

"Responsive bidder" means:

1. A firm/person who has submitted a bid that conforms in all material respects to the invitation for request for proposal;

2. One whose bid conforms in all material respects to the terms and conditions, the specifications and other requirements of the invitation for bid/request for proposal.

"Service" means work that directly engages the time and effort of a contractor whose primary purpose is to perform an identifiable task rather than to furnish an end item of supply. Services may be performed either by professional or nonprofessional personnel, whether on an individual or organizational basis. Examples of services or services contracts are (1) maintenance, overhaul, repair, servicing, rehabilitation, salvage, modernization, or modification of supplies, systems, or equipment, (2) facilities maintenance, (3) janitorial services, (4) advisory and assistance services, (5) telecommunication services, and (6) transportation and related services. "Service" does not include projects that are "public projects" under the Public Contract Code.

"Sole source procurement" means an award for the services of the only known capable supplier, occasioned by the unique nature of the requirement, the supplier, or market conditions. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.030 Procurement of services.
A. For procurement of services equal to or over $50,000, a request for proposal (RFP) shall be solicited from at least three firms from the bidders’ list of consultants maintained for that particular type of work. The RFP shall include, at a minimum, (1) proposal submittal requirements, (2) scope of work, (3) selection criteria, and (4) contract documents, such as the contract agreement and insurance certificates. The city council shall award such contracts for work.

B. For procurement of services less than $50,000, the city manager or the finance director may award such contracts after verbal or written proposals have been received from at least two firms from the bidders’ list of consultants maintained for that particular type of work. The city attorney may award contracts for legal consultants less than $50,000.

C. Contracts for services from a sole source provider more than $50,000 shall be awarded by the city council. Contracts for services less than $50,000 may be awarded by the city manager or finance director or by the city attorney if for legal services. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.040 Public projects.
The procurement of work for a public project shall be by written contract after the following procedures:

A. Public projects, as defined by Public Contract Code Section 20161, exceeding $5,000 shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder using the formal bidding process set forth in Public Contract Code Section 20160 et seq.

B. Public projects, as defined by Public Contract Code Section 22002, of $25,000 or less may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

C. Public projects, as defined by Public Contract Code Section 22002, of up to $100,000 may be bid using the informal bidding procedure of Chapter 3.09 BMC.

D. Public projects, as defined by Public Contract Code Section 22002, exceeding $100,000 shall be bid using the formal bidding process set forth in Public Contract Code Section 20160 et seq.

E. The city manager and finance director may award public project contracts up to $50,000. The city council shall award contracts of $50,000 or more. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.050 Payment and performance bonds.
The awarding authority may require a payment and/or performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city and as required by state law. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.060 Use of consultants selected by another agency.
The city manager or finance director may enter into an agreement for services from a bidder awarded a bid by another agency if said agency used procedures substantially the same as those normally used by the city, provided said agreement is less than $50,000 and funds are appropriated in the city’s budget for such purpose.

For an agreement for services from a bidder awarded a bid by another agency in an amount more than $50,000, the city council may award said agreement. (Ord. 03-6).

3.10.070 Award of professional service agreement.
For professional service agreements up to $50,000 in value, the finance director or city manager may award an agreement for services to a responsible/responsive bidder, who did not submit the lowest bid price, but is, in the city manager’s or finance director’s judgment, most capable in all material aspects to perform full contract requirements. For legal consultant agreements up to $50,000, the city attorney may award an agreement for services to a responsible/responsive bidder who did not submit the lowest bid price, but is, in the city attorney’s judgment, most capable in all material aspects to perform full contract requirements. For agreements $50,000 or above in value, the city council may award an agreement for services to a responsible/responsive bidder who did not submit the lowest bid price, but is, in the city council’s judgment, most capable in all material aspects to perform full contract requirements. (Ord. 03-6).

1
Prior legislation: Ord. 99-5.


Chapter 3.12
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND1
Sections:

3.12.010  Created.

3.12.020  Deposits.

3.12.030  Expenditures.

3.12.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Section 196, Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." (Prior code § 11-201).

3.12.020 Deposits.
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvements of streets or highways by the city, shall be paid into the fund. (Prior code § 11-202).

3.12.030 Expenditures.
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of Sections 2106 through 2116 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Prior code § 11-203).

1
For statutory provisions on the special gas tax improvement fund, see Streets and Highways Code § 2113.


Chapter 3.16
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX1
Sections:

3.16.010  Citation – Statutory authority.

3.16.020  Imposition.

3.16.030  Payment.

3.16.040  Exception – Security agreement.

3.16.050  Exception – Public agencies.

3.16.060  Exception – Conveyances.

3.16.070  Exception – Order of S.E.C.

3.16.080  Exception – Partnership interest.

3.16.090  Exception – Instrument of foreclosure.

3.16.100  Administration.

3.16.110  Refunds.

3.16.010 Citation – Statutory authority.
This chapter may be cited as the "real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of Benicia." It is adopted under the authority of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, beginning with Section 11901. (Prior code § 11-301).

3.16.020 Imposition.
There is imposed on each instrument or writing by which land, tenement or other realty sold within the city is transferred or conveyed to the purchaser or other grantee when the consideration or value of the interest conveyed, exclusive of the value of an encumbrance remaining at the time of sale, exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part of $500.00. (Prior code § 11-302).

3.16.030 Payment.
The tax imposed under BMC 3.16.020 shall be paid by the person who makes, signs or issues the instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the instrument is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 11-303).

3.16.040 Exception – Security agreement.
The tax imposed does not apply to an instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 11-304).

3.16.050 Exception – Public agencies.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Prior code § 11-305; amended during 1980 codification).

3.16.060 Exception – Conveyances.
The tax imposed does not apply to a conveyance to make effective a plan of reorganization or adjustment:

A. Confirmed under the federal Bankruptcy Act;

B. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

C. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

D. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

This section applies only if the filing of instrument of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 11-306).

3.16.070 Exception – Order of S.E.C.
The tax does not apply to the making of conveyances to make effective an order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 if:

A. The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission recites that the conveyance is necessary or appropriate to carry out Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; and

B. The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed. (Prior code § 11-307).

3.16.080 Exception – Partnership interest.
A. In the case of realty held by a partnership, no levy is imposed by reason of transfer of an interest in a partnership if:

1. The partnership is a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

2. The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

B. If there is a termination of a partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter the partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed for fair market value, exclusive of the land value of an encumbrance remaining, all realty held by the partnership at the time of termination.

C. Not more than one tax may be imposed by reason of a termination described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant to it, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the time of termination. (Prior code § 11-308).

3.16.090 Exception – Instrument of foreclosure.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds that unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. (Prior code § 11-308.5; added during 1980 codification).

3.16.100 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and any county ordinance adopted pursuant to it. (Prior code § 11-309).

3.16.110 Refunds.
A claim for refund of the tax imposed is governed by Chapter 5 of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, beginning with Section 5096. (Prior code § 11-310).

1 For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose a tax on transfers of real property, see Revenue and Taxation Code § 11901 et seq.


Chapter 3.20
SALES AND USE TAX1
Sections:

3.20.010    Short title.

3.20.020    Rate.

3.20.030    Operative date.

3.20.040    Purpose.

3.20.050    Contract with state.

3.20.060    Sales tax.

3.20.070    Place of sale.

3.20.080    Use tax.

3.20.090    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.20.100    Limitation on adoption of state law.

3.20.110    Permit not required.

3.20.120    Exclusions and exemptions.

3.20.130    Exclusions and exemptions – Operative upon state amendment.

3.20.140    BMC 3.20.120 effective date.

3.20.150    BMC 3.20.130 effective date.

3.20.160    Amendments.

3.20.170    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.20.180    Violation – Penalties.

3.20.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.030 Operative date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 17, 1984. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

B. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

C. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

D. To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incidental to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in BMC 3.20.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.070 Place of sale.
For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in BMC 3.20.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.100 Limitation on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.110 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

D. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.130 Exclusions and exemptions – Operative upon state amendment.
A. The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

B. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

C. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

D. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

E. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

F. In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.140 BMC 3.20.120 effective date.
BMC 3.20.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.150 BMC 3.20.130 effective date.
BMC 3.20.130 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.160 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.170 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

3.20.180 Violation – Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 83-17 N.S. § 2, 1983).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose sales and use taxes, see Government Code § 37101; for provisions on uniform local sales and use taxes, see Revenue and Taxation Code § 7200 et seq.


Chapter 3.22
TRANSACTION AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.22.010    Short title.

3.22.020    Definitions.

3.22.030    Purpose.

3.22.040    Contract with state.

3.22.050    Imposition of transaction tax – Transaction tax rate.

3.22.060    Place of sale.

3.22.070    Imposition of use tax – Use tax rate.

3.22.080    Adoption of provisions of state law.

3.22.090    Limitations on the adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.

3.22.100    Permit not required.

3.22.110    Exemptions and exclusions.

3.22.120    Oversight, annual audit and public report.

3.22.130    Amendments.

3.22.140    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.22.150    Termination.

3.22.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the transactions and use tax ordinance of the city of Benicia. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings given in this section:

“City” means the incorporated territory of the city.

“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this chapter and the approval by the voters of the city of a measure approving the imposition of a transaction and use tax; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization as required by BMC 3.22.040 prior to such date, the city shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.030 Purpose.
The city council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

A. To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

B. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

C. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

D. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.050 Imposition of transaction tax, transaction tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date and before the termination date. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.070 Imposition of use tax, use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date and before the termination date for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.090 Limitations on the adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

A. Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

1. The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California.

2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

3. In those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

a. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or

b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

4. In Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

B. The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
A. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

B. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

a. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

b. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

C. There is exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property:

1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.

4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter.

5. For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

6. Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

7. “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

D. Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.120 Oversight, annual audit and public report.
A. The independent auditor hired by the city council to conduct an audit of and provide audited financial statements for all of the city’s financial activities. The auditor shall include an accounting of the revenue received from the tax and expenditures thereof in the audited financial statements. The auditor’s report shall be presented to the city council and made available to the public.

B. The finance committee shall function as the tax oversight committee and shall review and report annually to the city council on the receipt of revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax authorized by this chapter. The report shall include how the funds are being used to address the city council’s stated priorities and shall be completed in conjunction with the city’s budget process. This report shall include the status and performance of the programs and services funded, wholly or partially, with proceeds from the tax. It is not within the purview of the committee to direct staff, recommend any particular contracts, or define the scope of a project using funds from the tax. Rather these responsibilities remain under the authority of the city council and the professional staff including the city manager. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.130 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the operative date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

3.22.150 Termination.
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall not expire, unless terminated by a four-fifths vote of the city council or by a vote of the people of the city of Benicia. (Ord. 14-05b § 1; Ord. 14-05a).

Chapter 3.24
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX1
Sections:

3.24.010    Title.

3.24.020    Definitions.

3.24.030    Imposition.

3.24.040    Exemptions.

3.24.050    Operator’s duties.

3.24.060    Registration.

3.24.070    Recordkeeping.

3.24.080    Remittance.

3.24.090    Refunds.

3.24.100    Remittance failure – Procedure.

3.24.110    Remittance failure – Penalties and interest.

3.24.120    Appeal.

3.24.130    Actions to collect.

3.24.140    Violation.

3.24.010 Title.
This chapter may be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city of Benicia.” (Prior code § 11-501).

3.24.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

B. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

C. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

D. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

E. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

F. “Tax administrator” means the city administrator.

G. “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of 29 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 29 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior to and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Prior code § 11-502).

3.24.030 Imposition.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel/motel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of nine percent of the rent charged by the operator. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel/motel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel/motel. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid to the operator of the hotel/motel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 93-13 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 75-2 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 11-503).

3.24.040 Exemptions.
A. No tax shall be imposed upon:

1. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

2. Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

3. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

B. No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 11-504).

3.24.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 11-505).

3.24.060 Registration.
Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

A. The name of the operator;

B. The address of the hotel;

C. The date upon which the certificate was issued;

D. The following:

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting the tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize a person to conduct unlawful business or to conduct lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

(Prior code § 11-506).

3.24.070 Recordkeeping.
Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter shall keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 11-511).

3.24.080 Remittance.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 11-507).

3.24.090 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient had been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 11-512).

3.24.100 Remittance failure – Procedure.
If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within 10 days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause, at a time and place fixed in said notice, why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specific tax, interest and penalties should not be fixed. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days unless an appeal is taken as provided in BMC 3.24.120. (Prior code § 11-509).

3.24.110 Remittance failure – Penalties and interest.
A. Original Delinquency. An operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. An operator who fails to remit a delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first becomes delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed.

C. Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid. (Prior code § 11-508).

3.24.120 Appeal.
An operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 07-28 § 1; prior code § 11-510).

3.24.130 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 11-513).

3.24.140 Violation.
It is a violation of this code to:

A. Fail or refuse to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish a return required to be made or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator; or

B. Render a false or fraudulent return claim; or

C. Make, render, sign or verify any report or claim or make any false or fraudulent report of claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made. (Ord. 03-9 § 4; prior code § 11-514).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing local taxes on transient occupancies, see Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7280 and 7281.


Chapter 3.25
UTILITY USERS EXCISE TAX
Sections:

3.25.010    Purpose.

3.25.020    Short title.

3.25.030    Definitions.

3.25.040    Rules of construction.

3.25.050    Benefit to all persons.

3.25.060    Power in addition.

3.25.070    Conflicting provisions.

3.25.080    Liberal construction.

3.25.090    Defect or omission – Validity of proceedings or taxes.

3.25.100    Limitation of actions.

3.25.110    Termination or suspension of tax.

3.25.120    Exemptions.

3.25.130    Telephone users tax.

3.25.140    Electricity users tax.

3.25.150    Gas users tax.

3.25.160    Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.

3.25.170    Cable television users tax.

3.25.180    Delinquent taxes – Penalty.

3.25.190    Actions to collect.

3.25.200    Duty to collect – Procedures.

3.25.210    Additional power and duties of tax administrator.

3.25.220    Assessment – Administrative remedy.

3.25.230    Recordkeeping.

3.25.240    Refunds.

3.25.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a utility users excise tax as a revenue measure necessary to pay the usual and current expenses of conducting the municipal government of the city, the proceeds of which shall be paid into the general fund of the city. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 1, 1989).

3.25.020 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “utility users excise tax ordinance.” (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 2, 1989).

3.25.030 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

A. “City” means the city of Benicia.

B. “Gas” includes natural gas and any other gas used for light, heat and power.

C. “Month” means a calendar month.

D. “Nonutility supplier” means a service supplier, other than an electrical corporation serving within the city, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least 100 kilowatts monthly for its own use or for sale to others.

E. “Person” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, Massachusetts business or common law trust, society or individual.

F. “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city.

G. “Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “cable television corporation” have the same meanings as defined in Section 234, 218, 222 and 215.5, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code (as said sections existed on June 1, 1989), except that “electrical corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user.

H. “Service supplier” means any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter.

I. “Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 3, 1989).

3.25.040 Rules of construction.
Words of the masculine gender are deemed and construed to include correlative words of the feminine and neuter genders. Unless the context otherwise indicates, words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice versa. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 17, 1989).

3.25.050 Benefit to all persons.
The city council has found and determined and declares that all persons using utility services in the city enjoy the privilege of using and benefit from the providing, by the city, of municipal services and facilities. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 18, 1989).

3.25.060 Power in addition.
The powers conferred by this chapter are in addition to, and the limitations imposed by this chapter do not affect, the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 19, 1989).

3.25.070 Conflicting provisions.
If this chapter is inconsistent with any other law, this chapter is controlling. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 20, 1989).

3.25.080 Liberal construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to promote its objects. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 21, 1989).

3.25.090 Defect or omission – Validity of proceedings or taxes.
If the jurisdiction of the city council to order the proposed act is not affected, the defect or omission of any officer in proceedings under this chapter does not invalidate the proceedings or taxes levied under this chapter. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 22, 1989).

3.25.100 Limitation of actions.
The validity of this chapter or of any tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding or defense unless such action or proceeding or defense has been brought or raised within 60 days from the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Unless an action or proceeding is commenced or such defense raised within said period, this chapter and any tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be held valid and in every respect legal and incontestable. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 23, 1989).

3.25.110 Termination or suspension of tax.
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the city council. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 25, 1989).

3.25.120 Exemptions.
A. Any individual who qualifies as a “claimant” under the Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Law (Chapter 1, commencing with Section 20501, of Part 10.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California) shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter and any such tax paid by any such individual is subject to refund under BMC 3.25.240.

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of California.

C. The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service (which shall include energy generated by solar heat and/or wood-burning stoves produced on the premises) otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax.

D. The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 4, 1989).

3.25.130 Telephone users tax.
A. Tax Imposed. There is imposed a tax (herein called the “telephone users tax”) on the amounts paid for any intrastate telephone services by every person in the city using such services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such services and shall be paid by the person paying for such services. The telephone users tax is intended to, and does, apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates within the city.

B. Definitions. The following definitions apply to this section, in addition to those in BMC 3.25.030:

“Intrastate telephone service” means all telephone communications services or telephone services where the point or points of origin and the point or points of destination of the service are all located in this state.

“Charges” means the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone service. Charges shall not include:

1. Any tax imposed by the United States or by any charter city;

2. Amounts billed to nonsubscribers for coin shortages;

3. Amounts billed for any nonrecurring, installation, service connection service charges; or

4. Amounts billed by a hotel or motel for service rendered in placing calls for its guests.

“Telephone communications services” or “telephone services” refers to that service which provides access to a telephone system and the privilege of telephonic quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such telephone system.

C. Collection. The telephone users tax shall be collected from the service user by the person providing the intrastate communication services, or the person receiving payment for such services. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected, measured by the tax bill in the previous month, shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of each month.

D. Exemptions. In addition to the exemptions set forth in BMC 3.25.120, the telephone users tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed on any of the following:

1. Certain Coin-Operated Service. Service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones available to the public with respect to local telephone service, or with respect to toll telephone service if the charge for such toll telephone service is less than $0.25; except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be subject to the tax.

2. News Services. No tax shall be imposed, except with respect to local telephone service, on any payment received from any person for services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person.

3. International Organizations or Red Cross. No tax shall be imposed on any payment received for services furnished to an international organization, or to the American National Red Cross.

4. Servicemen in Combat Zone. No tax shall be imposed on any payment received for any toll telephone service which originates within a combat zone from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone, as determined under such section, provided a certificate, setting forth such facts as the secretary may by regulations prescribe, is furnished to the person receiving such payment.

5. Items Otherwise Taxed. Only one payment of tax under subsection (A) of this section shall be required with respect to the tax on any service, notwithstanding the lines or stations of one or more persons are used in furnishing such service.

6. Common Carriers and Communications Companies. No tax shall be imposed on the amount paid for any toll telephone service to the extent that the amount so paid is for use by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting station or network in the conduct of its business as such.

7. Installation Charges. No tax shall be imposed on so much of any amount paid for the installation of any instrument, wire, pole, switchboard, apparatus, or equipment as is properly attributable to such installation.

8. Nonprofit Hospitals. No tax shall be imposed on any amount paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term “nonprofit hospital” means a hospital which is exempt from income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(a).

9. State and Local Governmental Exemption. No tax shall be imposed on any payment received for services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or any political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia.

10. Exemption for Nonprofit Educational Organizations. No tax shall be imposed on any amount paid by a nonprofit educational organization for services or facilities furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term “nonprofit educational organization” means an educational organization which is exempt from income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(a). The term also includes a school operated as an activity of an organization which is exempt from income tax under Section 501(a), if the school normally maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on.

11. Land Mobile or Maritime Mobile Services. No tax shall be imposed on telephone communications services that are land mobile services or maritime mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations as the section existed on January 1, 1970.

12. Other Service or Equipment. Any type of service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a service supplier subject to public utility regulation. (Ord. 06-07 § 1, 2006; Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 5, 1989).

3.25.140 Electricity users tax.
A. There is imposed a tax (herein called the “electricity users tax”) upon every person in the city using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the city and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be based on the above tax rate and the sale price of that electrical energy if there is an arms-length transaction for the sale of the electrical energy between the nonaffiliated nonutility supplier and the service user. If there is not an arms-length sale from a nonutility supplier, the tax shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Regulatory Commission.

B. As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by such person for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term includes the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the conduct of its business; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency.

C. The electricity users tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The electricity users tax on use supplied by self-generation or cogeneration or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in BMC 3.25.160. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by United States mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by United States mail, to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. The amount of the tax remitted may be estimated by a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier’s customers.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving electricity directly from a nonutility supplier, or otherwise not having the full tax due, billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within 30 days of said use, and shall remit directly to the city the amount of said tax due.

E. The tax administrator may require from said service user the filing of tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the sales price, or fair market value in the absence of a sales price, and quantity of electricity used.

F. Notwithstanding the provisions of BMC 3.25.200(A), if the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of the energy charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the energy charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 6, 1989).

3.25.150 Gas users tax.
A. There is imposed a tax (herein called the “gas users tax”) upon every person in the city other than a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using, in the city, gas which is delivered through mains or pipes or by motor vehicle or by rail. The gas users tax shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for the gas and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by nonutility suppliers shall be based on the sale price of the gas or gas transportation if that is derived from an arms-length transaction between a nonaffiliated nonutility supplier and the service user. If there is not an arms-length sale, the tax shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the city. “Charges” as used in this section shall include:

1. Those billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes or by motor vehicle or by rail;

2. Gas transportation charges; and

3. Demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

B. The gas users tax is not applicable to:

1. The charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes or by motor vehicle or by rail;

2. Charges made for gas sold by a public utility or governmental agency for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water;

3. Charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and

4. Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

C. The gas users tax shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes or by motor vehicle or by rail shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator.

D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas directly from the nonutility supplier, or otherwise not having the full tax due, billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within 30 days of said use, and shall remit directly to the city the amount of said tax due.

E. The tax administrator may require from said service user the filing of tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the sales price, or fair market value in the absence of a sales price, and quantity of gas used. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 7, 1989).

3.25.160 Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the tax administrator within 30 days of said use and shall directly remit to the city the amount of tax due.

B. The tax administrator may require from said service user the filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the sale price and quantity of gas used. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 8, 1989).

3.25.170 Cable television users tax.
A. There is imposed a tax (herein called the “cable television users tax”) upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four percent of the charges made for such service and shall be paid by the person paying for such service.

B. The cable television users tax shall be collected from the service user by the person furnishing the cable television service. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 9, 1989).

3.25.180 Delinquent taxes – Penalty.
A. Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.

B. Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination shall attach and be paid by the person required to collect and remit at the rate of 15 percent of the total tax collected or imposed in this section.

C. The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon any person required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting at a rate of 15 percent of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

D. Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 10, 1989).

3.25.190 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by a service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 11, 1989).

3.25.200 Duty to collect – Procedures.
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the energy charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first, until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of their refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges, BMC 3.25.220(C) will apply.

B. The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 12, 1989).

3.25.210 Additional power and duties of tax administrator.
A. The tax administrator shall have the power and duty and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B. The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes imposed in this chapter. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

C. The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that the collection of any tax imposed may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

D. The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person’s right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 13, 1989).

3.25.220 Assessment – Administrative remedy.
A. The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit.

B. Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax to such person, or whenever the tax administrator deems it is in the best interest of the city, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods.

C. The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts refused to be paid and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due.

D. The tax administrator shall notify the service user that the tax administrator assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to such user personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user’s address change, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than $5.00. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 14, 1989).

3.25.230 Recordkeeping.
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 15, 1989).

3.25.240 Refunds.
A. Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted in the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from which the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment.

C. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto.

D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly return. In the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city.

E. A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier’s customary practice. (Ord. 89-6 N.S. § 16, 1989).

Chapter 3.26
COMMUNICATION USERS TAX
Sections:

3.26.010    Short title.

3.26.020    Adoption.

3.26.030    Definitions.

3.26.040    Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.

3.26.050    Communication users tax.

3.26.060    Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items.

3.26.070    Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.

3.26.080    Duty to collect – Procedures.

3.26.090    Collection penalties – Service suppliers.

3.26.100    Actions to collect.

3.26.110    Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.

3.26.120    Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.

3.26.130    Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.

3.26.140    Records.

3.26.150    Refunds.

3.26.160    Appeals.

3.26.170    No injunction/writ of mandate.

3.26.180    Notice of changes to ordinance.

3.26.190    Future amendment to cited statute.

3.26.200    No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval.

3.26.210    Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and expenditure.

3.26.220    Interaction with prior tax.

3.26.230    Remedies cumulative.

3.26.240    Benefit to all persons.

3.26.250    Power in addition.

3.26.260    Conflicting provisions.

3.26.270    Liberal construction.

3.26.280    Defect or omission – Validity of proceedings or taxes.

3.26.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Communication Users Tax Law” of the city. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.020 Adoption.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the powers of the city of Benicia as authorized by Section 6 of Article XI of the Constitution of the State of California. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

“Ancillary telecommunication services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including but not limited to the following services:

1. “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

2. “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

3. “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information.

4. “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

5. “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.

“Ancillary video services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video programming.

“Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

“City” shall mean the city of Benicia.

“City administrator” shall mean the city manager or his or her designee.

“Communication services” means “telecommunication services,” “ancillary telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”

“Mobile telecommunications service” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

“Month” shall mean a calendar month.

“Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city), cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

“Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

“Post-paid telecommunication service” means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

“Prepaid telecommunication service” means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

“Private telecommunication service” means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).

“Service address” means either:

1. The location of the service user’s communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or

2. If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VolP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

3. For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number.

“Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the city, that provides communication service to a user of such service within the city.

“Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.

“State” shall mean the state of California.

“Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city or his or her designee.

“Telecommunications services” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over Internet protocol (VolP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with “telecommunications services.” “Telecommunications services” include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service (to the extent that it is practicable for the service supplier to collect the correct amount of the tax imposed under this chapter from the service user); post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); and 911 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers call in to pre-recorded or live service). Telecommunications services shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunications services” such as books, music, ringtones, games and similar digital products.

“Video programming” means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a “video service supplier” including but not limited to basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed.

“Video services” means any and all services related to the providing or delivering of “video programming” (including origination programming and programming using Internet protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used to deliver or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes data services, “telecommunication services,” or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with “video services.”

“Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the city, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)); open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using Internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand); direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.040 Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state.

B. Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of communication users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.

The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to BMC 3.26.160. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator pursuant to BMC 3.26.160 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

C. The city council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from such tax for a specified period of time.

D. The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier.

E. Any individual who qualifies as a “claimant” under the Gonsalves-Deukmejian-Petris Senior Citizens Property Tax Assistance Law (Chapter 1, commencing with Section 20501, of Part 10.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California) shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter and any such tax paid by any such individual is subject to refund under BMC 3.26.150. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.050 Communication users tax.
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and one-half percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.

B. “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, and private communication services; provided, that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation.

C. The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section.

D. As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including but not limited to call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. Telecommunication services shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services” such as books, music, ringtones, games and similar digital products.

E. Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not limited to, charges for the following:

1. Franchise fees and access fees (PEG);

2. Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of communication services;

3. Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and returned check fees;

4. Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

5. All video programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, or on demand programming);

6. Ancillary programming services (e.g., electronic program guide services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming);

7. Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices); and

8. Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.

F. To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or local jurisdiction on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

G. The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.060 Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items.
Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.070 Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VolP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail.

The city shall make available, upon request, an accurate description of its jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses and/or ZIP Plus Four, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided by the city, it shall not be responsible for any errors in taxation that may result. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.080 Duty to collect – Procedures.
A. Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

1. The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, BMC 3.26.120 shall apply.

2. The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

B. Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.090 Collection penalties – Service suppliers.
A. Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging moneys between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.

B. If the person required to collect and/or remit the communication users tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of 15 percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

C. The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of 15 percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

D. For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

E. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a communication users tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.100 Actions to collect.
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.110 Deficiency determination and assessment – Tax application errors.
A. The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any service user or service supplier required to pay, collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

B. The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay, collect and/or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within 14 calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter.

C. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within 30 days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

D. At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or non-assessment) thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to BMC 3.26.160. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city administrator pursuant to BMC 3.26.160 is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

E. Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be 15 percent on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection (E).

F. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.120 Administrative remedy – Nonpaying service users.
A. Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

B. In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of 15 percent of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date until paid.

C. The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

D. If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within 30 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.130 Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
A. The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

B. The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

C. Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and is voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time.

D. The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to BMC 3.26.110 for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

E. Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed 45 days; provided, that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of 0.75 percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

F. The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

G. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.140 Records.
A. It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

B. The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date; provided, that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.

C. The tax administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7.

D. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall:

1. Provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and

2. Upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, are necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

E. If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of $500.00 on such person for each day following:

1. The initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or

2. The due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.150 Refunds.
Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section:

A. The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier; provided, that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this subsection.

B. The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946.

The tax administrator, or the city council where the claim is in excess of $5,000, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the tax administrator/city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form, which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

C. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the city upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the tax administrator; provided, that:

1. Such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax;

2. The tax administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and

3. In the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the city, the tax administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit.

D. Notwithstanding subsections (A) through (C) of this section, a service supplier shall be entitled to take any overpayment as a credit against an underpayment whenever such overpayment has been received by the city with the three years next preceding a deficiency determination or assessment of the tax administrator in connection with an audit instituted by the tax administrator pursuant to BMC 3.26.130(D). A service supplier shall not be entitled to said credit unless it clearly establishes the right to the credit by written records showing entitlement thereto. Under no circumstances shall an overpayment taken as a credit against an underpayment pursuant to this subsection qualify a service supplier for a refund to which it would not otherwise be entitled under the one-year written claim requirement of this section. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.160 Appeals.
A. The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to BMC 3.26.150), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to BMC 3.26.150), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

B. If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to BMC 3.26.150), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, he or she may appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

C. The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before the city council. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

D. Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the council shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within 14 days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within 90 days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

E. All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.170 No injunction/writ of mandate.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.180 Notice of changes to ordinance.
If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.190 Future amendment to cited statute.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.200 No increase in tax percentage or change in methodology without voter approval.
A. Regarding BMC 3.26.050, the city may not increase the tax percentage or change a methodology for calculating the tax so as to result in an increase in a tax imposed on a person, without voter approval.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, pursuant to Government Code Section 53750, the city may make the following changes without voter approval:

1. Reduce the percentage rate, and at any time thereafter increase such percentage rate, so long as the subsequent increase does not exceed the rate previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;

2. Change the methodology so as to reduce the amount of the tax being levied, and at any time thereafter change the methodology, so long as the subsequent change in methodology does not result in an increase in the amount being levied under the methodology previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;

3. Change a methodology or definition so as to avoid or eliminate a discriminatory tax on taxpayers that are similarly situated, so long as the change does not result in an increase in the amount levied on such class of similarly situated taxpayers under the methodology or definition previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter;

4. Establish a class of persons that is exempt or excepted from one or more taxes hereunder, and at any time thereafter, discontinue such exemption or exception;

5. Decide that all or a part of a tax imposed under BMC 3.26.050 should not be enforced for administrative reasons, and at any time thereafter, decide to enforce the full amount of such tax as previously approved by the voters in the enactment of this chapter; or

6. Establish, and at any time thereafter change, the value and/or apportionment (including a “safe harbor” percentage) of taxable and nontaxable services that are bundled or packaged under a combined charge, in response to changes in the marketing of combined services and the components thereof, or in reevaluating the values thereof (see BMC 3.26.060). (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.210 Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance, and expenditure.
The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.220 Interaction with prior tax.
A. Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to BMC 3.26.050 with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to BMC 3.25.130 and 3.25.170 with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to April 1, 2008, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to BMC 3.25.130 and 3.25.170 with respect to any charge for a service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to BMC 3.26.050 with respect to that charge. The intent of this paragraph is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone and video users tax to the new communication users tax (which transition period ends April 1, 2008) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.

B. Collection of Tax by Service Providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.230 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 77070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.240 Benefit to all persons.
The city council has found and determined and declares that all persons using communication services in the city enjoy the privilege of using and benefit from the providing, by the city, of municipal services and facilities. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.250 Power in addition.
The powers conferred by this chapter are in addition to, and the limitations imposed by this chapter do not affect, the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.260 Conflicting provisions.
If this chapter is inconsistent with any other law, this chapter is controlling. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.270 Liberal construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to promote its objects. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

3.26.280 Defect or omission – Validity of proceedings or taxes.
If the jurisdiction of the city council to order the proposed act is not affected, the defect or omission of any officer in proceedings under this chapter does not invalidate the proceedings or taxes levied under this chapter. (Ord. 07-26 § 1).

Chapter 3.28
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY1
Sections:

3.28.010    Storage.

3.28.020    Sale – Time limit.

3.28.030    Sale – Before time limit.

3.28.040    Disposition of unsold or dangerous property.

3.28.050    Expenses of sale and disposition of proceeds.

3.28.060    Exceptions.

3.28.010 Storage.
Except as provided by Civil Code Sections 2080.1 through 2080.2 or other state or federal law, personal property which comes into the possession of the police department, if unclaimed by the owner, shall be stored in a safe place for a period of four months or, in the case of a bicycle, for three months. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-801).

3.28.020 Sale – Time limit.
At any time after the expiration of four months from the time unclaimed property is stored by the police department, or three months in the case of an unclaimed bicycle, the chief of police may sell the property at public auction to the highest bidder. The chief of police shall give notice of the sale at least five days before the time fixed for the auction by publishing a notice once in the newspaper of general circulation published in the county. The notice shall contain a general description of the property and a time and place where the sale will be held. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-802).

3.28.030 Sale – Before time limit.
The chief of police may sell property by public auction in the manner authorized by Civil Code Section 2080.5 without holding it for the time periods specified in BMC 3.28.010 when:

A. The thing is in danger of perishing or of losing the greater part of its value; or

B. The reasonable charges imposed by the police department to defray the cost of storage and care of the property amount to two-thirds of its value. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-803).

3.28.040 Disposition of unsold or dangerous property.
The chief of police may destroy or otherwise dispose of property which:

A. Remains unsold after public auction;

B. Is dangerous in itself;

C. Is contrary to public policy;

D. The police department is to retain. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-804).

3.28.050 Expenses of sale and disposition of proceeds.
The expenses of sale shall be deducted from the proceeds received from the sale and the balance remaining shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-805).

3.28.060 Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to property which is subject to confiscation or special disposition under state or federal law. (Ord. 74-14 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 12-806).

1
    For statutory provisions on lost and unclaimed property, see Civil Code § 2080 et seq. and § 1864 et seq.


Chapter 3.32
INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES
Sections:

3.32.010    Purpose.

3.32.020    Title.

3.32.030    Authority.

3.32.040    Definitions.

3.32.050    Findings – Notice.

3.32.060    Findings – Requirements.

3.32.070    Findings – Concurrent by city.

3.32.080    Findings – Development approval.

3.32.090    Payment of fees – Dedication of land.

3.32.100    Payment of fees – Small residential developments.

3.32.110    Fees or land – Standards.

3.32.120    Fees or land – Amount.

3.32.130    Fee payment procedure.

3.32.140    Land dedication procedure.

3.32.150    Refunds.

3.32.160    School district schedule.

3.32.170    Fees or land – Use.

3.32.180    Agreement for fee distribution.

3.32.190    Recordkeeping – Report.

3.32.200    Termination of dedication or fee requirements.

3.32.210    Additional regulations.

3.32.220    Conformance with general plan.

3.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for financing interim school facilities necessitated by new residential developments causing conditions of overcrowding. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 103, 1978).

3.32.020 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “school facilities fee/dedication ordinance.” (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 101, 1978).

3.32.030 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7, commencing with Section 65970, of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 102, 1978).

3.32.040 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Apartment” means two or more dwelling units under a single roof and under a single ownership.

B. “Conditions of overcrowding” means that the total enrollment of an attendance area’s school or schools, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school or schools within the attendance area, as determined by the governing body of the school district.

C. “Decision-making body” means the city council or their designee.

D. “Dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof, or a mobile home, designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two or more persons living together as a domestic unit.

E. “Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding” means and includes, but is not limited to, concepts such as:

1. Any agreements entered into by the affected school district which would alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development;

2. The use of relocatable structures, student transportation, and school boundary realignments;

3. The use of available bond or state loan revenues to the extent authorized by law;

4. The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from other appropriate sources, as determined by the governing body of affected school districts; and

5. Agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential development in the affected school district whereby temporary use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district or temporary use buildings owned by the school district will be used.

F. “Residential development” means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobile homes, of one or more units, or a division of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential units. “Residential development” includes, but is not limited to, a preliminary or final development plan, a subdivision tentative or final map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, a building permit, or any other discretionary permit for residential use. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. §§ 201 – 206, 1978).

3.32.050 Findings – Notice.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65970 et seq., the governing body of a school district may make a finding supported by clear and convincing evidence that:

A. Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs, including the reason for such conditions existing;

B. All reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated; and

C. No feasible method for reducing such conditions exists. Upon making these findings, the school district must provide the city with written notice of its findings as provided in BMC 3.32.060. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 301, 1978).

3.32.060 Findings – Requirements.
Any notice of findings sent by a school district to the city shall specify:

A. The findings listed in BMC 3.32.050;

B. Findings of facts and a summary of the evidence upon which the findings in BMC 3.32.050 were based;

C. The mitigation measures and methods, including those listed in BMC 3.32.040(E), considered by the school district, in any determination made concerning them, by the district;

D. The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; and

E. Such other information as may be required by a council regulation. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 302, 1978).

3.32.070 Findings – Concurrent by city.
After receipt of any notice of findings complying with the requirements of BMC 3.32.060, the council, if it concurs with such school district findings, shall do so by resolution. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 303, 1978).

3.32.080 Findings – Development approval.
Within an attendance area where the council has concurred in a school district’s notice of finding that conditions of overcrowding exist, no decision-making body shall approve an application for a residential development within such area unless such decision-making body makes one of the following findings:

A. That, pursuant to this chapter, provision has been made for payment of fees, dedication of land, or both, or some other provision has been agreed upon by the applicant for a residential development in the school district to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area; or

B. That there are specific, overriding physical, economic, social, or environmental factors, which, in the judgment of the decision-making body, would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land or other alternate provision required by BMC 3.32.090 through 3.32.120. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 304, 1978).

3.32.090 Payment of fees – Dedication of land.
In an attendance area where the council has concurred, as provided in BMC 3.32.050 through 3.32.080, that overcrowding exists, the applicant of a proposed residential development, as a condition of approval or the obtaining of a building permit, shall pay fees, make an equivalent arrangement in lieu thereof, dedicate land, or do a combination thereof unless excepted as provided in BMC 3.32.080(B) as determined by the decision-making body during the hearings and other proceedings on specific residential development applications falling within their respective jurisdictions. Prior to the imposition of the fees, or the dedication of land, or both, it is necessary for the decision-making body acting on the application to make the following determination: that the facilities to be constructed, purchased, leased, or rented from such fees or the land to be dedicated, or both, are consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 401, 1978).

3.32.100 Payment of fees – Small residential developments.
Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less, or other developments containing 50 units or less. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 402, 1978).

3.32.110 Fees or land – Standards.
Any requirement imposed pursuant to this chapter shall bear reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim, elementary, or high school facilities, and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for the schools caused by the development. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 403, 1978).

3.32.120 Fees or land – Amount.
A. When fees are required to be paid in lieu of land dedication or as a combination of both, said fees shall be paid as follows:

1. Two hundred dollars per unit for one-bedroom apartments and $600.00 for two bedrooms and $1,000 per unit for apartments of three or more bedrooms;

2. One thousand five hundred dollars for each dwelling unit, space or lot in a mobile home park other than an apartment;

3. Five hundred dollars for each bedroom subsequently added to a dwelling unit or apartment to a maximum of $1,500;

4. In addition to the fees set forth above, there shall be added thereto a sum equal to that part of said fee which is in direct proportion to the increase in the cost of living index over the said index as established for June, 1978. Said increase shall be determined on July 1st of each year and applied throughout the next 12-month period.

B. The total land area required by this chapter to be dedicated shall be at least equal in monetary value to the fees which would be otherwise required by subsection (A) of this section. The director of public works shall determine and establish the monetary value of land area for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 404, 1978).

3.32.130 Fee payment procedure.
If the payment of a fee is required, such payment shall be made at the time the building permit is approved and issued. Fees shall be paid directly to the school district who shall notify the city. No building permits shall be issued until proof of payment is made. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 501, 1978).

3.32.140 Land dedication procedure.
When land is to be dedicated, it shall be offered for dedication in substantially the same manner as prescribed in the city subdivision ordinance. Land shall be deeded directly to the school district or districts under procedures adopted by the city. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 502, 1978).

3.32.150 Refunds.
A. If a final subdivision map, a parcel map, or conditional use permit is vacated or voided, and the district still retains the land, and if the applicant so requests, the council or board of trustees shall order such land returned.

B. If a residential development approval is vacated or voided, and if the school district still retains the fees collected therefor, and if the applicant so requests, the council shall order the fees returned to the applicant. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 503, 1978).

3.32.160 School district schedule.
Following concurrence by the council pursuant to BMC 3.32.070, the community development director shall notify each school district affected thereby. The governing body of the school district shall then submit a schedule specifying how it will use the fees or land, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for the modifications. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 504, 1978).

3.32.170 Fees or land – Use.
All fees or land, or both, collected pursuant to this chapter and transferred to a school district shall be used only by the district for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom and related facilities. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 601, 1978).

3.32.180 Agreement for fee distribution.
If two separate school districts operate schools in an attendance area where the council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the council will enter into an agreement with the governing body of each school district for the purpose of determining the division of revenues from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 602, 1978).

3.32.190 Recordkeeping – Report.
Any school district receiving funds or land pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and disposition of land received, and shall file a report with the council on the balance and account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year, and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the council. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 603, 1978).

3.32.200 Termination of dedication or fee requirements.
When it is determined by the city council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an attendance area, the city council shall cease imposition of any requirements under this chapter. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 604, 1978).

3.32.210 Additional regulations.
The city council may, from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 104, 1978).

3.32.220 Conformance with general plan.
The city general plan provides for the location of public schools. Where facilities are to be constructed from fees or land required to be dedicated hereunder or both, they shall be consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 78-9 N.S. § 105, 1978).

Chapter 3.33
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
Sections:

3.33.010    Title.

3.33.020    Authority and purpose.

3.33.030    Intent.

3.33.040    Definitions.

3.33.050    Tax imposed.

3.33.060    Registration, reporting and remittance of tax.

3.33.070    Payments and communications – Timely remittance.

3.33.080    Payment – When taxes deemed delinquent.

3.33.090    Notice not required by the city.

3.33.100    Penalties and interest.

3.33.110    Refunds, credits, and procedures.

3.33.120    Exemptions from the tax.

3.33.130    Administration of the tax.

3.33.140    Enforcement – Action to collect.

3.33.150    Apportionment.

3.33.160    Constitutionality and legality – Not a sales tax.

3.33.170    Audit and examination of records and equipment.

3.33.180    Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.

3.33.190    Payment of tax does not authorize activity.

3.33.200    Deficiency determinations.

3.33.210    Failure to report.

3.33.220    Tax assessment – Notice requirements.

3.33.230    Tax assessment – Hearing, application and determination.

3.33.240    Conviction for violation – Taxes not waived.

3.33.250    Violation deemed misdemeanor.

3.33.260    Remedies cumulative.

3.33.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Cannabis Business Tax Ordinance” and shall be applicable in the city of Benicia, California, which shall be referred to herein as “city.” (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.020 Authority and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant to Sections 37100.5 and 37101 of the California Government Code, upon cannabis businesses that engage in business in the city. The cannabis business tax is levied based upon business gross receipts and square footage of plant canopy. It is not a sales and use tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real property.

The cannabis business tax is a general tax enacted solely for general governmental purposes of the city and not for specific purposes. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund and be available for unrestricted general revenue purposes. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.030 Intent.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and shall be interpreted to accomplish those purposes:

A. To impose a tax on the privilege of cultivating, transporting, dispensing, manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, storing, testing, providing, donating, selling, or distributing cannabis or cannabis products by cannabis businesses in the city of Benicia, pursuant to the State Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, California Business and Professions Code Section 26000, Proposition 64, approved by the voters in November 2016 and as amended to date (“MAUCRSA”), which legalized and regulates commercial cannabis activities in California, and other applicable law as it now exists or may hereafter be adopted; and

B. To specify the type of tax and rate of tax to be levied and the method of collection.

This chapter does not authorize the conduct of any business or activity in the city, but provides for the taxation of such businesses or activities as they occur. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not otherwise be legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.040 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this chapter:

“Cannabis” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 26001(f) of the Business and Professions Code and as subsequently amended.

“Cannabis business” shall have the meaning set forth in BMC 17.84.020 and as subsequently amended.

“Cannabis product” shall have the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code and as subsequently amended.

“Canopy” shall have the meaning set forth in BMC 17.84.020 and as subsequently amended.

“Commercial cannabis activity” shall have the meaning set forth in BMC 17.84.020 and as subsequently amended.

“Commercial cannabis cultivation” shall mean cultivation conducted by, for, or as part of a cannabis business.

“Cultivation” shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

“Employee” shall mean each person who renders any service, with or without compensation, for the owner, permittee, or agent of either an owner or permittee of a commercial cannabis business. For purposes of this chapter, the term “employee” shall include part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent employees.

“Engaged in business as a cannabis business” shall mean the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business and the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed engaged in business within the city if:

1. Such person or person’s employee maintains a fixed place of business within the city for the benefit or partial benefit of such person;

2. Such person or person’s employee owns or leases real property within the city for business purposes;

3. Such person or person’s employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in the city for sale in the ordinary course of business;

4. Such person or person’s employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the city;

5. Such person or person’s employee performs work or renders services in the city; and

The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of “engaged in business.”

“Evidence of doing business” shall mean evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or representation to a government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis business in the city.

“Fiscal year” shall mean July 1st through June 30th of the following calendar year.

“Gross receipts,” except as otherwise specifically provided, shall mean the total amount actually received or receivable from all sales; the total amount or compensation actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; discounts, rents, royalties, fees, commissions, dividends, and gains realized from trading in stocks or bonds, however designated. “Gross receipts” shall include all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. However, the following shall be excluded from gross receipts:

1. Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;

2. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

3. Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included in gross receipts;

4. Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade fixtures, machinery or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the regular course of the taxpayer’s business;

5. Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business;

6. Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible in a subsequent year, those amounts may be excluded from the gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided, however, if the whole or portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently collected they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they are recovered;

7. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded when in excess of $1.00;

8. Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee and to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. These agents or trustees must provide the tax administrator with the names and the addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments retained by the agent or trustees.

9. Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters or other personal tangible property which the tax administrator has excluded in writing shall not be subject to the cannabis business tax under this chapter. However, any retail sales not subject to this chapter as a result of the administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate business tax under any other applicable provision of this code as determined by the tax administrator.

“Person” shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, collective or any other group or combination acting as a unit, whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well as the singular number.

“Sale” shall mean any sale, exchange, or barter or other transaction for any consideration.

“Square foot” or “square footage” shall mean the maximum amount of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation authorized by a city permit issued to a person engaging in a cannabis business.

“State license” or “license” shall mean a license issued by the state of California, or one of its departments or divisions, pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq. and any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same, to engage in commercial cannabis activity.

“Tax administrator” shall mean the city finance director. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.050 Tax imposed.
A. There is established and imposed upon each person who is engaged in business as a cannabis business an annual cannabis business tax at the rates set forth in this chapter. The tax imposed by this chapter is upon the privilege of conducting business within the city and is not a sales tax or use tax.

B. Tax on Commercial Cannabis Cultivation Operations. There is hereby imposed on every cannabis business engaged in cultivation in the city an annual tax in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city which does not exceed $10.00 per square foot of cannabis cultivation area or fraction thereof. The maximum square foot tax shall be increased annually (and rounded to the nearest cent) each January 1st based on the year-over-year percentage change in Bureau of Labor Statistics San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) October to October comparison, or if such index is discontinued, a comparable or successor consumer price index designated by the city council. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of any tax imposed by this section shall be made. The tax shall be due and payable in monthly installments. For purposes of this subsection, the square feet of canopy space for a cannabis business shall be rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of canopy allowed by the cannabis business’s use permit for cannabis cultivation, or, in the absence of such a city permit, the square footage shall be the maximum square footage of canopy for cannabis cultivation allowed by the state license type. Should a city permit be issued to a cannabis business which cultivates only for certain months of the year, the city shall prorate the tax as to sufficiently reflect the period in which cultivation is occurring at the cannabis business. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by the city use permit but not utilized for cultivation be deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the tax administrator is informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the purpose of relief from the tax prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will not be used.

C. Tax on All Other Cannabis Businesses. The cannabis business tax upon every person who engages in business in the city as a cannabis business but is not solely engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation shall not exceed the maximum annual rate of six percent of the gross receipts.

D. The city council may by resolution, in its discretion, implement tax rates lower than the maximum rates established in subsections (A) through (C) of this section for all persons engaged in a cannabis business in the city, including establishing different tax rates for different categories of cannabis business, including for medical versus adult recreational use or for products of different potencies. The city council may, by resolution, also decrease or increase any such tax rate from time to time; provided, that the tax rate shall not, at any time, exceed the maximum tax rates established in subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.060 Registration, reporting and remittance of tax.
A. All persons engaging in a cannabis business, whether an existing, newly established or acquired business, shall register with the tax administrator’s office by the later of:

1. Thirty days after commencing operation; or

2. January 1, 2019, and shall annually renew such registration on or before the anniversary of the initial registration for that business.

B. Registrants shall furnish to the tax administrator a statement sworn under penalty of perjury, upon a form provided by the tax administrator, setting forth:

1. Every name under which the business engages in commercial cannabis activity in the city;

2. The names and addresses of every person who is an owner, principal or manager of the business;

3. The nature or kind of all business activity to be conducted;

4. The place or places whether or not in the city where such business is to be conducted; and

5. Any further information which the tax administrator may require.

C. The cannabis business tax imposed by this chapter shall be imposed on a fiscal year basis and shall be due and payable in monthly installments as follows:

1. Each person owing a cannabis business tax shall, on or before the last day of the month, prepare and submit a tax return statement on the form prescribed by the tax administrator, including the basis of its calculation, and remit to the tax administrator the tax due.

2. The taxpayer shall remit the tax owed to the tax administrator when the return is due whether or not a return is filed as required.

3. The tax due shall be no less than the monthly installment due, but the taxpayer may at any time pay the tax due for the entire fiscal year.

4. Tax statements and payments for all outstanding taxes owed the city are immediately due to the tax administrator upon cessation of business for any reason.

5. The tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish an alternate reporting and payment period for any taxpayer as the tax administrator deems necessary to insure collection of the tax. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.070 Payments and communications – Timely remittance.
Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is due, it must be received by the tax administrator on or before the final due date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely remittance. If the due date falls on Saturday, Sunday, holiday, or a day City Hall is closed, the due date shall be the next regular business day on which City Hall is open to the public. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.080 Payment – When taxes deemed delinquent.
Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, the taxes required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date as specified in BMC 3.33.060 and 3.33.070. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.090 Notice not required by the city.
The city may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the business; however, the tax administrator is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this chapter. Failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.100 Penalties and interest.
A. Any person who fails or refuses to pay any cannabis business tax required to be paid pursuant to this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows:

1. A penalty equal to 10 percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at the rate of one percent per month; and

2. If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, an additional penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the rate of one percent per month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties.

3. Interest shall be applied at the rate of one percent per month on the first day of the month for the full month, and will continue to accrue monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is paid in full.

B. Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a cannabis business tax and the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable for the tax amount due plus any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, and any other amount allowed under state law. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.110 Refunds, credits, and procedures.
A. No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in this section.

B. No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a business.

C. Whenever the amount of any cannabis business tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax; provided, that a written claim for refund is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and payable.

D. The tax administrator, his or her designee or any other city officer charged with the administration of this chapter shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the claimant to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant’s books and business records after request by the tax administrator to do so.

E. If the cannabis business tax was erroneously paid and the error is attributable to the city, the city shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid up to one year from when the error was identified. If an error is attributable to the claimant, the city may retain an amount established by resolution of the city council from time to time in an amount sufficient to recover the city’s cost to process the claim and refund the balance. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.120 Exemptions from the tax.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation as defined in the MAUCRSA or any subsequent state legislation regarding the same. This chapter shall not apply to personal use of cannabis that is specifically exempted from state licensing requirements, that meets the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under state law, and for which the individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal use. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.130 Administration of the tax.
A. It shall be the duty of the tax administrator to collect the taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the duties required by this chapter.

B. For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the tax administrator may from time to time promulgate such administrative rules and procedures consistent with the purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.

C. The tax administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to administer the tax, including but not limited to:

1. Provide all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting of the tax;

2. Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of this chapter;

3. Receive and record all taxes remitted to the city as provided in this chapter;

4. Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to this chapter;

5. Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this chapter;

6. Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this chapter;

7. Take such other reasonable steps as he or she deems necessary and appropriate to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.140 Enforcement – Action to collect.
A. Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such debt. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the city to bring any other action, including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties and/or fees imposed by this chapter or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.

B. In addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or local law, if any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter is not paid when due, the tax administrator may, within four years after the amount is due, record a certificate of lien specifying the amount of taxes, fees and penalties due, and the name and address of the individual or business as it appears on the records of the tax administrator. The lien shall also specify that the tax administrator has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid, together with penalties thereon, constitutes a lien upon all real property in the city owned by the individual or business, or subsequently acquired by the individual or business before the lien expires. The lien has the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for 10 years from filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged.

C. At any time within four years after any individual or business is delinquent in the payment of any amount herein required to be paid or within four years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under subsection (B) of this section, the tax administrator may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to the sheriff and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff the same fees, commissions and expenses for service provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator shall approve the fees for publication in the newspaper.

D. At any time within four years after recording a lien against any individual or business, if the lien is not discharged and released in full, the tax administrator may forthwith seize any asset or property, real or personal (including bank account), of the operator and sell at public auction the asset or property, or a sufficient part of it to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any cost incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Assets or property of the business subject to seizure and sale subject to this chapter shall not include any assets or property which is exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.150 Apportionment.
If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the city, it is the intent of the city to apply the cannabis business tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the taxed activity actually carried on in the city. To the extent federal or state law requires that any tax due from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate said apportionment on his or her tax return. The tax administrator may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or she finds useful or necessary. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.160 Constitutionality and legality – Not a sales tax.
A. This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United States Constitution and state law. None of the tax provided for by this chapter shall be applied in a manner that causes an undue burden upon interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States or the state of California or a violation of any other provision of applicable law.

B. The taxes imposed under this chapter are excises on the privilege of engaging in commercial cannabis activity in the city. It is not a sales or use tax and shall not be calculated or assessed as such. Nevertheless, at the option of a commercial cannabis business, the tax may be separately identified on invoices, receipts and other evidences of transactions. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.170 Audit and examination of records and equipment.
A. The tax administrator shall have the power to audit and examine all books and records of persons engaged in cannabis businesses, including both state and federal income tax returns, sales tax returns, or other evidence documenting the gross receipts of persons engaged in cannabis businesses, and, where necessary, all equipment, of any person engaged in cannabis businesses in the city, for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of commercial cannabis tax, if any, required to be paid by the provisions hereof, and for the purpose of verifying any statements or any item thereof when filed by any person pursuant to this chapter.

B. It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least four years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.180 Other licenses, permits, taxes, fees or charges.
A cannabis business subject to the provisions of this chapter shall also be subject to the business license tax requirements defined in BMC Title 5. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by virtue of any other provision of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any other chapter of this code or any other ordinance or resolution of the city. Any references made or contained in any other chapter of this code to any licenses, license taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, license taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other chapters of this code. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.190 Payment of tax does not authorize activity.
The payment of a tax imposed under this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Nothing in this chapter authorizes or implies the lawfulness of any activity connected with the distribution or possession of cannabis unless otherwise authorized and allowed in strict and full conformance with this code. Nothing in this chapter shall be applied or construed as authorizing the sale of cannabis. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.200 Deficiency determinations.
If the tax administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may come into his or her possession within four years of the date the tax was originally due and payable. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within four years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under BMC 3.33.220. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.210 Failure to report.
A. Under any of the following circumstances, the tax administrator may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter at any time:

1. If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the provisions of this chapter;

2. If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this chapter; or

3. If the person has not, after demand by the tax administrator, filed a corrected statement, or furnished to the tax administrator adequate substantiation of the information contained in a statement already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter.

B. The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the tax administrator to be due or estimated by the tax administrator, after consideration of all information within the tax administrator’s knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person assessed, to be due under each applicable chapter of this title, and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.220 Tax assessment – Notice requirements.
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal delivery, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business or to such other address as he or she shall register with the tax administrator for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the person have no address registered with the tax administrator for such purpose, then to such person’s last known address. For the purposes of this chapter, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.230 Tax assessment – Hearing, application and determination.
A. Within 30 days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the city is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive.

B. Within 30 days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than 30 days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the tax administrator and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the tax administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the tax administrator should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in BMC 3.33.220 for giving notice of assessment.

C. The decision of the tax administrator under this section may be appealed to the city manager as set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.240 Conviction for violation – Taxes not waived.
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.250 Violation deemed misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the mandatory provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable therefor as provided in Chapter 1.08 BMC. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

3.33.260 Remedies cumulative.
The penalties set forth in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in the city municipal code, or in any other ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the city, county, or the state of California. (Ord. 18-22 § 1).

Title 4
OPEN GOVERNMENT
Chapters:

4.04  In General

4.08  Public Access to Meetings

4.12  Public Information

4.16  Ethics

4.20  Open Government Commission

Chapter 4.04
IN GENERAL
Sections:

4.04.010  Goal.

4.04.020  Findings and purpose.

4.04.030  Fundamental rights.

4.04.040  Copies to be provided.

4.04.050  Definitions.

4.04.010 Goal.
It is the goal of this title to make it easier for people to access city government so that they may be more informed about what their city is doing and so that they may be involved in a more meaningful and knowledgeable way. Open meetings, easier access to public records, ethical guidelines and a watchdog commission will help increase the public trust and confidence in the city government and will increase the public awareness and knowledge about their government. A well-educated public and ethical officials are essential to good government. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.04.020 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds as follows:

A. The Ralph M. Brown Act states: "The people of this State do not yield their sovereignty to the agencies which serve them."

B. It is the city’s duty to serve the public and to accommodate those who wish to obtain information about or participate in the process of making decisions.

C. Elected city officials, commissions, boards, advisory bodies and other agencies of the city exist to conduct the people’s business. This title is intended to assure that the deliberations of these bodies and the city’s operations are open to the public.

D. This title is intended in part to clarify and supplement the Ralph M. Brown Act and the California Public Records Act to assure that the people of the city of Benicia can be fully informed and thereby retain control over the instruments of local government in their city.

E. This title is intended to list and implement fundamental rights of each member of the public. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.04.030 Fundamental rights.
Fundamental rights of each member of the public include, but are not limited to:

A. The right to receive meaningful, advance notice of agendas and packets of all meeting materials.

B. The right to attend, listen to and participate in all meetings without cost, signup, giving name or address or any personal information.

C. The right to speak with a meaningful amount of time on every agenda item separately, including each consent item, closed session or any report items without being required to sign up, give his/her name, or address, or any other information.

D. The right to interrupt the body for a point of order or clarification except to the extent that it becomes unduly disruptive.

E. The right to speak on any subject not on the agenda so long as the subject relates to the business of the body.

F. The right to criticize the body or members for their official actions or inactions, during public comment or by holding signs except to the extent that it becomes unduly disruptive.

G. The right to pull consent agenda items for public review and discussion.

H. The right to comment on every agenda item either during the public comment period on that item, under the general public comment period or in writing.

I. The right to use presentation tools when commenting.

A plaque listing these rights will be placed at the entrance of the council chambers. These rights shall be read aloud by the presiding official to the public at the start of each meeting unless the rights are posted in the meeting room. If the rights are posted, the presiding officer may state the rights are posted instead of reading them. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.04.040 Copies to be provided.
The office of the city attorney shall provide any person with a copy of the Brown Act or Public Records Act or this title without charge. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.04.050 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this title, shall be construed as hereafter set out unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning. Unless defined herein, the definitions in the Ralph M. Brown Act and the California Public Records Act and related laws shall govern.

A. “Agenda packet” means the nonconfidential portion of a body’s agenda-related materials. “Agenda packet” includes materials that:

1. Were distributed by the city to a majority of the members of a body prior to or at the meeting; and

2. Relate to an item on the agenda.

B. “Body” means:

1. The Benicia city council;

2. Any board, commission, task force or committee, which is established by city ordinance or by motion or resolution of the city council or created as a result of federal, state or local grants;

3. Any advisory board, commission or task force created and appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council; or

4. Any standing committee of any body specified in subsections (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section.

“Body” shall not mean any congregation or gathering which consists solely of employees of the city of Benicia or consists of employees and representatives of companies providing employees’ benefits including, but not limited to, retirement and health care plans.

C. “Criticize” means to provide verbal or written critical comments, regarding the official actions or inactions, during public comment or by holding signs except to the extent that it becomes unduly disruptive.

D. “Days” means calendar days.

E. “Department” means a department of the city of Benicia.

F. “Information request facilitator” means the person who shall assist members of the public with their public information requests. For general requests, it means the city clerk in accordance with BMC 4.20.030(D). For department-specific requests, it means the department director or designee.

G. “Interrupt” means to stand and raise one’s hand and, in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, wait for recognition by the presiding officer before speaking.

H. Meeting.

1. “Meeting” shall mean any of the following:

a. A congregation of a majority of the members of any body in which any item within its subject matter jurisdiction is heard, discussed or deliberated;

b. Any use of direct communication, personal intermediaries or communications media to cause a majority of the members of a body to become aware of an item of business and of the views or positions of other members with respect thereto, and to negotiate consensus thereon; and

c. Any meal or social gathering of a majority of the members of a body immediately before, during, or after a meeting of a body. For the purposes of this definition, “immediately before” means the four hours prior to a meeting.

2. “Meeting” shall not include any of the following:

a. Individual contacts or conversations between a member of a body and any other person;

b. The attendance of any number of the members of a body at a conference, or at any meeting or gathering organized to address a topic of local community concern and which is open to the public; provided, that a majority of the members of a body refrains from collectively discussing, other than as part of the scheduled program, the topic of the meeting or gathering or any other business within the subject matter jurisdiction of that body;

c. The attendance of any number of the members of any body at a purely social, recreational, educational or ceremonial occasion; provided, that a majority of the members of any body refrains from discussing any business within the subject matter jurisdiction of the body; and provided, that the gathering does not qualify as a meeting under subsection (H)(1)(c) of this section; and

d. The attendance of a majority of the members of a body at a standing committee; provided, that the members of the body who are not members of the standing committee do not participate personally or through representatives.

I. “Notice” means the posting of an agenda in a location that is freely accessible to the public 24 hours a day and as additionally specified in BMC 4.08.030, 4.08.050 and 4.08.060.

J. “Public information” means the content of “public records” as defined in the California Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) whether contained in public records or in oral communications.

K. “Public official” means all elective officials and members of all official boards, commissions and committees of the city.

L. “Online” shall mean accessible by computer without charge to the user.

M. “The Public Records Act” shall mean Government Code Section 6250 et seq.

N. “Ralph M. Brown Act” shall mean Government Code Section 54950 et seq.

O. “Software or hardware failure” means solely technological failures of software or hardware that are unforeseeable. This term includes failures such as those caused by natural disasters or acts of God, and technical failures against which the city has taken customary precautions.

P. “Standing committee” shall mean any number of members of a body which totals less than a quorum and which has (1) a continuing subject matter jurisdiction, or (2) a meeting schedule fixed by charter, ordinance, resolution or formal action of the body.

Q. “Weeknight” shall mean after 5:00 p.m. on any day of the week except for Saturday or Sunday. (Ord. 07-22 § 1; Ord. 06-11 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

Chapter 4.08
PUBLIC ACCESS TO MEETINGS
Sections:

4.08.010    Meetings to be open and public – Application of Brown Act.

4.08.020    Conduct of meetings for public agencies covered by this title.

4.08.030    Notice requirement – Emergency meeting.

4.08.040    Conduct of business – Time and place for meeting.

4.08.050    Notice and agenda requirements – Regular meetings.

4.08.060    Notice and agenda requirement – Special meetings.

4.08.070    Agenda packets as public records – Agenda subscribers.

4.08.080    Barriers to attendance prohibited.

4.08.090    Public testimony at regular and special meetings.

4.08.100    Minutes and recordings.

4.08.110    Public comment by members of bodies.

4.08.120    Agenda descriptions and oral disclosures.

4.08.130    Statement of reasons for closed sessions.

4.08.140    Conduct of closed session.

4.08.150    Disclosure of closed session discussions and actions.

4.08.160    Ex-parte communications.

4.08.010 Meetings to be open and public – Application of Brown Act.
All meetings of bodies defined in BMC 4.04.050 shall be open and public, to the same extent as if that body were governed by the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) unless greater public access is required by this chapter, in which case this chapter shall be applicable. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.020 Conduct of meetings for public agencies covered by this title.
To the extent not inconsistent with state or federal law, a body may require, as a condition of any express delegation of power to any public agency, including joint powers authorities, whether such delegation of power is achieved by legislative act, contract, lease or other agreement, that any meeting by such a public agency at which an item concerning or subject to the delegated power is discussed or considered shall be conducted pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.030 Notice requirement – Emergency meeting.
Emergency meetings shall be held in accordance with Government Code Section 54956.5 which states:

(a) For purposes of this Section, “emergency situation” means both of the following:

(1) An emergency, which shall be defined as a work stoppage, crippling activity, or other activity that severely impairs public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

(2) A dire emergency, which shall be defined as a crippling disaster, mass destruction, terrorist act, or threatened terrorist activity that poses peril so immediate and significant that requiring a legislative body to provide one-hour notice before holding an emergency meeting under this Section may endanger the public health, safety, or both, as determined by a majority of the members of the legislative body.

(b)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), in the case of an emergency situation involving matters upon which prompt action is necessary due to the disruption or threatened disruption of public facilities, a legislative body may hold an emergency meeting without complying with either the 24-hour notice requirement or the 24-hour posting requirement of Section 54956 or both of the notice and posting requirements.

(2) Each local newspaper of general circulation and radio or television station that has requested notice of special meetings pursuant to Section 54956 shall be notified by the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee thereof, one hour prior to the emergency meeting, or, in the case of a dire emergency, at or near the time that the presiding officer or designee notifies the members of the legislative body of the emergency meeting. This notice shall be given by telephone and all telephone numbers provided in the most recent request of a newspaper or station for notification of special meetings shall be exhausted. In the event that telephone services are not functioning, the notice requirements of this Section shall be deemed waived, and the legislative body, or designee of the legislative body, shall notify those newspapers, radio stations, or television stations of the fact of the holding of the emergency meeting, the purpose of the meeting, and any action taken at the meeting as soon after the meeting as possible.

(c) During a meeting held pursuant to this Section, the legislative body may meet in closed session pursuant to Section 54957 if agreed to by a two-thirds vote of the members of the legislative body present, or, if less than two-thirds of the members are present, by a unanimous vote of the members present.

(d) All special meeting requirements, as prescribed in Section 54956 shall be applicable to a meeting called pursuant to this Section, with the exception of the 24-hour notice requirement.

(e) The minutes of a meeting called pursuant to this Section, a list of persons who the presiding officer of the legislative body, or designee of the legislative body, notified or attempted to notify, a copy of the roll call vote, and any actions taken at the meeting shall be posted for a minimum of 10 days in a public place as soon after the meeting as possible.

(Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.040 Conduct of business – Time and place for meeting.
A. Unless proscribed by council ordinance, every body established by city council ordinance shall establish by formal action the time and place for holding regular meetings and shall conduct such regular meetings in accordance with such resolution or formal action. Whenever reasonably possible bodies shall conduct their regular meetings on weeknights except when the body determines that the subject matter would be more appropriately discussed at another time.

B. Regular and special meetings of every body shall be held within the city of Benicia except to do any of the following:

1. Comply with state or federal law or court order, or attend a judicial or administrative proceeding to which the body is a party;

2. Inspect real or personal property which cannot be conveniently brought to Benicia; provided, that the topic of the meeting is limited to items directly related to the real or personal property;

3. Participate in meetings or discussions of multi-agency significance that are outside Benicia. However, any meeting or discussion held pursuant to this subsection shall take place within the jurisdiction of one of the participating agencies and be noticed by all participating agencies. Agencies include local agencies such as school districts, counties, cities or other public agencies as specified in the Brown Act; or

4. Meet outside the city of Benicia with elected or appointed officials of the United States or the state of California or counties.

C. If a meeting is held outside of the city, the location of the meeting shall be posted in the city.

D. If a regular meeting for any body falls on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next scheduled regular meeting day unless otherwise noticed as a special meeting for which notice is given at least six days in advance.

E. If, because of fire, flood, earthquake or other emergency, it would be unsafe to meet in the customary location, the meetings may be held for the duration of the emergency at some other place specified by the presiding official of the body or his or her designee. The change of meeting site shall be announced, by the most rapid means of communication available at the time, in a notice to media organizations who have requested written notice of meetings.

F.  If a quorum of a body becomes present at a meeting of a standing or ad hoc committee of said body, the body may not take action at the meeting of the committee unless the meeting has been properly noticed as a meeting of the body itself. The standing or ad hoc committee of a body may take action at the meeting consistent with the committee’s jurisdiction and authority.

G. Every body shall ensure that video screens or presentation boards are reasonably viewable by both the body and the public.

H. To ensure business is conducted in the open, bodies should avoid taking breaks during discussion of a particular agenda item. If a break is needed or if the item is continued to a future meeting, each member of the body shall disclose orally on the public record the general nature of any conversations during the break or continuance pertaining to the item.

I. Unless proscribed by council ordinance, each body established by ordinance shall establish and publish an annual schedule of regular meetings. (Ord. 07-02 § 1; Ord. 06-11 § 2; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.050 Notice and agenda requirements – Regular meetings.
A. Six-Day Advance Notice Requirement for Regular Meetings of Bodies. The city council, and any body defined in BMC 4.04.050, shall provide notice before any regular meeting by:

1. Posting a copy of the agenda in a location freely accessible to the public 24 hours a day no later than six days before the date of the meeting;

2. Filing a copy of the agenda and a complete agenda packet with the office of the city clerk and the Benicia Public Library no later than five days before the date of the meeting; and

3. Posting a copy of the agenda online at the city’s web site no later than six days before the date of the meeting. Notwithstanding this subsection, the failure to timely post a copy of the agenda because of software or hardware failure, as defined, shall not constitute a defect in the notice for a regular meeting, if the body complies with all other posting and noticing requirements.

B. Supplemental Agenda and Related Material Requirements for Regular Meetings of Bodies.

1. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a posted agenda or agenda-related materials may be amended or supplemented no later than 72 hours before a regular meeting and only for the following reasons or under the following conditions. The amended or supplemented posted agenda or agenda-related materials shall state for the record what supplemental or amended material is under consideration and/or how the agenda is proposed to be amended. Agendas or agenda-related materials may only be amended or supplemented:

a. To add an item due to an emergency or urgency, provided the body makes the same findings as required by subsection (D) of this section before taking action;

b. To delete or withdraw any item from a posted agenda;

c. To provide additional information to supplement the agenda-related material previously filed with the office of the city clerk; provided, that the additional information was not known to staff;

d. To correct technical, nonsubstantive errors or omissions, or to change a stated financial amount that decreases the body’s obligation under a proposed agreement, or to clarify the agenda title in a manner that does not substantively change the nature of the action to be taken on the agenda item;

e. To consider the recommendations, referrals, minutes or actions taken on any item heard by a standing committee of the city council; provided, that the item has not been materially changed by the committee or materially changed after the committee considered the item; or

f. To continue an agendized item to the next regular meeting of the body so long as members of the public are given an opportunity to address the body on the item at the meeting from which the item is continued.

2. If substantial supplemental information is received from the applicant or a member of the public less than 72 hours prior to a regular meeting, the body shall either automatically continue the item to the next regular meeting or a special meeting or decide that there was adequate notice to allow consideration of the additional information. “Substantial supplemental information” is written information that (a) could not be said or read within the oral public comment period, (b) is, according to a majority vote of the body, too technical or detailed to be readily understood, and (c) is new information not discussed in prior staff report or documents previously provided to the body.

C. Excuse of Open Government Notice Requirements. If an item appears on an agenda but the body fails to meet any of the additional notice requirements under this section, the body may take action only if:

1. The minimum notice requirements of the Brown Act have been met; and

2. The body, by a two-thirds vote of those members present, adopts a motion determining that, upon consideration of the facts and circumstances, it was not reasonably possible to meet the additional notice requirements under this section and any one of the following exists:

a. The need to take immediate action on the item is required to avoid a substantial adverse impact that would occur if the action were deferred to a subsequent special or regular meeting;

b.  There is a need to take immediate action which relates to federal or state legislation or the body’s eligibility for any grant or gift; or

c. The item relates to a purely ceremonial or commendatory action.

D. Action on Items Not Appearing on the Agenda. Notwithstanding subsection (C) of this section, a body may take action on items not appearing on a posted agenda only if:

1. The matter is an emergency. Upon a determination by a majority vote of the body that work stoppage, crippling disaster or other activity exists which severely impairs public health, safety or both; or

2. The matter is urgent. Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of those present, or, if less than two-thirds of the members are present, a unanimous vote of those members present, that there is a need to take immediate action which came to the attention of the body after the agenda was posted; that there was adequate public notification considering the subject matter to be considered; and that the need to take immediate action:

a. Is required to avoid a substantial adverse impact that would occur if the action were deferred to a subsequent special or regular meeting;

b. Relates to federal or state legislation; or

c. Relates to a purely ceremonial or commendatory action.

E. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a body from taking action to schedule items for a future meeting to which regular or special meeting notice requirements will apply, or to distribute agenda-related materials relating to items added pursuant to subsection (D) of this section before or during a meeting.

F. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the office of the city attorney from conforming a document to comply with technical requirements as to form and legality. (Ord. 09-19 § 1; Ord. 07-03 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.060 Notice and agenda requirement – Special meetings.
A. If the presiding official or senior staff member to the body finds that waiting for the next available regular meeting of the body would make it impossible to take meaningful action or the regular meeting will be cancelled due to a lack of quorum or a city holiday, a special meeting of any body may be called at any time by the presiding official thereof or by the senior staff member to the body. All bodies calling a special meeting shall provide notice by:

1. Posting a copy of the agenda in a location freely accessible to the public at least 72 hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays) before the time of the meeting set forth in the agenda. The posting time for a special meeting due to the body’s regular meeting falling on a holiday shall be six days;

2. Filing a copy of the agenda and a complete agenda packet with the office of the city clerk and the Benicia Public Library at least 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays) before the time of the meeting set forth in the agenda; and

3. Delivering a copy of the agenda to each member of the body, to each local newspaper of general circulation, to each agenda subscriber, and to each media organization which has previously requested notice in writing, so that a copy of the agenda is received at least 24 hours before the time of the meeting set forth in the agenda. Receipt of the agenda shall be presumed upon reasonable proof that delivery was made.

B. Bodies specified in BMC 4.04.050 shall, in addition to the noticing requirements of this section, post a copy of the agenda for any special meeting online at the city’s web site at least 72 hours before the time of the meeting set forth in the agenda. Failure to timely post a copy of the agenda online because of software or hardware failure, as defined, shall not constitute a defect in the notice for a special meeting if the body complies with all other posting and noticing requirements.

C. No business other than that set forth in the agenda shall be considered at a special meeting. Each special meeting shall be held at the regular meeting place of the body except that the body may designate an alternative meeting location; provided, that such alternative location is specified in the agenda.

D. To the extent practicable, the presiding official or the majority of members of any body may cancel a special meeting by delivering notice of cancellation in the same manner and to the same persons as required for the notice of such meeting.

E. Special meetings may not be scheduled on the same day as a previously scheduled regular meeting that was not noticed in compliance with this chapter if the special meeting is called to consider any of the items that were included in the notice for such regular meeting. (Ord. 09-20 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.070 Agenda packets as public records – Agenda subscribers.
In addition to providing access to all records which are public records pursuant to the California Public Records Act (Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) and this title, every body specified in BMC 4.04.050 shall make available for immediate public inspection and copying all agendas and agenda-related materials.

A. All agendas shall be posted on the city’s web site and the city’s cable channel and available at the Benicia Public Library. Complete agenda packets for each body shall be posted on the city’s web site to the extent fiscally and technologically feasible and shall be available for review at the Benicia Public Library and at the city manager’s office during normal business hours. The time for compliance with this subsection shall be in accordance with the time of the posting of the agenda for the meeting.

B. All agendas of every body shall be available to the public by an email subscription. Such service shall be provided free of charge and shall be provided to the subscriber until the request for the service is cancelled by the subscriber or the email address is no longer valid. The email shall be sent at the time of the posting of the agenda for the meeting. The city clerk shall establish the email subscribers list for the city council agendas. The secretary to other bodies shall establish and maintain the email subscribers list for the respective bodies.

C. Paper copies of the agenda and agenda packet shall be available to members of the public for every body upon payment of the fee established by city council resolution. Every body shall establish a subscription list for the agenda and/or agenda packet so that members of the public may subscribe to the agenda and/or agenda packet upon payment of the fee established by the city council. The fee shall not exceed the direct costs of copying the agenda and agenda packet and the reasonable mailing costs of the agenda and agenda packet. In order to enhance public participation and involvement, the fees for the agenda subscription shall be waived for anyone who reports on city government and makes the reports available to members of the public. Subscriptions for the agenda and/or agenda packet shall be valid for one year. The city clerk or the secretary to other bodies shall send the subscriber a note to resubscribe and pay the subscription fee with the last agenda and/or agenda packet that is mailed to a subscriber.

D. Every body shall make available for immediate public inspection and copying the agenda packet that has been distributed to a majority of its members. The right to immediate public inspection and copying provided in this section shall not include any material exempt from public disclosure under this title or under state or federal law. Neither this section nor the California Public Records Act shall be construed to limit or delay the public’s right to inspect any record required to be disclosed by that Act or this title.

E. All requests by agenda subscribers to receive agendas or agenda-related materials may be made by mail, telephone or email to the office of the city clerk or city manager’s office. The city clerk shall maintain a list of all bodies and shall immediately forward a copy of the written request to the appropriate body to ensure compliance with the request.

F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the failure of an agenda subscriber to timely receive the agenda or agenda-related material pursuant to this section shall not constitute grounds for invalidation of the actions of the body taken at the meeting for which the agenda or the agenda-related material was not timely received. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.080 Barriers to attendance prohibited.
A. No body specified in this title shall conduct any meeting, conference or other function in any facility which is inaccessible to persons with physical disabilities, or where members of the public may not be present without making a payment or purchase. Whenever a body anticipates that the number of persons attending the meeting may exceed the legal capacity of the room, a public address system or television shall be used to the extent technologically and fiscally reasonable to permit the overflow audience to listen to the proceedings.

B. Any person attending an open meeting of a body shall have the right to record, photograph or broadcast the proceedings unless such activities constitute a persistent disruption of the proceedings. (Ord. 06-11 § 3; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.090 Public testimony at regular and special meetings.
A. Every agenda for every regular or special meeting shall provide a public comment section on the agenda as an opportunity for members of the public or for members of the body to directly address a body on items of interest to the public that are within the body’s subject matter jurisdiction; provided, that no action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the agenda unless the action is otherwise authorized by Government Code Section 54954.2 and BMC 4.08.050(D). Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, speakers shall limit their comments during the public comment section of the agenda to nonagendized items.

B. Every agenda for regular or special meetings at which action is proposed to be taken on an item shall provide an opportunity for each member of the public to directly address the body concerning that item before taking action. Public comments on closed session items shall be taken before the closed session is convened. The presiding official of any body may request speakers representing similar views to designate a spokesperson in the interest of time. Spokespersons for the proponent(s) of an agenda item and for the opponent(s) shall each have 15 minutes to present their case. The spokesperson for the proponent(s) shall have five minutes to present any rebuttal. Other speakers may be requested to keep their remarks concise.

C. At the presiding official’s discretion, the official may grant up to 10 minutes to a speaker who desires to speak on multiple agenda items so that the speaker shall address all items at one time before the body’s consideration of those items. Such comments shall be made under the public comment part of the agenda.

D. Every body shall adopt a rule providing that each person wishing to speak on an item shall be permitted to speak once based upon previously adopted time constraints which are reasonable and uniformly applied. Except as otherwise provided by this section, it shall be the policy of the city that all speakers are entitled to up to five minutes of speaking time per agenda item.

E. Members of the public who speak on an agenda item or under public comment do not have to give their name or address should they choose not to.

F. Written material submitted by members of the public shall be retained as part of the official agenda file and available for review by other members of the public in accordance with Chapter 4.12 BMC.

G. No body shall abridge or prohibit public criticism of the policies, procedures, programs or services of the body or agency, or of any other aspect of its proposals or activities, or of the acts or omissions of the body, even if the criticism implicates the performance of one or more public employees. Nothing in this subsection shall confer any privilege or protection beyond that which is otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 07-04 § 1; Ord. 06-04 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.100 Minutes and recordings.
A. All bodies shall record the minutes for each regular and special meeting convened under the provisions of this chapter. At a minimum, the minutes shall state the time the meeting was called to order, the names of the members attending the meeting, a one-sentence summary of, and the roll call vote on, each matter considered at the meeting, the time the body began and ended any closed session, any letters submitted on agenda items, those members of the public who spoke on each matter if the speakers identified themselves, and the time the meeting was adjourned. The draft minutes of each meeting shall be available for inspection and copying upon request within the shortest possible time after the meeting. No later than five business days after the meeting at which the minutes are adopted, the officially adopted minutes shall be available for inspection and copying upon request and shall be posted on the city’s web site.

B. Every body specified in BMC 4.04.050 and established by city ordinance shall make an audio and where possible economically and technically a visual recording of every open regular meeting. Other bodies shall audiotape each regular and special open meeting and may make a visual recording of any meeting. Any recording of any open meeting shall be a public record subject to inspection and copying. If a visual recording is made of a meeting, the recording shall be posted on the city’s website as soon as reasonably possible unless there is a software or hardware failure, but no later than 48 hours after the recording is made. For the city council and bodies established by ordinance, the recording shall not be erased, deleted or destroyed for at least four years. For all other bodies, the recording shall not be erased, deleted or destroyed for at least two years. If, during the four- or two-year period, a written request for inspection or copying of any recording is made, the recording shall not be erased, deleted or destroyed until the requested inspection or copying has been accomplished. Inspection of any such recording shall be provided without charge on a player or computer made available by the body. (Ord. 19-06 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.110 Public comment by members of bodies.
Every member of a body retains the rights of any citizen to comment publicly on the wisdom or propriety of government actions, including those of the body of which he or she is a member. Bodies shall not sanction, reprove or deprive members of their rights as elected or appointed officials to express their judgments or opinions, including those judgments or opinions pertaining to the disclosure or nondisclosure of discussions or actions taken in closed session. However, the release of specific factual information made confidential by state or federal law including, but not limited to, privileged attorney-client communications, other than by the procedures set forth under state law or this title, may constitute grounds for censure or for an action for injunctive or declaratory relief by the body. Nothing in this section shall confer any privilege or protection for expression beyond that which is otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.120 Agenda descriptions and oral disclosures.
A. Agendas for meetings shall provide a brief description of the item under consideration. To the extent appropriate, information that should be described includes the following: the commonly used name and location of the property under consideration; names of proposed appointees, contractors or parties to an agreement; and the general nature of the action(s) under consideration. The use of acronyms, jargon and “double speak” should be avoided.

B. Closed session descriptions shall comply with the permissive provisions of Government Code Section 54954.5 in describing items for closed session.

C. In the case of an item added to the agenda pursuant to Government Code Section 54954.2(b) or BMC 4.08.050(D), the statement shall be made in open session concurrent with the findings required pursuant to that section.

D. Any action taken on items that are not described in accordance with this section is subject to invalidation pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 54960.1. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.130 Statement of reasons for closed sessions.
A. Prior to adjourning to any closed session, a body shall announce in open session the general reason or reasons for the closed session, and must cite and explain the statutory or case authority under which the session is being closed.

B. In the case of a closed session item added to the agenda pursuant to Government Code Section 54954.2(b) or BMC 4.08.050(D), the statement shall be made in open session concurrent with the findings required pursuant to that section.

C. No minutes for a closed session, but a tape recording of the closed session shall be made. The tapes shall remain confidential pursuant to Government Code Section 54960 unless the body elects to disclose the information in accordance with BMC 4.08.150(B) or a court orders disclosure.

D. Nothing in this section shall require or authorize a disclosure of information that is confidential under law. (Ord. 06-11 § 4; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.140 Conduct of closed session.
A. A body shall consider in closed session only those matters specified in the statement required in BMC 4.08.130.

B. The following provisions of the Brown Act apply to the conduct of closed session by bodies and are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein: Government Code Sections 54956.8; 54956.9; 54956.95; 54957; and 54957.6.

C. No minutes for a closed session, but a tape recording of the closed session shall be made. The tapes shall remain confidential pursuant to Government Code Section 54960 unless the body elects to disclose the information in accordance with BMC 4.08.150(B) or a court orders disclosure. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.150 Disclosure of closed session discussions and actions.
A. In accordance with Government Code Section 54963 and as provided below, a person present at a closed session may not disclose confidential information received.

B. In addition to the required disclosures pursuant to Government Code Section 54957.1 and subsection (C) of this section, the body may, by motion and vote in open session, elect to disclose any other information obtained in closed session which a majority of the members of the body deems to be in the public interest. Any disclosure pursuant to this section shall be made through the presiding official or such other person present in the closed session, designated to convey the information.

C. Immediately following the closed session a body shall publicly report any action taken in closed session and the vote or abstention of every member present thereon, as follows:

1. Real Property Negotiations. Approval of an agreement concerning real estate negotiations pursuant to Government Code Section 54956.8 shall be reported as soon as the agreement is final. If its own approval renders the agreement final, the body shall report that approval, the substance of the agreement and the vote thereon in open session immediately. If final approval requires action from another party to the negotiations, the body shall disclose the fact of its approval, the substance of the agreement and the body’s vote or votes thereon after the other party or its agent has informed the body of its action upon (a) inquiry by any person, and (b) in any event, at the next meeting of said body. If notwithstanding the final approval there are conditions precedent to the final consummation of the transaction, or if there are multiple contiguous or closely located properties that are being considered for transfer, the report specified in this section need not be made until the conditions have been satisfied or an agreement has been reached with respect to all the properties, or both.

2. Litigation. Direction or approval given to the body’s legal counsel to prosecute, defend, seek or refrain from seeking appellate review or relief, or to otherwise enter as a party, intervenor or amicus curiae in any form of litigation as the result of a consultation under Government Code Section 54956.9 shall be reported in open session as soon as given, or at the first meeting after an adverse party has been served in the matter if immediate disclosure of the body’s intentions would not be contrary to the public interest. The report shall identify the names and capacities of all parties to the litigation, the court of jurisdiction and case number, the type of case, any existing claim or order to be defended against, or any factual circumstances or contractual dispute giving rise to the litigation.

3. Settlement. If a body accepts a settlement offer signed by an opposing party, the body shall report its vote of approval and identify the substance of the agreement. If final approval rests with another part or with the court, the body shall disclose its vote of approval and the substance of the agreement to any person upon inquiry as soon as the settlement becomes final, but in no case later than the next meeting following final approval of settlement. A body shall neither solicit nor agree to any term in a settlement agreement which would preclude the release, upon request, of the text of the settlement agreement itself and any related documentation communicated to or received from the adverse party or parties. Where the disclosure of documents in settled litigation could affect litigation on a closely related case, the report, settlement agreement and any documents described in this section need not be disclosed until the closely related case is settled or otherwise finally concluded.

D. Reports required to be made pursuant to this section may be made orally or in writing. Copies of any contracts, settlement agreements, or other documents related to the items or transactions that were finally approved or adopted in closed session and which contain the information required to be disclosed under this section shall be made available for inspection and copying, upon request, at the time the report is made or after any substantive amendments have been retyped into the document.

E. A written summary of the information required to be reported immediately pursuant to this section, or documents containing that information, shall be made available for inspection and copying by the close of business on the next business day following the meeting.

F. Action taken in closed session which is not immediately disclosable under this section shall be disclosed and noticed under the procedures set forth in subsection (C) of this section at such time as disclosure is required. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.08.160 Ex-parte communications.
While it is the city’s policy to encourage communications between the public and officials, the city recognizes that Constitutional due process protections may limit communications with council members or board or commission members outside of a public meeting. Therefore, the city’s policy on ex-parte communications discourages officials from discussing appeals or enforcement matters with members of the public except during the body’s formal consideration of the matters. These matters should not be discussed during site inspections or field trips that are not part of an agendized meeting. If such discussions take place, officials must publicly disclose at the start of the agendized presentation of the item, the substance of any such discussions they have had with anyone other than another member of the body or staff member. This policy applies to any appeal or enforcement matter which is pending, or is reasonably expected to come before the body on which the official sits. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

Chapter 4.12
PUBLIC INFORMATION
Sections:

4.12.010  Release of documentary public information.

4.12.020  Release of oral public information.

4.12.030  Public review file – Policy body communications.

4.12.040  Non-exempt public information.

4.12.050  Disclosure requests.

4.12.060  Immediate disclosure request.

4.12.070  Withholding restrictions.

4.12.080  Justification for withholding.

4.12.090  Fees for copying.

4.12.100  Web site information.

4.12.110  Requests made by email.

4.12.120  Policy regarding purchase and use of computer systems.

4.12.010 Release of documentary public information.
Release of public records by a body or by any department, whether for inspection of the original or by providing a copy, shall be governed by the Public Records Act in any particulars not addressed by this chapter. The provisions of Government Code Section 6253.9 are incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.020 Release of oral public information.
Release of oral public information shall be accomplished as follows:

A. Every department director shall be responsible for being knowledgeable about the affairs of the respective agency or department, to facilitate the inspection and copying of public records and to provide oral public information about agency or department operations, plans, policies, and positions. The department will make every effort to facilitate the information requested and will make it a top priority.

B. It shall be the duty of the department director (or designee) or, in the case of requests not directed to a specific department, the city clerk to provide information on a timely and responsive basis to the public. It shall also be their duty to assist members of the public in identifying those public records they wish to obtain pursuant to Government Code Section 6253.1. This section shall not be interpreted to curtail existing informal contacts between employees and members of the public when these contacts are occasional, acceptable to the employee and the department, not disruptive of his or her operational duties and confined to accurate information not confidential by law.

C. Public employees and city board, commission or committee members shall not be discouraged from or disciplined for the expression of their personal opinions on any matter of public concern while not on duty, so long as the opinion is not represented as that of the city, department, board, commission or committee and does not materially misrepresent the city, department, board, commission or committee’s position. Nothing in this section shall be construed to provide rights to public employees beyond those recognized by law or agreement, or to create any new private cause of action or defense to disciplinary action. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.030 Public review file – Policy body communications.
Every body specified in BMC 4.04.050 shall maintain a communications file, organized chronologically and accessible to any person during normal business hours, containing a copy of any letter, memorandum or other writing pertaining to the body’s duties which the clerk or secretary of such body has distributed to, or sent on behalf of, a quorum of the body concerning a matter that has been placed on the body’s agenda within the previous 30 days or is scheduled or requested to be placed on the agenda within the next 30 days. Excepted from the communications file shall be commercial solicitations, mail sent bulk-rate, agenda and agenda-related material, periodical publications or communications exempt from disclosure under the California Public Records Act or this title. Multiple-page reports, studies or analyses which are accompanied by a letter or memorandum of transmittal need not be included in the communications file; provided, that the letter or memorandum of transmittal is included in the communications file and the reports, studies or analyses are readily available for review. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.040 Non-exempt public information.
Notwithstanding any right or duty to withhold certain information under the California Public Records Act or other law, the following shall govern specific types of requests for documents and information:

A. Drafts and Memoranda. No completed preliminary drafts or memoranda shall be exempt from disclosure under Government Code Section 6254(a) if said completed preliminary draft or memorandum has been retained in the ordinary course of business or pursuant to law or agency or department policy. Completed preliminary drafts and memoranda concerning agreements, memoranda of understanding or other matters subject to negotiation and pending a body’s approval need not be subject to disclosure until final action has been taken or said document is included as part of the public agenda packet for the body, whichever is first.

B. Litigation Material. Unless otherwise privileged or made confidential by law, records of all communications between a body’s representatives and the adverse party shall be subject to public inspection and copying, including the text and terms of any settlement agreement, once the pending litigation has been settled or finally adjudicated.

C. Personnel Information. None of the following shall be exempt from disclosure under Government Code Section 6254(c):

1. Job pool information, to the extent such information is compiled for reporting purposes and does not permit the identification of any particular individual. Such job pool information may include the following:

a. Sex, age and ethnic group;

b. Years of graduate and undergraduate study, degree(s) and major or discipline;

c. Years of employment in the private and/or public sector;

d. Whether currently employed in the same position for another public agency;

e. Other non-identifying particulars as to experience credentials, aptitudes, training or education entered in or attached to a standard employment application form used for the positioning in question.

2. The job description of every employment classification.

3. The resumes of employees, although personal information such as home address shall be deleted.

4. Any adopted memorandum of understanding between the city and a recognized employee organization.

D. Law Enforcement Information.

1. The Benicia police department shall cooperate with all members of the public making requests for law enforcement records and documents under the California Public Records Act or other applicable law. Unless disclosure of the records sought is prohibited by other provisions of state or federal law such as the TNG Order, records and documents exempt from disclosure under the California Records Act pertaining to any investigation, arrest or other law enforcement activity shall be disclosed to the public to the full extent permitted by law after the district attorney or court determines that a prosecution will not be sought against the subject involved or the statute of limitations for filing charges has expired, whichever occurs first. Information may be redacted from such records and documents and withheld if, based upon the particular facts, the public interest in nondisclosure clearly outweighs the public interest in disclosure. The final decision for disclosure shall be made by the city council and the vote and reasoning of each city council member shall be made public on all nondisclosures. Such redacted information may include:

a. The names of juvenile witnesses or suspects;

b. Personal or otherwise private information related or unrelated to the investigation if disclosure would constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy;

c. The identity of a confidential source;

d. Secret investigative techniques or procedures;

e. Information whose disclosure would endanger law enforcement personnel, a witness, or party to the investigation; or

f. Information whose disclosure would endanger the successful completion of an investigation where the prospect of enforcement proceedings is likely.

2. The Benicia police department shall maintain a record, which shall be a public record and which shall be separate from the personnel records of the agency, which reports the number of citizen complaints against law enforcement agencies or officers, the number and types of cases in which discipline is imposed and the nature of the discipline imposed. This record shall be maintained in a format which assures that the names and other identifying information of individual officers involved is not disclosed directly or indirectly.

E. Contracts, Bids and Proposals. Contracts, contract bids, responses to requests for proposals and all other records of communications between the city and individuals or business entities seeking contracts shall be open to inspection and copying following the contract award or acceptance of a contract offer. Nothing in this provision requires the disclosure of a person’s net worth or other proprietary financial information submitted for qualification for a contract.

F. Budgets and Other Financial Information. The following shall not be exempt from disclosure:

1. Any proposed or adopted budget for the city, including any of their respective agencies, departments, programs, projects or other categories, which have been submitted to a majority of the members of the city council, or their standing committees.

2. All bills, claims, invoices, vouchers or other records of payment obligations, as well as records of actual disbursements showing the amount paid, the payee and the purpose for which payment is made, other than payments for social, legal or other services whose records are confidential by law. The nonconfidential portion, if any, of such records shall be disclosed.

G. Email correspondence retained in the ordinary course of business and not exempt from disclosure shall be made available within three working days upon written or oral request. All such email shall be maintained for two years before being destroyed. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.050 Disclosure requests.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to the requirements of this section, a written or oral request to inspect or obtain copies of public records that is submitted to any department or to any body shall be satisfied no later than five business days unless the requestor is advised in writing within one business day that additional time is needed to determine whether:

1. The request seeks disclosable public records or information;

2. The requested records are in the possession of the department processing the request;

3. The requested records are stored in a location outside of the department;

4. The requested records likely comprise a voluminous amount of separate and distinct writings;

5. Reasonably involves another department or other local or state agency that has a substantial subject matter interest in the requested records and which must be consulted in connection with the request.

B. All determinations made pursuant to subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section shall be communicated in writing to the requestor within five business days of the date of the request. In no event shall any disclosable records be provided for inspection or copying any later than 10 business days after the written determination pursuant to subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section is communicated to the requestor. Additional time shall not be permitted to delay a routine or readily answerable request. The written request shall also contain a telephone number, email or facsimile number whereby the requestor may be contacted. The provisions of Government Code Section 6253 shall apply to any written request that fails to state a number by which the requestor may be contacted.

C. The person seeking the information need not state a reason for making the request or the use to which the information will be put, but shall be advised that providing such information may help the city assist the person finding all documents responsive to their request.

D. Unless the record request will be satisfied within one business day, an acknowledgement of receipt of the request or notification that additional time is needed pursuant to subsection (A) of this section shall be sent to the requestor if an address has been provided. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.060 Immediate disclosure request.
A. An immediate disclosure request is a request for (1) public records which have been previously distributed to the public, such as past meeting agendas and agenda-related materials, within the past calendar year, or (2) public records such as statements of economic interests that have, by other law, a requirement to be disclosed within a specific shortened time frame. All immediate disclosure requests shall describe the records sought in as focused and specific language as possible so they can be readily identified and shall state the words "Immediate Disclosure Request" across the top of the first page of the request and on any envelope in which the request is transmitted.

B. Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to the requirements of this section, a written or oral request to inspect or obtain copies of public records pursuant to an immediate disclosure request that is submitted to any department or to any body shall be satisfied at the earlier of the time required by other law or no later than two business days unless the requestor is advised in writing within two business days that additional time is needed because of the volume of records sought or because the records do not qualify as subject to the immediate disclosure request procedure.

C. All determinations made pursuant to subsection (B) of this section shall be communicated in writing to the requestor within two business days of the date of the request. If additional time is needed or if the records do not qualify for an immediate disclosure request, the request shall be processed in accordance with BMC 4.12.050. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.070 Withholding restrictions.
A. No record shall be withheld from disclosure in its entirety unless all information contained in it is exempt from disclosure by law.

B. Any redacted, deleted or segregated information shall be keyed by footnote or other clear reference to the appropriate justification for withholding. Such redaction, deletion or segregation shall be done personally by the attorney or other staff member conducting the exemption review. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.080 Justification for withholding.
Any withholding of information shall be justified, in writing, as follows:

A. A withholding under a permissive exemption in the California Public Records Act or this title shall cite the legal authority and, where the exemption is based on the public interest in favor of not disclosing, explain in practical terms how the public interest would be harmed by disclosure.

B. A withholding on the basis that disclosure is prohibited by law shall cite the applicable legal authority.

C. A withholding on the basis that disclosure would incur civil or criminal liability shall cite any statutory or case law supporting that position.

D. The final decision for withholding information shall be made by the city council. The matter shall be scheduled for action at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting unless such meeting is more than 30 days from the date of the request for action by the council. In the event that the next regular meeting is more than 30 days away, a special meeting shall be called. If the council decides records should be disclosed, the records shall be disclosed not later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day following the council meeting unless the council specifies some other time. Each council member’s vote and general reason shall be given and recorded in public. Detailed reasons need not be provided when such disclosure would compromise privacy or confidential matters or would subject the city to litigation. (Ord. 07-05 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.090 Fees for copying.
A. No fee shall be charged for making public records available for inspection.

B. No fee shall be charged for a single copy of a current meeting agenda.

C. A fee may be charged for:

1. Single or multiple copies of past meeting agendas or any agenda-related materials;

2. Multiple copies of a current meeting agenda; and

3. Any other public record copied in response to a specific request.

D. The city may, rather than making copies itself, contract at market rate to have a commercial copier produce the duplicates and charge the cost directly to the requester.

E. All drafts or final environmental impact reports and environmental impact statements shall be posted either on the city’s web site or on the consultant’s web site.

F. In addition to the copies routinely required for city official or staff use, the city shall require the applicant for a project that is, or will be, of widespread public interest to pay for up to 20 copies of documents such as environmental impact reports. These copies will be provided on a first-come, first-serve basis at no cost to members of the public. The city manager or designee shall determine if and how many extra copies will be required on a case by case basis.

G. All fees permitted under this section shall be determined and specified in the city of Benicia master fee schedule, as amended. When the cost of writing a receipt and collecting the fees required under this section would exceed the cost of the copies, the copying fee shall be waived. The master fee schedule shall note the maximum amount that may be waived.

H. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as intending to preempt any fee set by or in compliance with state law. (Ord. 06-11 § 5; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.100 Web site information.
Each department shall make an effort to ensure its portion of the city’s web site is kept current. Each department shall also post public documents that are of interest to a wide number of the public. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.110 Requests made by email.
To ensure that email requests are received, records requests made by email shall not be effective until acknowledged by a return email of the city. Immediately upon receipt of an email request for records, the employee shall promptly acknowledge the request by a return email. Departments may establish a designated staff member or designated email address to receive email records requests. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.12.120 Policy regarding purchase and use of computer systems.
A. It is the policy of the city to utilize computer technology in order to reduce the cost of public records management, including the costs of collecting, maintaining, and disclosing records subject to disclosure to members of the public under this chapter. To the extent that it is technologically and economically feasible, departments that use computer systems to collect and store public records shall select these systems to ensure convenient, efficient, and economical public access to records.

B. Departments purchasing new computer systems shall attempt to reach the following goals as a means to achieve lower costs to the public in connection with the public disclosure of records:

1. Implementing a computer system in which exempt information is segregated or filed separately from otherwise disclosable information.

2. Implementing a system that permits paper reproduction of electronic copies of records.

C. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to use a system that would prevent it from complying with the security requirements of the state and federal governments for accessing their records. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

Chapter 4.16
ETHICS
Sections:

4.16.010    Policy.

4.16.020    Responsibilities of public office and employment.

4.16.030    Declaration of open government awareness.

4.16.040    Dedicated service.

4.16.050    Fair and equal treatment.

4.16.060    Use of public property.

4.16.070    Obligations to citizens.

4.16.080    Conflict of interest.

4.16.090    Disclosure of conflict of interest.

4.16.100    Representation before bodies.

4.16.110    Gifts.

4.16.010 Policy.
The proper operation of city government requires that: (1) public officials and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; (2) government decisions and policy be made using the proper channels of government; and (3) that public office or employment not be used for personal gain. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.020 Responsibilities of public office and employment.
Public officials and employees are bound to uphold and carry out the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the state of California, and the law and regulations of the city. Public officials and employees shall observe in their official acts the highest ethical standards and discharge faithfully the duties of their offices or employment regardless of personal considerations. Public officials and employees shall recognize that the public interests must be their primary concern; that they fulfill the public trust invested in them by their conduct; and that conduct in their official affairs should be above reproach. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.030 Declaration of open government awareness.
All employees who are required to fill out conflict of interest forms pursuant to the Political Reform Act and the city’s conflict of interest code and all public officials shall sign an annual statement stating that they have read the rest of this title, Open Government, and have attended or will attend when next offered, a training session on open government, to be held at least once annually. The statements shall be maintained by the city clerk’s office and shall be available as public record. Annual training shall also be provided to city employees who regularly respond to requests for information by the public. All such trainings will be conducted by the city attorney’s office with the assistance of the open government commission. (Ord. 07-23 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.040 Dedicated service.
Public officials and employees shall not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so. Public officials and employees shall work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from doing so by laws or regulations including, but not limited to, attorney-client privilege, privacy or confidentiality laws. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.050 Fair and equal treatment.
Except in the case of moving an agenda item up on a particular agenda, preferential consideration of the request or petition of an individual person, group, business or entity shall not be given. No person, group, business or entity shall receive special advantages beyond that which are available to any other person, group, business or entity. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.060 Use of public property.
No public official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such property is available to the public generally or when such use is incidental as provided by city policy including city manager administrative instructions. No public official or employee shall use the time of any city employee, while said employee is on duty, for personal convenience or profit. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.070 Obligations to citizens.
No public official or employee shall use their official position to grant, or assist in granting, any special (whether negative or positive) consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen in the same circumstances. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.080 Conflict of interest.
A. Incorporation of the California Political Reform Act. No public official or employee shall make, participate in making, or in any way use or attempt to use his or her official position to influence a governmental decision in which the public official or employee knows or has reason to know he or she has a disqualifying conflict of interest within the meaning of California Government Code Section 87100 et seq., and any subsequent amendments to those sections. Members of advisory bodies not subject to the Political Reform Act may make, participate in making, or in any way use or attempt to use their official positions to influence decisions on matters within the purview of their body. In the interest of open government, members of all bodies are encouraged to disclose economic interests that are not conflicts under the Political Reform Act.

B. Incorporation of Government Code Section 1090 Et Seq. No public official or employee shall make a contract in which he or she has a financial interest within the meaning of California Government Code Section 1090 et seq. and any subsequent amendments to those sections.

C. Future Employment. No public official or employee shall make, participate in making, or in any way use or attempt to use his or her official position to influence a decision of the city, affecting a person or entity with whom the public official or employee is discussing or negotiating an agreement concerning said public official or employee’s future employment. This prohibition shall be for a period of one year from the beginning of the discussion or negotiation or completion of the negotiation on future employment.

D. Incompatible Activity or Employment. Public officials and employees shall not engage in any employment, activity or enterprise which is inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with their assigned duties as a public official or employee. (Ord. 07-06 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.090 Disclosure of conflict of interest.
A. Public officials and employees shall disclose on the public record any personal, professional or business relationships with any individual who is the subject of or has an ownership or financial interest in the subject of a governmental decision being made by the official or employee where, as a result of the relationship, the ability of the official or employee to act for the benefit of the public could reasonably be questioned. For the purposes of this section, the minutes of a public meeting at which the governmental decision is being made, or if the governmental decision is not being made in a public meeting, a memorandum kept on file at the offices of the city official or the employee’s department, shall constitute the public record.

B. Penalties. A court may void any governmental decision made by a public official or employee who fails to disclose a relationship as required by subsection (A) of this section if the court determines that the failure to disclose was willful.

C. Regulations. The open government commission may recommend regulations for adoption by the city council setting forth the types of personal, professional and business relationships that must be disclosed pursuant to this section. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.100 Representation before bodies.
No public official on a decision making body shall represent a client, a person or group before the board, commission, committee or the city council on which the public official presently sits. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.16.110 Gifts.
In conformance with the gift limits imposed by California Government Code Section 89503 and any subsequent amendments to that section, no official or employee of the city shall accept any gift, reward, service or gratuity of any kind in excess of the amount set forth pursuant to the Political Reform Act per single source as defined by the Political Reform Act regulations in a calendar year by reason of their employment or office. The provisions of Government Code Section 89503 and the related regulations shall be used to interpret the provisions of this section. (Ord. 07-24 § 1; Ord. 06-11 § 6; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

Chapter 4.20
OPEN GOVERNMENT COMMISSION
Sections:

4.20.010    Open government commission.

4.20.020    Administrative review and appeal process.

4.20.030    Responsibility for administration.

4.20.040    Enforcement of ethics chapter.

4.20.010 Open government commission.
A. Duties. In the implementation of this title, the commission shall:

1. Advise the city council and provide information to other city departments and bodies on appropriate ways in which to implement this title with a priority on simple, standard procedures.

2. Assist in citywide training for implementing the title.

3. Develop and maintain an administrative process for review and enforcement of this title.

4. Propose amendments to the city council of this title as needed.

5. Report to the city council on any practical or policy problems encountered in the administration of this title.

B. The commission shall consist of five members of the public. All commission members shall have a demonstrated interest in open and ethical government through such activities as, but not limited to, attendance at meetings of government bodies, requests for documents from government agencies, disseminating information about government to others, and familiarity with the Brown Act and/or Public Records Act. All members shall be without known conflicts of interest and shall be residents of the city to the extent possible.

C. The commission will meet as needed, but at least twice annually, unless otherwise directed by the city council.

D. The commission shall provide an annual report on implementation and compliance with this title. (Ord. 18-20 § 1; Ord. 08-05 § 2; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.20.020 Administrative review and appeal process.
A. An administrative review and appeal process is hereby established to review whether a meeting was held in violation of this title or records were withheld in violation of this title. No such administrative review process shall preclude, delay or in any way limit a person’s remedies under the Brown Act or Public Records Act. Further, such administrative review process shall not be used against employees except the city manager and city attorney since other employees are subject to discipline at the discretion of their supervisor.

B. Such review process shall include an:

1. Appeal to the city manager who shall make a decision within seven days of the appeal. (This step shall not apply in cases involving the city manager or members of the city council.)

2. Appeal of the city manager’s decision to either the commission or a three-member panel of city attorneys, at the option of the person appealing the decision. The commission or three-member panel of city attorneys, as the case may be, shall first review the matter to determine if they have jurisdiction over the matter. If the complaint involves allegations that meetings were held in violation of this title or records were withheld in violation of this title, then they have jurisdiction to hear the matter and may hear the matter in accordance with the procedures established by resolution of the open government commission. The decision on jurisdiction is final unless judicial review is initiated.

3. If the commission or a three-member panel of city attorneys reviews whether a meeting was in violation of this title or records were withheld in violation of this title, their decision may be appealed to the city council. The decision of the city council is final.

C. Enforcement.

1. Upon the conclusion of the administrative review process, as implemented pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, any person may institute proceedings for injunctive relief, declaratory relief, or writ of mandate in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce his or her rights under this title.

2. A court may award costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees to the plaintiff in an action brought pursuant to this section where it is found that a body has violated this title. The costs and fees shall be paid by the body and shall not become a personal liability of any public official or employee of the body.

3. If the litigation is judged to be frivolous by the court, the defendant body may assert its right to be paid reasonable court costs and attorneys’ fees.

D. Mediation. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person whose request to inspect or copy public records has been denied by any body, agency or department may demand immediate mediation of his or her request with the Solano County courts mediation service or some mutually agreed-upon person who agrees to volunteer his or her time serving as mediator.

E. Cure and Correction.

1. Nothing in this title shall prevent a body from curing or correcting an action challenged on grounds that a body violated any material provision of Chapter 4.08 BMC. A body shall cure and correct an action by placing the challenged action on a subsequent meeting agenda for separate determinations of whether to cure and correct the challenged action and, if so, whether to affirm or supersede the challenged action after first taking any new public testimony.

2. In the event the commission, upon the conclusion of a formal hearing conducted pursuant to its administrative review process, determines that a body violated any material provision of this title, the body shall agendize for the challenged action to correct and cure the violation. Any violation shall have no effect on those actions described in Government Code Section 54960.1(d)(1) – (4), inclusive.

F. Reports or Recommendations from Meetings Alleged to Have Been Held in Violation of This Title. If the sole purpose or nature of an action that is challenged for violation of this title is to make or convey an advisory report or recommendation to another body, such body shall not be precluded from hearing or taking action on the item if it is within the authority or jurisdiction for said body to hear or take action on the item in the absence of such report or recommendation.

G. Penalties. The penalty for violation of this title by an elected or appointed official shall be commensurate with the violation and may include penalties, such as censure, including findings of fact and a determination, which shall be given to media selected by the commission.

H. Limitation of Actions. No person may file a complaint with the commission alleging violation of the notice provisions of BMC 4.08.050 if he or she attended the meeting or had actual notice of the item of business at least 72 hours prior to the meeting at which the action was taken. (Ord. 07-08 § 1; Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.20.030 Responsibility for administration.
A. The city manager shall administer and coordinate the implementation of the provisions of this title for all bodies, agencies and departments under his or her authority, responsibility or control.

B. The city attorney shall staff, or provide staff for, the commission to permit the commission to fulfill the functions and duties set forth herein. The city attorney shall provide the commission with legal assistance, to the extent such assistance does not constitute a conflict.

C. The city clerk in the case of the city council and the assigned department in the case of other bodies shall be responsible for timely posting all agendas and shall make available for immediate public inspection and copying all agendas and agenda-related material filed with it.

D. The city clerk or designee shall act as information request facilitator to assist members of the public with acquiring the information they seek. If it will take longer than 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays) to obtain the information requested by a member of the public then the city clerk will provide a written concise explanation of how and when the information will be made available. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

4.20.040 Enforcement of ethics chapter.
The city council, and not the open government commission, shall be the enforcement body for alleged violations of Chapter 4.16 BMC. This process shall not be used against employees except the city manager and city attorney since other employees are subject to discipline at the discretion of their supervisor. In the event of an allegation of a violation of the ethics provisions of this title, the matter shall first be referred to the city attorney for a determination as to whether there is a substantial likelihood that an ethics violation occurred. If substantial cause exists, the city council shall use the administrative process set forth above to resolve the matter except the option of referral to the commission in BMC 4.20.020(A)(2) shall be omitted. In the case of an allegation of an ethics violation committed by an elected official, the process shall proceed directly to the city council for a determination. (Ord. 05-06 § 1).

Title 5
BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS1
Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.06    Business License Tax Rates

5.08    Card Rooms

5.12    Bingo Games

5.16    Closing of Amusement Places

5.20    Controlled Sales

5.24    Jewelry Auctions

5.28    Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers

5.32    Taxicabs

5.36    Construction of Structures

5.37    Library Book Fee

5.38    Traffic Impact Mitigation

5.40    State Video Franchises

5.44    Adult Business Licenses and Operating Regulations

5.45    Adult Business Performer License

5.46    Adult Business Background Check for Nonperformers

5.48    Motion Picture Production, Television Productions and Commercial Still Photography

5.52    Massage

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to license businesses for purposes of revenue or regulation, see Government Code § 37101; for provisions authorizing regulatory licensing, see Business and Professions Code § 1600 et seq.


Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS LICENSES1
Sections:

5.04.010    Purpose.

5.04.020    Definitions.

5.04.030    Tax payment required.

5.04.040    Exemptions.

5.04.050    Application required.

5.04.060    License tax certificate – Issuance.

5.04.070    License tax certificate – Display.

5.04.080    Audits and corrections.

5.04.090    Determination of tax classification.

5.04.100    Failure to file.

5.04.110    Penalties for delinquency.

5.04.120    Refunds.

5.04.130    Gross receipts confidential.

5.04.140    Evidence of doing business.

5.04.150    Constitutional apportionment.

5.04.160    Apportionment guidelines and other regulations.

5.04.170    Misrepresentation of material fact.

5.04.180    Civil debt.

5.04.190    Remedies cumulative.

5.04.210    Cost recovery fee.

5.04.220    Revocation or suspension – Grounds.

5.04.290    Revocation or suspension – Procedure.

5.04.010 Purpose.
This chapter and Chapter 5.06 BMC are enacted solely to raise revenue for general municipal purposes. They are not intended to be regulatory. The payment of a license tax, and its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of a business tax certificate to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has also complied with all of the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such business tax certificate if such building or premises is or are situated in a zone or location in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

A. “Administrator” means the finance director, his or her designee, or another city officer or employee charged by the city manager with the administration of this chapter.

B. “Business” includes professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. Where a person subject to the tax acquires a business, unless that business is a newly established business, the business shall be deemed a continuation of the previous business and the gross receipts of the business from both before and after the acquisition shall be considered in calculating the amount of any tax due from the person engaging in the business at the time the tax is due.

C. “Gross receipts” means and includes the total of amounts actually received or receivable from sales and the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not performed as a part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” are all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind without deduction of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses. Excluded from “gross receipts” are:

1. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

2. Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

3. Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

4. Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

5. Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom the amount is collected, provided the agent or trustee furnishes the administrator with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;

6. That portion of the receipts of a general contractor which represents payments to subcontractors licensed under this chapter, provided the general contractor furnishes the administrator with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid to them;

7. Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and retained by the business are not excluded;

8. As to a real estate agent or broker, the sales price of real estate sold for the account of others except that portion which represents commission or other income to the agent or broker;

9. As to a retail gasoline dealer, a portion of his or her receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid to the state of California pursuant to Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code;

10. As to a retail gasoline dealer, the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser; and

11. Admissions charges for entertainment events, dances, concerts, exhibitions and lectures where such charges are collected by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, amateur theatrical, military, state, county or municipal organization, association, public benefit corporation or mutual benefit corporation, if the proceeds of such charges are used for the purposes or objects for which such organization, association or corporation was formed, and do not inure to the profit of any individual.

D. “License tax” means the tax imposed pursuant to BMC 5.04.030.

E. “Newly established business” means a business in which neither the owner or operator, nor any person from whom the owner or operator acquired the business, engaged during the immediately preceding calendar year. The following shall not be considered newly established businesses:

1. A business conducted at a new location whether within or outside the city when the business conducted and taxed at a previous location during the preceding calendar year was discontinued at the same time, prior to, or within 30 days after commencement of business at the new location;

2. The business engaged in during the current calendar year is the same kind as that engaged in during the immediately preceding year, but not at the close thereof;

3. The business to be engaged in during the current calendar year, though not the same kind of business, is taxed under the same section as the business engaged in during, but not necessarily throughout, the immediately preceding calendar year.

Provided, that the administrator may, on written application by a taxpayer, and after considering all circumstances, find that a business described in this definition is in fact new and not a continuation of a business engaged in during the immediately preceding calendar year.

F. “Person” means and includes domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock corporation, partnership, joint venture, club, business, or common law trust, society, estate, receiver, retirement plan, trustee individual or any other group or combination of individuals acting as a unit.

G. “Sale” includes the transfer of title to any kind of property for a consideration or the serving, supplying or furnishing for consideration of property. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains title as security for payment of the price is a sale. This definition does not exclude any transaction which results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

H. “Sworn statement” means an affidavit or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California.

I. “Taxpayer” means a person subject to a tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.030 Tax payment required.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every person who engages in business within the city, whether or not at a fixed place of business, shall pay a license tax in an amount calculated pursuant to Chapter 5.06 BMC. It is unlawful for a person to transact business in the city, without first complying with the requirements of this chapter.

B.    1. Where a license tax is calculated based on (a) gross receipts, (b) number of persons employed or compensated, or (c) number of residential rental units for which rent is received, this subsection (B) shall apply.

2. The tax with respect to each calendar year (other than the initial calendar year of business operations) shall be due on February 1st of that year, shall be delinquent on April 1st of that year, and shall be calculated based on the actual or estimated gross receipts of the business during the prior calendar year.

3. Though a statement must be filed pursuant to BMC 5.04.050(D), no tax shall be due with respect to a newly established business until the first February 1st that occurs more than 31 days after the taxpayer first conducts the business.

4. With respect to the first license tax due from a newly established business, if a license tax is calculated based on gross receipts and Chapter 5.06 BMC establishes a minimum tax amount due without regard to the amount of gross receipts received by the business, that minimum tax amount shall be prorated based on the number of whole or partial months remaining in the calendar year on the date the taxpayer first conducts the business.

C. With respect to any license tax to which subsection (B) of this section does not apply, the tax with respect to any period of operations shall be paid before the business conducts operations during that period. For example, and without limitation, a license tax charged on an annual basis must be paid for each calendar year during which the business is operated, regardless of when the tax is due or paid. The amount of such an annual, non-gross-receipts tax shall not be prorated due to the fact that the business is operated for less than a year.

D. If two or more activities of a single taxpayer are taxable pursuant to Chapter 5.06 BMC at the same rate and on the same tax basis, the taxpayer may calculate and report the tax due for the activities as a group. If two or more activities are taxable on the same tax basis, but at different tax rates, the taxpayer may calculate the tax for each activity separately or may elect to calculate the tax for the activities as a group by applying the highest tax rate applicable to any activity in the group. If two or more activities are taxed on differing tax bases (such as, for example, gross receipts or days of business activity), the tax must be calculated for each activity separately.

E. Where a license tax is based on gross receipts, a taxpayer may elect to pay the maximum tax indicated in Chapter 5.06 BMC rather than paying the tax that would otherwise be due under that chapter. In such event, the taxpayer need not report his or her gross receipts in the statement required by BMC 5.04.050. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.040 Exemptions.
A. The requirement to pay a license tax pursuant to BMC 5.04.030 does not apply to:

1. Any person transacting or carrying on any business exempted by the Constitution or laws of the United States or of the state of California from the license tax, but such exemption shall only extend to such exempt business and not to any other business in which such person may engage;

2. Any disabled veteran holding an honorable discharge from a branch of the military service of the United States, if he or she is physically unable to earn a livelihood by manual labor;

3. Any organization certified by the Internal Revenue Service as an exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, except with respect to business activities for which the organization is required to pay federal income taxes;

4. Any individual under 18 years of age and whose gross receipts do not exceed $1,000 per year.

B. A person claiming an exemption under this section, in addition to filing the application required by BMC 5.04.050, shall file a sworn statement with the administrator stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. In the absence of a statement substantiating the claim, the person is liable for the payment of the license tax required by BMC 5.04.030.

C. Upon proper showing contained in the sworn statement, the administrator shall issue a license tax certificate to the person claiming exemption without payment to the city of the license tax otherwise required by BMC 5.04.030.

D. The administrator, after giving a person receiving a license pursuant to subsection (C) of this section notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing, may revoke such license tax certificate upon receiving information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption claimed. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.050 Application required.
A. Each person engaging in business within the city, whether or not at a fixed place of business, shall file a written statement each year with the administrator upon forms provided by the administrator indicating the business activity to be conducted, the location of the business, the officers or other principals of the business, the period for which the application is submitted, the amount of license tax due for that period, and sufficient information to allow computation of the license tax due.

B. The statement required by subsection (A) of this section shall also include a list of all contractors or subcontractors engaged by the taxpayer to conduct business in the city during the preceding year.

C. The administrator shall not accept a statement unless accompanied by payment of the license tax due.

D. With respect to license taxes based upon gross receipts, a person filing an initial statement for a newly established business shall file that statement within 30 days of commencing business. Such person shall file statements no later than March 31st of each subsequent calendar year during which business is conducted in the city.

E. With respect to any other license tax, the statement is due at the time the business license tax is due. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.060 License tax certificate – Issuance.
A. The administrator shall issue a license tax certificate to each person who submits an application and pays the license tax as required by BMC 5.04.050. The license tax certificate shall indicate the name of the business for which the license tax is paid, the person paying the license tax, the location of the business, the type of business for which the license tax has been paid, the period for which it has been paid and such other information as is deemed necessary by the administrator for the administration of the tax.

B. A license tax certificate is not transferable, except that if the holder of a license tax certificate changes his or her place of business, he or she may apply to the administrator for a transfer of the license tax certificate to the new location. The tax for such a transfer application shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. A transfer application must be filed within 30 days of the establishment of a new location.

C. No license tax certificate shall be issued to any person until any previous indebtedness for taxes and fees imposed by this chapter upon that person, and with respect to the business for which the person seeks a license tax certificate, has been paid.

D. A separate license tax certificate is required for each branch or location of a business and for each separate type of business at a single location. Each license tax certificate shall authorize the tax certificate holder to transact and carry on only the business stated therein at the location or in the manner designated in such certificate; provided, however, a business may obtain certificates for separate locations either by submitting combined or separate applications for each location. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.070 License tax certificate – Display.
A. Each taxpayer shall display his or her license tax certificate as follows:

1. If the license tax certificate is issued with respect to a business carried on at a fixed place, the taxpayer shall post the license in a conspicuous location at that place;

2. If the license tax certificate is issued with respect to a business that has no fixed place of business, the taxpayer shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while conducting business;

3. If a taxpayer uses a motor vehicle in connection with his or her business, he or she shall affix to the vehicle in a manner specified by the administrator a tab furnished by the city showing that the license tax has been paid. The administrator may waive this requirement in the case of a taxpayer who operates three or more vehicles within the city, or in any case in which the administrator determines that this requirement is not necessary to the administration of the tax.

B. The administrator, any police officer, or any person authorized by the administrator to do so shall have the authority to enter any place of business taxed under this chapter at any reasonable time and demand exhibition of the license tax certificate issued with respect to that place of business.

C. Any person who willfully fails to exhibit a license tax certificate in the manner required by this section is guilty of a violation of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.080 Audits and corrections.
A. Taxpayers shall maintain and preserve, for a period of at least four years following the date the tax was due, such records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due and shall, upon request of the administrator, provide the necessary records to substantiate the tax paid or due for such business. If upon audit of such records, the administrator determines the tax imposed by this chapter has not been paid in full, the administrator shall notify the taxpayer of the balance due, including any accrued penalties and interest. Such amount shall be paid within 30 days after notice is issued by the administrator.

B. If an audit reveals an overpayment, the administrator shall notify the taxpayer of the amount overpaid. Unless the taxpayer requests a refund of the overpayment within thirty days after notice is issued by the administrator, the overpayment shall be applied as a credit against the next annual tax due from that taxpayer.

C. If an audit reveals an underpayment of $25.00 or less, the administrator need take no action to collect the underpayment.

D. Rather than request information and conduct an audit, the administrator may request a taxpayer to file a corrected statement pursuant to BMC 5.04.050. If such corrected statement is filed and the administrator is satisfied with its accuracy, the existence of any underpayment or overpayment under this section shall be determined with reference to that corrected statement. If a taxpayer fails to file a corrected statement or the administrator is not satisfied with a corrected statement, the administrator may conduct an audit pursuant to subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.090 Determination of tax classification.
A. The determination of the class of business in which an applicant for a tax certificate is engaged for purposes of Chapter 5.06 BMC shall be a ministerial task of the administrator. The administrator may, at any time within one year after receiving a statement pursuant to BMC 5.04.050, correct the classification reported by a taxpayer and recalculate the tax due. The administrator shall then treat the results of this recalculation as the results of an audit.

B. In the event an applicant disagrees with the determination of the administrator as to the class of business in which the applicant is engaged, the applicant may file an application for reclassification with the administrator. This application shall set forth with specificity the facts upon which it is based. Upon receipt of a reclassification application, the administrator shall review the matter and either affirm the original classification or assign a new classification and shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing, which shall be final.

C. The administrator may refuse to accept an application for reclassification from an applicant who has applied for reclassification within the previous 12 months if the application fails to state material and relevant facts that were not and could not have been presented in the previous reclassification application. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.100 Failure to file.
A. If a person fails to file a required application or statement or fails to file a corrected statement within 15 days of a demand by the administrator, the administrator may determine the amount of license tax due, using the information he or she is able to obtain.

B. When the administrator makes a determination under subsection (A) of this section, he or she shall give a notice of the amount of license tax due by serving it personally or by mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the taxpayer at his or her last known address.

C. Payment of the corrected tax shall be due within 15 days of the service or mailing of the notice pursuant to subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.110 Penalties for delinquency.
A. Upon a taxpayer’s failure to pay the entire tax when due, the administrator shall add a penalty of the greater of $10.00 or 10 percent of the unpaid tax on the first day of each month following the month the tax was due; provided, however, no penalty shall be assessed in excess of 50 percent of the tax due. For the purposes of this chapter, a payment made by mail shall be deemed received on the date of a postmark on the envelope in which the payment is received, or if payment is made by means other than U.S. mail, payment shall be deemed received on the date the payment is stamped “received” by the administrator or his or her designee.

B. On the first day of the month following the date on which the maximum penalty provided for in subsection (A) of this section has accrued, interest at the rate of one percent per month shall begin to accrue. Interest shall accrue at this rate on the amount of the unpaid tax, exclusive of penalties, for each month or portion of a month until the tax is paid. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.120 Refunds.
No tax shall be refunded unless it is determined by the administrator that it has been paid in error, computed incorrectly, overpaid, or collected illegally. No refund shall be made unless a written request therefor is received by the administrator within one year of the payment of the tax. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.130 Gross receipts confidential.
Information concerning gross receipts or operating costs furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be confidential, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall not be made available to anyone not charged with the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.140 Evidence of doing business.
The use of signs, circulars, cards or any other advertising media, including, without limitation, the use of telephone solicitation, or any other means by which a person may hold himself or herself out as, or represent that he or she is, doing business in the city, shall constitute evidence that a person is doing business in the city. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.150 Constitutional apportionment.
A. If a person believes that the license tax, as applied to him or her, places an undue burden on interstate commerce or violates the due process or equal protection clauses of the United States or California Constitutions, he or she may apply to the administrator for an adjustment of the tax. Such adjustment shall be supported by a sworn statement setting forth the method of business and gross receipts calculations and such other information as the administrator may consider necessary to consider the claim.

B. The administrator shall review any application pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, and shall fix as the license tax an amount that is reasonable, nondiscriminatory and consistent with applicable law. The amount so fixed shall not exceed the amount that would otherwise be due pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.160 Apportionment guidelines and other regulations.
The administrator, in consultation with the city attorney, and subject to the approval of the city manager, may:

A. Promulgate guidelines for the apportionment of the gross receipts of businesses which operate both inside and outside the city to assist taxpayers in calculating the portion of their activities subject to the tax imposed by this chapter; and

B. Adopt any other rules or regulations necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this chapter.

Any apportionment guidelines or rules or regulations for the enforcement of this chapter shall be effective only after they have been published in the manner required for an ordinance of the city. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.170 Misrepresentation of material fact.
It is a violation of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to BMC 1.08.010 to knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact, relative to any tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.180 Civil debt.
The amount of tax, fee, penalty, or interest imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action to recover such debt may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.190 Remedies cumulative.
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve that person from paying any tax, fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment prevent prosecution of a violation of any provision of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city to enforce this chapter shall not bar the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.210 Cost recovery fee.
In addition to the license tax imposed pursuant to this title, the city council may, by resolution, establish and impose a fee, to be collected with the license tax, to recover the city’s costs of implementing the requirements of this title, including the costs of compliance and audit programs. The anticipated proceeds of such fee shall not exceed the city’s actual or expected implementation costs. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.220 Revocation or suspension – Grounds.
The administrator may revoke or suspend a license granted under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

A. A false statement in the application;

B. Failure to comply with a regulatory provision in the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city;

C. Failure to operate the business in an orderly and business-like manner in obedience to orders, rules and regulations applicable to it;

D. Conducting business in an illegal, improper or disorderly manner, or in a manner which endangers the public welfare. (Ord. 04-12 § 2).

5.04.290 Revocation or suspension – Procedure.
A. Authority of Administrator. The collector shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation or suspension. The notice shall specify a time and place of hearing, and shall be given at least five days before the time of the hearing. The licensee shall show cause why his license should not be revoked or suspended.

B. Appeal to Council. The licensee may appeal the decision of the administrator to the council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

C. Failure to Appeal. If the licensee does not appeal, the decision of the administrator is final and conclusive on expiration of the time fixed for appeal. (Ord. 07-29 § 1; Ord. 04-12 § 2).

1
    Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 5-101 – 5-103, 5-111 – 5-116, 5-121 – 5-129, 5-131 – 5-135, 5-141 – 5-145, 5-161 – 5-168, 5-171 – 5-175, Ords. 72-7 N.S., 75-1 N.S., amendments during 1980 codification, Ords. 96-4 N.S., 97-10 N.S. and 03-9.


Chapter 5.06
BUSINESS LICENSE TAX RATES1
Sections:

5.06.010  Definitions.

5.06.020  Total tax due.

5.06.030  Personnel tax.

5.06.040  Multifamily residential rental tax.

5.06.050  Gross receipts tax.

5.06.060  Alternate license tax for solicitors, farmer’s market vendors and street fair participants.

5.06.070  Inflation adjustment.

5.06.010 Definitions.
Except where indicated to the contrary or where the context clearly requires to the contrary, all terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in Chapter 5.04 BMC. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.020 Total tax due.
Except as otherwise provided in BMC 5.06.060, the license tax due pursuant to BMC 5.04.030 with respect to any business shall be the sum of:

A. The personnel tax imposed by BMC 5.06.030;

B. The multifamily residential rental tax imposed by BMC 5.06.040; and

C. The gross receipts tax imposed by BMC 5.06.050.

The requirements of this chapter shall apply only to persons required to pay a license tax pursuant to BMC 5.04.030. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.030 Personnel tax.
A. Each person who employs or compensates another shall pay an annual personnel tax of $7.50 for each person he or she employs or compensates.

B. For purposes of this section, persons deemed to be employed or compensated by a person subject to the license tax include:

1. Employees to whom the person subject to the license tax pays wages reportable on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its successor; and

2. Other persons to whom the person subject to the license tax pays compensation, but only if (a) the person subject to the license tax is obligated to report such compensation in Box 7 of Internal Revenue Service Form 1099-MISC, as that form existed in November 2004, and (b) the person receiving compensation had not been issued a business license tax certificate by the city valid during the period for which compensation was paid.

C. If a person subject to the personnel tax imposed under this section employed or compensated one or more persons for fewer than 2,000 hours of services in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due, then that taxpayer shall pay the tax due under this section with respect to that person or those persons in the amount of $7.50 multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of hours of service performed by all such persons in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due, and the denominator of which is 2,000 hours. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.040 Multifamily residential rental tax.
A. This section shall apply to persons engaging in the business of renting or leasing multifamily property in the city for residential tenancies of 30 or more days. Persons engaging in this type of business are not subject to a gross receipts calculation pursuant to BMC 5.06.050 or a personnel tax pursuant to BMC 5.06.030. The record owner of a property that is rented or leased for such tenancies shall be presumed to be the person renting or leasing the property and liable for the tax due under this section unless that record owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrator that some other person is engaged in the business of renting or leasing a particular property, in which case that other person shall be liable for the tax due under this section as to that property.

B. Each person subject to this section shall pay a multifamily residential rental tax of $36.00 for each rental unit for which that person receives any rent during the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, no multifamily residential rental tax shall be due with respect to any rental unit that the person subject to this section can establish, in a manner satisfactory to the administrator:

1. To be a rental unit located in a building containing three or fewer other such rental units; or

2. To have been occupied for at least half of the period during which it was rented to any tenant in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due by:

a. A head of household who is 65 years of age or older; or

b. A "lower income household" as that term is defined in Section 50075.9 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.

D. A person who is subject to the multifamily residential rental tax shall not be subject to the gross receipts tax imposed pursuant to BMC 5.06.050 with respect to gross receipts derived from the rental or leasing of residential rental units in the city. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.050 Gross receipts tax.
A. Any person who engages in the business of providing professional services shall pay a gross receipts tax of $0.75 per $1,000 of gross receipts received in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due, but not less than $75.00 per year.

B. Any person who engages in the business of retailing, operating a hotel or motel, or providing services (other than professional services) to the general public shall pay a gross receipts tax of $0.65 per $1,000 of gross receipts received in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due, but not less than $65.00 per year.

C. Any person who engages in any business other than a business specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall pay a gross receipts tax of $0.55 per $1,000 of gross receipts received in the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is due, but not less than $55.00 per year.

D. The maximum gross receipts tax that any person shall be required to pay pursuant to this section with respect to any year shall be $450.00. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.060 Alternate license tax for solicitors, farmer’s market vendors and street fair participants.
A. The license tax due pursuant to BMC 5.06.020 with respect to a person engaged in the business of soliciting in the city shall be $15.00 for each day that the person engages in soliciting and shall be payable monthly beginning on the first date in each calendar year in which that person conducts business in the city.

B. The license tax due pursuant to BMC 5.06.020 with respect to a person engaged in the business of vending at a farmer’s market in the city shall be $15.00 per year and shall be payable five days before the beginning of business and shall be remitted on behalf of the licensee by the sponsor of the farmer’s market.

C. The license tax due pursuant to BMC 5.06.020 with respect to a person engaged in the business of participating in a street or community fair shall be $15.00 per street or community fair and shall be payable before the commencement of business and shall be remitted on behalf of the licensee by the sponsor of the street or community fair. If a street or community fair lasts for more than three consecutive days, the tax shall be due for each whole or partial three-consecutive-day period during which a person engages in business in the city. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

5.06.070 Inflation adjustment.
A. By November 30th of each year, beginning in 2005, the administrator shall adjust in the manner required by this section each of the following tax rates or amounts, and those adjusted rates or amounts shall be used in calculating taxes due in the following calendar year:

1. The rate of the personnel tax set forth in BMC 5.06.030;

2. The rate of the residential rental tax set forth in BMC 5.06.040;

3. The maximum gross receipts tax amount set forth in BMC 5.06.050(D); and

4. Each of the license tax rates and amounts set forth in BMC 5.06.060.

B. Each rate or amount shall be adjusted for inflation by multiplying the then-effective rate by the lower of:

1. The annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, San Francisco Bay Area (or any successor to that index) for the most recent 12 months for which data have been published when the adjustment is calculated; or

2. The average annual increase in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, San Francisco Bay Area (or any successor to that index) over the five most recent 12-month periods for which data have been published when this calculation is made.

C. The administrator shall publish the adjusted rates and amounts by December 15th of each year, beginning in 2005, in the manner required for publication of ordinances of the city.

D. The city council may, by resolution, suspend the effectiveness of all or part of one or more such adjustments for such period or periods as it may determine. However, such suspension shall not be taken into account by the administrator when making the calculations required by this section. The expiration or termination of any such suspension shall not require voter approval; provided, that the tax is not imposed on any person in an amount in excess of the inflation-adjusted rates or amounts authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 04-10 § 1).

1
Prior legislation: Ord. 04-12.


Chapter 5.08
CARD ROOMS1
Sections:

5.08.010    Purpose and intent.

5.08.020    Definitions.

5.08.030    Card room license required – Prohibition of all future card rooms.

5.08.040    Application for card room license.

5.08.050    Card room license application fee.

5.08.060    Application acceptance, referral, investigation and report.

5.08.070    License issuance or denial.

5.08.080    Suspension and revocation of license.

5.08.090    Procedures for suspending or revoking card room licenses and work permits by city council.

5.08.100    License nonassignable.

5.08.110    Operating regulations.

5.08.120    Cessation of operations.

5.08.130    Violation of chapter as public nuisance.

5.08.140    Issuance of work permits for employees.

5.08.150    Obligation to inform of certain changes concerning licenses and employees.

5.08.160    Card games conducted pursuant to law.

5.08.170    Permitted games designated.

5.08.180    Identification cards.

5.08.190    Licensee, owner, agent or employees not to play cards – Exceptions.

5.08.200    Use of shills by card rooms.

5.08.210    Operation of house bank or similar system.

5.08.220    Communication within card rooms – When prohibited.

5.08.230    Exclusion or ejection of individuals from card rooms.

5.08.240    Licensee responsible for violations.

5.08.250    Violation of state and city laws.

5.08.260    Gamblers Anonymous information.

5.08.270    Posting operating regulations.

5.08.280    Inspection of card rooms for enforcement.

5.08.290    Formal bookkeeping system.

5.08.300    Notice.

5.08.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council determines that the public health, safety and welfare require the adoption of regulations pursuant to, and in conformity with, the State Gaming Registration Act, under which the city shall prohibit the future construction and establishment of card rooms within the city. The city council also finds it necessary to regulate the existing card rooms located in the city with regards to the following:

A. The persons who will own, operate, and be employed in card rooms;

B. The operation of card rooms in the city;

C. The issuance of permits and licenses, including limitations on transfer and assignment, regarding card rooms; and

D. The permissible games which may be played in the card rooms.

5.08.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

A. “Applicant” shall mean a living person, corporation or partnership who applies for either:

1. A license to operate, manage or maintain a card room (an applicant for a license to operate or manage a card room also includes, for purposes of BMC 5.08.040, all persons holding or having a financial interest in the card room); or

2. A work permit to be employed in a card room.

B. “Application” shall mean the form submitted by the owner, operator, or employee and which, when completed by the applicant, contains information requested by the city of Benicia (the “city”) upon which the city council may base their approval of such application.

C. “Card game” shall mean any game played with cards or other devices for money, checks, credits or any other thing of value.

D. “Card room” shall mean any building or structure, or any portion of a building or structure, or any premises or place wherein any person or persons are permitted to play a card game authorized by BMC 5.08.170 in return for a fee, charge or other compensation.

E. “Card table” shall mean any table or any other surface upon which any card game authorized by BMC 5.08.170 is played.

F. “Day” shall mean a working day during which the city’s administrative departments are open and available to the general public.

G. “Employee” shall mean any person employed by a licensee, with or without compensation, in a card room, and who either (1) participates as a dealer in a card game or is in charge of the operation and is required to supervise card tables, or (2) is a proposition player or an agent of the licensee. Anyone who is required to routinely enter into the card playing area during the course of their duties is considered an employee. The term employee does not include a bartender, culinary worker, or any other person not directly connected with the card room operation.

H. “License” shall mean a license granted by the Benicia city council to an applicant to operate a card room in the city. This license is distinct from, and in addition to, any business license required by the city.

I. “Licensee” shall mean any person who holds a current, valid license, issued by the city to operate a card room.

J. “Owner” shall mean any person, persons, corporation or partnership, or any combination thereof, that has any interest, legal or equitable, in any card room or card room license, excepting a bona fide lending institution licensed by the state of California or the federal government.

K. “Person” shall mean and include individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture and corporation.

L. “Premises” shall mean any structure or portion of a structure to be licensed, or for which a license has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this section, which contains a card room.

M. “Proposition player” shall mean an employee or other person who participates in a card game at the request, direction or demand of the licensee, his/her agents, or employees and who plays with his/her own money, and who is solely responsible for his/her own wins and losses.

N. “Shill” shall mean any person who participates in a card game at the request, direction or demand of the licensee, his/her agents, or employees where the licensee and/or the card room has a financial interest in such person’s wins or losses.

O. “Wagering limit” shall mean to risk or stake an amount of money on an uncertain outcome; a bet.

P. “Work permit” or “permit” shall mean a permit granted to an employee or agent of the licensee of a card room by the chief of police. (Ord. 99-13).

5.08.030 Card room license required – Prohibition of all future card rooms.
A. No person shall establish, maintain, manage or operate any card room or permit or allow any card room to be established, maintained, managed, or operated within any building or structure, owned, occupied, or controlled by him/her unless such card room is maintained and operated pursuant to a valid, unexpired, unsuspended and unrevoked card room license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The holder of any such license or his/her designated representative shall be required to exercise personal control and direction over the operation of the card room and shall be available at reasonable times, during regular business hours, to the chief of police or his/her designated representative.

B. The city shall not approve or issue any building permit, license or other entitlement for the construction, ownership, operation or use of a card room except to those persons who otherwise comply with the requirements of this chapter in all respects, and (1) who were legally, lawfully and actively operating a card room as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or (2) who obtained a license which was sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee who was legally, lawfully and actively operating a card room as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

C. Those persons who obtain a card room license pursuant to this chapter shall continue to operate their card room as a legal nonconforming use, and shall be subject to all laws applicable to legal nonconforming uses in addition to the requirements of this chapter. To the extent any conflict exists between any law governing legal nonconforming uses and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail and control.

5.08.040 Application for card room license.
An application for a card room license or a card room license renewal, as required herein, shall be completed by the applicant and filed with the police department within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and by January 1st of each succeeding year upon such form as may be furnished by the police department. The application shall set forth and include the following:

A. The location of the card room for which the license is required, including a specific description of the building or structure, or portion of the building or structure, within which the card room is to be situated, and the specific portion of such building or structure for which a card room license is required. If the entire building or structure is used as a card room, the application shall so state and shall request a license for the entire building or structure. If only a portion of the building or structure is used as a card room, the applicant shall so state, shall describe such portion and shall request a license for only such portion. No permit shall be deemed issued for any portion of any building which the application fails to state is to be used for card room purposes or for which the application fails to specifically request a license;

No card room may be located in any zone which has not been specifically approved for such a business and none may be located near any of the unsuitable areas, as specified in Business and Professions Code Section 19852(a)(3);

B. The maximum number of card tables proposed to be maintained within the card room;

C. The specific types of card games proposed to be played within the card room;

D. The true and complete name and address of each owner or owners of the building or structure within which the card room is proposed to be maintained;

E. The true and correct name and address of the person or persons to whom it is requested that a card room license be issued, as follows:

1. If the proposed licensee is an individual, the application shall set forth the name, residence and business address of the applicant;

2. If the proposed licensee is a corporation, the application shall set forth the complete name of the corporation and the state within which it is incorporated, together with its home address and its local address, and also the names and addresses of each officer of the corporation, all persons responsible for operation and management of the card room, and any person owning 10 percent or more of the total shares of stock issued by such corporation;

3. If the proposed licensee is a partnership, the application shall set forth the full names of all partners and the firm name under which the partnership operates, together with the addresses of all partners;

F. A set of clearly identifiable fingerprints and photographs of each person to whom a license is to be granted or, in the case of a partnership, all of the partners; or in the case of a corporation, the president and members of the board of directors, in the form and manner and by an agency approved by the chief of police. Each person shall have paid to the police department the current fee set by the city master fee schedule for receiving and processing fingerprints so taken;

G. A statement as to whether or not any of the persons hereinabove required to be named in the application have at any time in the last 10 years been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime or crimes of lesser and included offense and (other than minor traffic offenses) listed in BMC 5.08.060(C) and, if so, the nature of the crime for which they were convicted, and the date and jurisdiction of the conviction;

H. A statement as to whether any gaming permit or card room license previously granted to the applicant has been denied or revoked; the time of denial, revocation or suspension; the jurisdiction denying, suspending or revoking; and the reasons therefor;

I. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the application shall be considered by the city council after a full investigation and reports have been made by the chief of police, other city officials or their authorized representatives;

J. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the card room established or maintained under any license issued pursuant to the application filed shall be established, operated, managed, and maintained in full conformity with all of the laws of the state of California and the laws and regulations of the city applicable thereto; and that any violation of any such laws in the card room or in connection therewith, shall render any license therefor subject to immediate suspension or revocation and the licensee may thereafter be forever barred from obtaining a card room license from the city of Benicia;

K. A full and complete financial statement of the applicant on forms provided by the police department; a full and complete financial statement of each general or limited partner of the applicant, and a full and complete financial statement of each officer and/or director of the corporation or other entity; a full and complete financial statement of all lenders, except bona fide lending institutions licensed by the state of California or the federal government, whose interest is secured by the assets of the card room;

L. A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the chief of police or a representative of the chief of police shall have access to the card room premises and to the business records of the applicant for the purpose of investigating compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and the applicant consents to any such search and consequential seizure;

M. A statement that the applicant understands and consents to the inclusion in any report to the city manager and city council of any criminal conviction that is related to the application;

N. A description of security measures the applicant has or will take or cause to be taken, including security personnel staffing and training, and provision of security in and around off-street parking areas. The security plan must be approved by the police department and adopted by the card room operator prior to issuance of the license;

O. A statement indicating whether the applicant will operate a “house bank,” and, if so, a complete description of the operating policies and procedures of such bank, and evidence of the surety bonds required by BMC 5.08.210;

P. A release by the applicant and any of the persons hereinabove required to be named in the application allowing the city to investigate their background, including any history of criminal convictions, as specified in BMC 5.08.060(C);

Q. If the applicant is seeking the transfer, sale or assignment of a current legal card room license, a signed and notarized statement of the current card room licensee consenting to the sale, transfer or assignment of the card room license;

R. Such other information that either the applicant or the city may consider pertinent;

S. The contents of the application shall be certified under penalty of perjury as follows:

1. By the proposed licensee if an individual;

2. By a general partner if the proposed licensee is a partnership; and

3. By the president thereof if the proposed licensee is a corporation. (Ord. 99-13).

5.08.050 Card room license application fee.
A nonrefundable card room license application fee shall accompany the application, shall be paid to the police department, and shall be retained by the city for the cost of investigating and processing of the application whether or not the application is approved. The application fee shall be paid before the application is accepted by the police department. The fee amount shall be established by resolution of the city council.

5.08.060 Application acceptance, referral, investigation and report.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a card room permit, within 30 days, the police department shall examine the same, and if it is determined that it fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter or does not contain all the information required by this chapter, the application shall be returned to the applicant for proper completion of the application, together with a statement indicating the deficiencies. If the application does comply, the police department shall inform the applicant in writing that the application has been accepted as complete, but that the city reserves the right to request additional information regarding matters contained in the application.

B. The city manager shall be responsible for the gathering of all reports and pertinent information from other city departments and completing a final report to the city council for their acceptance of said application.

C. Providing that the release(s) referenced in BMC 5.08.040(P) has been obtained, the chief of police, or a representative of the chief of police, is hereby authorized to obtain criminal history information in the last 10 years for each person required to be named in the application for determining whether any such person has been convicted of any crime involving robbery, burglary, lotteries, gambling, larceny, usury, perjury, bribery, extortion, bookmaking, fraud, narcotics or controlled substances (except for the history of convictions for marijuana offenses, which shall only be applied to those occurring in the last two years), prostitution, pimping, pandering, money laundering, the California Control of Profits of Organized Crime Act (Penal Code Section 186 et seq.), the Street Terrorism Enforcement and Prevention Act (Penal Code Section 186.20 et seq.), the Federal RICO provisions, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude or who, following an arrest and prosecution for any of the above offenses, is found guilty of or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any lesser and included offense. The chief of police, within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, shall submit a written report to the city manager summarizing the results of his or her investigation. (Ord. 99-13).

5.08.070 License issuance or denial.
The city manager shall submit a completed, final report on the initial application for a license to the city council. Within 30 days of receipt of the completed final report from the city manager, the city council shall review the report at a public meeting. If the city council determines the applicant complies with the requirements of this chapter in all respects, the city council shall direct the police department to issue a license to the applicant. Each license approved by the city council shall be subject to licensee’s compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter as well as such other conditions, limitations and restrictions as the city council may require and shall be valid for up to one calendar year. In the case of a partnership, a license shall be issued in the name of all the partners.

If the city council determines that the application does not comply with the requirements of this chapter in all respects, the city council shall direct the police department to deny the license. The decision of the city council shall be final.

For all subsequent years, the chief of police shall issue the annual license, provided he or she finds that it complies with this chapter. Each license approved by the chief of police shall be subject to licensee’s compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter as well as such other conditions, limitations and restrictions as the city council may require and shall be valid for up to one calendar year.

5.08.080 Suspension and revocation of license.
A. All licenses and work permits authorized and issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by either the chief of police pursuant to the procedures contained in this section or by majority vote of the city council pursuant to the procedures contained in BMC 5.08.090, if it is determined, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the licensee or any employee or agent of such licensee or permittee has:

1. Failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter; or

2. Been convicted, in the last 10 years, of any crime involving robbery, burglary, lotteries, gambling, larceny, usury, perjury, bribery, extortion, bookmaking, fraud, narcotics or controlled substances (except for the history of convictions for marijuana offenses, which shall only be applied to those convictions occurring in the last two years), prostitution, pimping, pandering, money laundering, the California Control of Profits of Organized Crime Act (Penal Code Section 186 et seq.), the Street Terrorism Enforcement and Prevention Act (Penal Code Section 186.20 et seq.), the Federal RICO provisions, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude or who, following an arrest and prosecution for any of the above offenses, is found guilty, enters a plea of guilty of or enters a plea of nolo contendere to any of the above or lesser and included offenses; or

3. Breached any term or condition upon which his/her card room license or work permit was issued.

B. The chief of police may immediately suspend or revoke a card room license or a work permit upon determining that any of the grounds listed in subsection (A) of this section exist. The chief of police shall give written notice to the licensee/permittee that the license/permit has been revoked and that the licensee/permittee may appeal that decision to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-30 § 1; Ord. 99-13).

5.08.090 Procedures for suspending or revoking card room licenses and work permits by city council.
Existing card room licenses and work permits may be suspended or revoked pursuant to the following procedures:

A. The city council may, by majority vote, suspend or revoke any card room license or work permit after a hearing pursuant to an appeal filed under BMC 5.08.080; or

B. The city council may, by majority vote, suspend or revoke any card room license or work permit pursuant to a hearing of which at least 20 days’ notice shall be given by the city to the licensee/permittee of the time, place and purpose thereof. Such notice may take the format of an order to show cause, issued by the chief of police or his or her designee, addressed to the licensee/permittee, requiring such licensee/permittee to show cause before the city council at a time, date and place stated, why the license should not be suspended or revoked. The order to show cause shall set forth the reasons or grounds upon which such suspension or revocation is proposed;

C. At any hearing under this section, the licensee/permittee may appear, either in person or by counsel, or both in person and by counsel, and may produce and submit any relevant evidence such licensee/permittee may desire, oral or documentary;

D. Should the city council exercise the authority granted to it under the authority of subsection (A) or (B) of this section, and suspend or revoke the license/permit of any card room or card room employee, the city manager shall notify in writing the licensee/permittee as to the action taken. Suspension or revocation of a license/permit by the city council shall be effective immediately after notice given by the city manager of the council’s decision. The decision of the city council shall be final;

E. No licensee or other person in charge or control of any card room operating under any license or permit held or issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall operate or use any table, or manage, conduct or carry on any business or activity permitted by this chapter during any time that such license issued by the city has been or is suspended or revoked. A revoked license may not be transferred.

If the license/permit is revoked by action of the city council, the licensee/permittee shall be forever barred from obtaining a card room license/permit from the city of Benicia.

5.08.100 License nonassignable.
A. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, no card room license may be sold, transferred or assigned by the licensee, or by operation of law, to any person, persons, or legal entity. Any sale, transfer or assignment shall be void, and shall be deemed a voluntary surrender of such license, which license shall immediately be deemed terminated, revoked and void unless the person, persons or legal entity have applied for and obtained a transfer of the card room license.

B. A license issued to an individual shall terminate on December 31st of the calendar year in which said individual dies, except that the personal representative of the estate of said individual may apply for renewal of the license for one year, providing said representative has complied with the Gaming Registration Act of the state of California and all other provisions of this chapter.

C. If the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners dies, the surviving partners, or partner, may, with prior approval of the city council, acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner, or partners, without affecting a surrender or termination of the license. In such case, the licensee shall thereafter be deemed to be the surviving partner, or partners, upon notice to the city of said purchase or transfer.

D. Any change of legal status of licensee (such as a change from individual to corporate status) not otherwise herein provided, shall require the prior approval of the city council, which may condition such approval on any appropriate basis.

5.08.110 Operating regulations.
The licensee may operate a card room only at the location specified in the license and in accordance with the following regulations:

A. Only one room may be used for the card room activity.

B. No more than 12 card tables shall be permitted in a card room. In the event a licensee reduces the number of card tables permitted by his/her license, he/she shall not be entitled to reimbursement of any fees or charges previously paid. No more than 36 card tables shall be allowed to operate in the city.

C. No more than eight players shall be permitted at one card table unless the state amends its laws to permit more players. No more than 10 players shall be permitted in any case.

D. The card room shall be located on the ground floor and be so arranged that card tables are plainly visible from the outside door opening.

E. The card room shall be open to police inspection, without a search warrant, during all hours of operation.

F. The card room may operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week unless otherwise stated. The hours of operation shall be clearly posted at the card room so as to give law enforcement and patrons adequate notice of such hours.

G. Each card table during the time of play shall have assigned to it a person holding a valid card room work permit. This person is in charge of and shall supervise and conduct the game strictly in accordance with the laws of the state and this chapter.

H. Only table stakes are permitted.

I. Neither the licensee nor an employee of the licensee shall extend credit to or accept a promissory note from any player for any reason.

J. No minor shall be permitted at a card table.

K. No alcoholic beverages shall be stored, poured or mixed in a card room.

L. No intoxicated person shall be permitted in a card room.

M. Before it shall be allowed to operate, each card room establishment shall adopt rules for wagering limits in each game, after the rules have been approved by the local licensing authority. During hours of operation, such rules shall be clearly posted at the card tables where the games are offered, to provide the patrons adequate notice of those rules. (Ord. 99-13).

5.08.120 Cessation of operations.
A license becomes void upon a six-month involuntary absence or suspension of operations allowed by it, regardless of the reasons therefor; except that the city council may, during the six months, extend the time for good cause shown.

5.08.130 Violation of chapter as public nuisance.
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this code, the operation of any card room in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws and regulations shall be deemed a public nuisance and the city may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin such nuisance or may abate such nuisance in any other manner provided to the city by law.

5.08.140 Issuance of work permits for employees.
A. No licensee or other person in charge or control of any licensed card room shall employ or allow any person to work in such card room without such person having first obtained a card room work permit. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the employees or agents of licensees who are actually working in a card room, or for a card room licensee, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, from continuing such work; provided, that within 60 days of such date such employees and agents must submit the required application for a work permit.

B. The prospective employee or agent shall complete an application for such permit on forms provided by the police department setting forth:

1. The true name of such person, including all other names by which such person is or has been known;

2. The permanent home address of such person;

3. The name of the card room and card room licensee in and for which such person intends to work;

4. The position/positions and duties such person shall hold and perform while in the employ of licensee;

5. A statement as to whether or not any of the persons hereinabove required to be named in the application have at any time in the last 10 years been convicted of or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime or crimes of lesser and included offense listed in BMC 5.08.060(C) and, if so, the nature of the crime for which they were convicted, and the date and jurisdiction of the conviction. The period of time for marijuana offenses shall be two years;

6. Two recent photographs of such person, and a set of clearly identifiable fingerprints and photographs of the person to whom a permit is to be granted in the form and manner and by an agency approved by the chief of police. Each person shall have paid to the police department the current fee set by the city master fee schedule for receiving and processing fingerprints so taken;

7. A statement that such person understands and agrees to the inclusion, in any report to the city manager or city council, of any criminal conviction related to the application;

8. A release by such person allowing the city to investigate his or her background, including any history of criminal convictions, as specified in BMC 5.08.060(C);

9. Certification by the prospective employee that contents of the application are true under penalty of perjury.

C. Providing that the release(s) referenced in subsection (B)(8) of this section has been obtained, the chief of police, or any other person designated by the chief of police, is hereby authorized to obtain any criminal history information related to the application requirements regarding such person and conduct such other investigations deemed necessary for the purpose of determining whether the application accurately sets forth the information requested.

D. Application for a work permit shall be submitted on the first day the police department is open to accept such applications after beginning employment at the card room. A nonrefundable fee, the amount of which will be established and may be amended by city council resolution, will be charged to each prospective employee or agent to cover the costs of such application, and shall be paid to the police department and made payable to the city at the time application for a work permit is submitted. After an application is submitted along with the required fee, the police department shall provide the applicant with a receipt indicating acceptance of the application and fee. The receipt shall serve as a probationary work permit to be maintained by the employee at all times while performing their duties in the card room. Upon completion of the police department’s investigation, a determination will be made by the police chief whether a work permit will be issued. The chief of police shall base such determination on the factors enumerated in this section.

E. The chief of police shall, within 30 days, determine whether the application contains false statements knowingly made, or whether the applicant is unfit to be employed by a card room because of prior criminal convictions in the last 10 years of or involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, usury, perjury, bribery, extortion, bookmaking, fraud, narcotics or controlled substances (except for the history of convictions for marijuana offenses, which shall only be applied to those occurring in the last two years), prostitution, pimping, pandering, robbery, burglary, money laundering, the California Control of Profits of Organized Crime Act (Penal Code Section 186 et seq.), the Federal RICO provisions, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude or who, upon arrest and prosecution for any of the above crimes, is found guilty of or enters a plea of nolo contendere to a lesser and included offense. If such determination is made, the chief of police shall notify the prospective employee and licensee that the application has not been approved and the reasons therefore in writing. Such determinations shall be subject to appeal to the city council of the city in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC.

F. An employee registration and work permit shall be valid for one year. It shall be renewable at the end of each year upon filing a new application and paying a renewal registration fee, the amount of which will be established by city council resolution. If an expired registration and work permit is not renewed within 30 days of the expiration date, it shall be considered void.

G. In addition to any other restrictions provided by law, no work permit shall be issued to anyone who is disqualified from holding a state gambling license for any of the reasons specified in Business and Professions Code Section 19850.

H. Any application for a work permit shall be subject to objection by the State Division. If the Division objects to the issuance of a work permit, it shall be denied. Such a denial may be reviewed in accordance with the Gambling Control Act (Business and Professions Code Section 19801 et seq). (Ord. 07-30 § 2; Ord. 99-13).

5.08.150 Obligation to inform of certain changes concerning licenses and employees.
A. The licensee shall notify the police department in writing within 14 days of any change in the information required in an application for license issuance or renewal as provided in BMC 5.08.040, except that no such change need be reported if such change occurs within 30 days immediately preceding the expiration of such license.

B. Each person registered as a card room employee or agent shall notify the police department in writing within 10 days of any change in the information such employee or agent provided in the registration application/work permit required by BMC 5.08.140.

C. On or before the first day of January of each year, each card room license owner shall submit to the chief of police a current and complete listing of all their employees or agents who work or are affiliated with the card room.

5.08.160 Card games conducted pursuant to law.
All games conducted or operated in the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted and operated in full conformity with, and subject to, all the provisions of the laws of the state of California and the city. The agreed-upon rules of play for the games which are permitted to be played by this chapter shall be retained by the chief of police and shall be available for public inspection. All games shall be conducted and played in accordance with such rules of play.

5.08.170 Permitted games designated.
Only the games of five card draw poker, five card lowball draw poker, seven card stud poker, Texas hold’em poker, double hand poker, crazy pineapple, or Omaha, and no other game or games shall be played or permitted to be played in a licensed card room. Additional games may be played if the applicant: (1) submits the game for approval to the Department of Justice and receives approval; and (2) receives approval from the chief of police. The chief of police may condition approval of the game in order to protect public welfare and promote integrity of the game. The chief of police’s approval or denial of the game may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. All games of chance are hereby prohibited. (Ord. 07-30 § 3).

5.08.180 Identification cards.
All employees, including managers and owner/managers, of a licensed card room shall display a personal identification card at all times while on duty and physically present in the card playing area. Such identification card shall be prominently displayed on the outermost garment at approximately chest height, and shall at all times be readable and in good condition. No such employee shall be allowed to commence work or remain in the card playing area who does not display such identification card. Wilful failure to comply with this section shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of such employee’s work permit and/or the card room’s license.

5.08.190 Licensee, owner, agent or employees not to play cards – Exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, agent or employee of any card room holding a license or permit under the provisions of this chapter to play any card game or gamble in the premises in which they are employed or have a financial interest, except for off-duty personnel and proposition players, unless they wear their identification card, as required by BMC 5.08.180, while playing. Proposition players shall also wear an identification card, as required by BMC 5.08.180, while playing.

5.08.200 Use of shills by card rooms.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, agent or employee of any card room holding a license under the provisions of this chapter to hire, employ or engage a “shill” as that term is defined in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a shill within a licensed card room in the city where such person is to receive any reward, whether financial or otherwise, present or promised; or whether such reward or revenue is to be diverted to said card room, its owner, licensee, manager or any other person whomsoever with any financial interest in said card room. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any such function as described herein within a licensed card room in the city.

5.08.210 Operation of house bank or similar system.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or agent or employee of a licensee, to remove, use, spend or transfer any money which has been deposited by a customer, player, employee or other person into a licensee’s house bank. Any licensee who establishes such a house bank shall maintain adequate records which detail all bank transactions, including deposit cards, which shall be signed by the depositor and which shall designate a beneficiary or beneficiaries in the event of the death or incapacity of the depositor. Such records shall be made available for inspection by the chief of police or any other person designated by the chief of police. Each house bank established and operated pursuant to this chapter shall obtain and maintain a surety bond or bonds in a principal amount equal to the total of all deposits in such bank.

5.08.220 Communication within card rooms – When prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to communicate in any way, whether verbally or nonverbally, to any other person, whether playing a card game or not, any information concerning the cards held by any other person in the card room.

5.08.230 Exclusion or ejection of individuals from card rooms.
It shall be unlawful for any person who has engaged in, been convicted of, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any charge in last 10 years involving bookmaking, narcotics or controlled substances (except for the history of convictions for marijuana offenses, which shall only be applied to those occurring in the last two years), illegal gambling activities, pimping, prostitution, a crime of moral turpitude, extortion, robbery, burglary, money laundering, violations of the California Control of Profits of Organized Crime Act (Penal Code Section 186 et seq.), the Street Terrorism Enforcement and Prevention Act (Penal Code Section 186.20 et seq.), or Federal RICO provisions; or who is under the age of 21 years; or who, in the opinion of a licensee or its agents or employees, is obviously under the influence of any intoxicating beverage, narcotic or drug to enter into or remain upon the premises of any card room, or to participate in the playing of any card game at any card table.

A. A licensee, owner, agent or employee of such card room or any law enforcement officer of the city may exclude or eject from any card room any person prohibited by the terms of this section from being on the premises of a card room. The chief of police may, but is not required to, notify a licensee, owner, agent or employee of a card room of the identity of a person subject to exclusion. Any such notification shall be in writing to the licensee, owner or employee of such card room of the identity of any person subject to exclusion or ejection pursuant to this section.

B. Any person who, pursuant to this section, is excluded or ejected from a card room may apply to the chief of police for a hearing on the question of whether this section is applicable to such person. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the hearing request, or at such other times as the applicant and chief of police may agree.

C. If, upon the hearing, the chief of police determines that the exclusion or ejection should not apply to the applicant, all card rooms licensed by the city shall be notified in writing of such determination. If the determination is that the exclusion or ejection was proper, the chief of police shall inform the applicant and card room of that determination in writing. Such determination shall be subject to appeal to the city council of the city in accordance with the appeal procedures set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC.

D. No card room which excludes any individual based upon this chapter shall be subject to civil liability if such ejection or exclusion was based upon a reasonable and good faith belief that this chapter applied to the individual in question. (Ord. 07-30 § 4; Ord. 99-13).

5.08.240 Licensee responsible for violations.
The licensee of any card room shall be responsible for all violations of the laws of the state of California or of the ordinances and regulations of the city which he or she knowingly or recklessly or without all due care permits to occur within said card room, whether or not said violations occur within his or her presence.

5.08.250 Violation of state and city laws.
No licensee, agent or employee of any card room licensed pursuant to this chapter shall knowingly engage in or knowingly permit any other person on such premises to engage in any act in violation of the laws of the state of California or of the ordinances and regulations of the city.

5.08.260 Gamblers Anonymous information.
All card rooms shall make available and post in a visible location on the premises the telephone number of Gamblers Anonymous.

5.08.270 Posting operating regulations.
A set of operating regulations in a form approved by the chief of police and containing the provisions of BMC 5.08.110 shall be prominently posted in at least one conspicuous location within every card room, as determined by the chief of police.

5.08.280 Inspection of card rooms for enforcement.
All premises operating pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be inspected for violations of this chapter at any time during normal business hours by the chief of police of the city or his duly authorized representative. Any evidence of any violation of the terms of this chapter may be seized without warrant; provided, that such evidence shall be specifically identified and a receipt therefor shall be given to the owner of such evidence and to the licensee of such premises or his or her agent.

5.08.290 Formal bookkeeping system.
All card room owners shall maintain a formal bookkeeping system that conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. Receipts from each operating card table shall be collected not less often than once every 24 hours. Such receipts shall be recorded on a voucher by a manager, verified by the table operator and signed by both such employees. These vouchers shall be time and date stamped and retained with the card room’s other financial records.

5.08.300 Notice.
Any written notice required to be given by this chapter shall be served on the applicant, licensee or permittee at the address stated on the application, license or permit, as the case may be, either personally or by first class mail and certified mail. Notice shall be deemed given upon receipt of notice when personally served or two days after deposit in the U.S. mail. (Ord. 99-13; Ord. 97-8; Ord. 72-6 § 1, 1972; prior code § 5-232)2

1
Prior legislation: Prior code §§  5-201 – 5-233.


2
    For statutory provisions on gaming generally, see Penal Code § 330 et seq.


Chapter 5.12
BINGO GAMES1
Sections:

5.12.010    Definitions.

5.12.020    Who may conduct.

5.12.030    Permit – Required.

5.12.040    Permit – Fee.

5.12.050    Location.

5.12.060    Participants.

5.12.070    Operation.

5.12.080    Prizes.

5.12.090    Use of funds.

5.12.100    Receiving profit declared misdemeanor.

5.12.110    Enforcement.

5.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Bingo” means a game of chance operated for a fee in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

B. “Eligible organizations” means an organization which is exempt from payment of Bank and Corporation Tax under California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 23701(a), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(i), or a mobile home park association or a senior citizens organization. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-901).

5.12.020 Who may conduct.
An eligible organization may conduct bingo games in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-902).

5.12.030 Permit – Required.
Before conducting a bingo game an eligible organization shall obtain a permit from the chief of police. Application shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief of police and shall include:

A. Evidence of exemption under Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 23701(a), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) or 23701(i);

B. Evidence, in the alternative to subsection (A) of this section, that the applicant is a mobile home park association or a senior citizens organization;

C. Date or periodic description of days when games will be held;

D. Time when games will be held;

E. Place where games will be held;

F. Number and value of prizes to be offered;

G. Other information prescribed on the form by the chief of police. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-903).

5.12.040 Permit – Fee.
The permit fee shall be established by resolution of the city council. If an application fee is denied, one-half of any fee paid shall be refunded. (Ord. 17-10 § 2; Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-904).

5.12.050 Location.
The bingo game must be held on property owned or leased by the eligible organization and used by it as an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization exists. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-905).

5.12.060 Participants.
A. A bingo game must be open to the public and not limited to members of the authorized organization.

B. It is unlawful for a minor to participate in a bingo game.

C. It is unlawful for a person to participate in a bingo game unless he is physically present at the game. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-906).

5.12.070 Operation.
A. Only a member of the eligible organization may operate the bingo game. No member may receive a profit, wage or salary from the bingo game. Only the eligible organization shall operate the bingo game or participate in the promotion, supervision or other phase of the game.

B. No individual, corporation, partnership or legal entity other than the eligible organization may have a financial interest in the conduct of the bingo game.

C. All net proceeds from bingo games shall be used for charitable purposes only. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-907).

5.12.080 Prizes.
The total value of prizes awarded at each bingo session shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1979; prior code § 12-908).

5.12.090 Use of funds.
A. The money derived from the bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with another fund or account.

B. The proceeds from a bingo game shall be used for charitable purposes except as follows:

1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

2. A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 10 percent of the proceeds after the deduction for prizes, or $500.00 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-909).

5.12.100 Receiving profit declared misdemeanor.
It is a misdemeanor for a person to receive a profit, wage or salary from the operation of a bingo game. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-910).

5.12.110 Enforcement.
A. Violation of this chapter, except BMC 5.12.100, is an infraction. The first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00. The second violation in the same year is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. The third and subsequent violation in the same year is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00.

B. The city may bring an action to enjoin violation of this chapter. (Ord. 77-19 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-911).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing bingo games for charity, see Penal Code § 326.5.


Chapter 5.16
CLOSING OF AMUSEMENT PLACES
Sections:

5.16.010  Hours designated.

5.16.020  Repealed.

5.16.010 Hours designated.
All places of amusement in the city shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 114-C M.C. § 1, 1947; Ord. 114-B M.C. § 1, 1945; Ord. 114 M.C. § 1, 1944).

5.16.020 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 114 M.C. § 2, 1944).

Chapter 5.20
CONTROLLED SALES
Sections:

5.20.010  Controlled sale defined.

5.20.020  Exceptions.

5.20.030  Permit – Required.

5.20.040  Permit – Application – Fee.

5.20.050  Permit – Application – Contents.

5.20.060  Permit – Application – Investigation.

5.20.070  Permit – Issuance.

5.20.080  Permit – Term – Conditions.

5.20.090  Permit – Revocation.

5.20.100  Operating conditions.

5.20.110  Unlawful acts.

5.20.120  Repealed.

5.20.010 Controlled sale defined.
In this chapter, "controlled sale" means sale of goods or merchandise of any kind which is held out or represented to be an insurance sale, bankrupt sale, liquidation sale, insolvent sale, a removal or closing-out sale, or a sale of damaged goods or merchandise of any kind or sale of goods or merchandise from the stock of a bankrupt receiver, trustee or insurance company. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-301).

5.20.020 Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to a sale conducted by a public officer under a statute authorizing him to conduct the sale or any other person acting under the order or authority of a court. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-312).

5.20.030 Permit – Required.
No person may advertise a controlled sale or hold a controlled sale without a permit from the city to do so. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-302).

5.20.040 Permit – Application – Fee.
A person desiring to advertise or conduct a controlled sale shall apply to the city manager for a permit to do so. At the time of filing an application, the applicant shall pay a fee based upon the following schedule:

A. One hundred dollars if the applicant has been in business for six months or less;

B. Twenty-five dollars if the applicant has been in business for more than six months but less than two years;

C. Five dollars if the applicant has been in business for two years or more. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-303).

5.20.050 Permit – Application – Contents.
A person desiring a permit shall file an application on a form prescribed by the city manager. In addition to other information, the application shall contain:

A. All facts concerning the sale, including an inventory of the goods or merchandise to be sold;

B. A statement of the names of persons from whom the goods and merchandise were obtained, together with the date of delivery to the applicant and other details necessary to identify the goods and merchandise to be sold;

C. The duration of the sale. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-304).

5.20.060 Permit – Application – Investigation.
When a person files an application for a permit to advertise and hold a controlled sale, the city manager may refer it for investigation and report. In conducting the investigation, the city may examine the business, books, records and accounts of the applicant. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-306).

5.20.070 Permit – Issuance.
The city manager may issue the permit if he finds that:

A. The proposed controlled sale is of the character reported by the applicant;

B. The applicant is of good moral character;

C. The applicant and each of the applicant’s officers, directors, or firm members have not violated this chapter;

D. The advertising and the conducting of the sale will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-307).

5.20.080 Permit – Term – Conditions.
A. The permit is valid only for the sale of goods or merchandise described in the application and for the location and duration specified in the permit.

B. The applicant may not add goods or merchandise to his inventory after filing the application. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-308).

5.20.090 Permit – Revocation.
The city manager may revoke a permit without notice if he finds that the applicant has made a false statement in his application or has violated any term or condition of the permit or any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-310).

5.20.100 Operating conditions.
No person may advertise or conduct a controlled sale for a period longer than 30 days; however, during the period of the controlled sale, the applicant may request an extension of the period of the controlled sale. The applicant requesting an extension of the period shall file a statement of the inventory remaining. If the city manager finds that all of the goods or merchandise described in the original application have not been sold, the city manager may extend the period of sale for an additional 30 days upon payment of an additional fee equal to one-half of the original application fee. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-305).

5.20.110 Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful for a person holding a permit to:

A. Remove the goods or merchandise described in an application from the place of sale;

B. Order or add additional goods or merchandise not described in the original application. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-309).

5.20.120 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 3, 1972; prior code § 5-311).

Chapter 5.24
JEWELRY AUCTIONS
Sections:

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    Applicability.

5.24.030    Permit – Required.

5.24.040    Permit – Application – Fee – Investigation.

5.24.050    Bond required.

5.24.060    Permit – Revocation.

5.24.070    Appeal.

5.24.080    Labeling requirements.

5.24.090    Inventory requirements.

5.24.100    False statements or misrepresentations prohibited.

5.24.110    False bidding prohibited.

5.24.120    Certain noises, searchlights prohibited.

5.24.130    Hours designated.

5.24.140    Violation.

5.24.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning hereinafter specified, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:

A. “Auction,” “public auction” and “auction sale” means and includes a sale or offering for sale of any jewelry as defined in this section to the highest bidder in any building, or in or on any street or alley, private premises, or in any other place, where any and all persons who choose are permitted to attend and offer bids.

B. “Jewelry” means and includes platinum, gold, silver, plated ware, precious stones, semi-precious stones, watches, clocks and other articles of jewelry. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 1, 1952).

5.24.020 Applicability.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to any public officer or officer of any court, who in pursuance of his duty as such officer, shall conduct within the city an auction sale pursuant to any law of the state or of the United States of America, or the lawful order of any court, nor to the sale or offering for sale of unredeemed pledges or chattels in the manner provided by law, by pawnbrokers, loan companies or others, the sale or offering for sale for the purpose of satisfying a lien, or any other sale or offering for sale at auction where the same is specifically authorized or provided by law. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 13, 1952).

5.24.030 Permit – Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale or advertise for sale at public auction in the city any jewelry as defined in this chapter; provided, however, that any person, firm or corporation who has been engaged in the business of selling jewelry at retail in the city continuously for a period of not less than one year may obtain a permit as provided in this chapter to conduct a public auction of such articles for the purpose of disposing of his stock on hand and of closing out his business. Any such person, firm or corporation so obtaining such permit shall be subject to all the regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 2, 1952).

5.24.040 Permit – Application – Fee – Investigation.
A. The applicant for a permit to conduct a public auction of jewelry shall make application therefor not less than 30 days previous to the intended auction to the license collector of the city, and at the time of such application shall pay a minimum filing fee of $25.00; provided, that if the net inventory exceeds the sum of $5,000, then in that event, the fee shall be $25.00 plus $5.00 for each $1,000 or fraction thereof of net inventory exceeding $5,000. Such application shall be in writing on forms provided by the license collector and under oath, showing all the facts in regard to the closing out of applicant’s business, and showing all the facts in regard to conducting the sale at public auction and the place of conducting the same, including an inventory of the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at said proposed sale, the quality, quantity and grade of each item, the wholesale value thereof, and a statement of the names of the persons from whom the jewelry to be sold were obtained, the date of the delivery of such jewelry to the person applying for the permit, and the place from which such jewelry was last taken and all details necessary to fully identify the jewelry, together with such other information as may be required by the license collector. Such application shall specify the proposed period of time over which such proposed sales at public auction shall continue, which period shall not exceed 30 days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded; provided, that if it is made to appear upon sworn application to the license collector at any time during said period of 30 days, that all the jewelry described and inventoried in the original application has not been sold, accompanied by a statement or inventory of what remains thereof, a permit supplemental to that provided for may be issued by the license collector upon the same terms and conditions as the original permit, granting authority to continue such sale for a further period of 30 days.

B. Upon receipt of such application the license collector shall refer the same to the chief of police for investigation and report.

C. After receipt of the report of the chief of police, if the license collector is satisfied that applicant and the person who is to conduct the proposed auction sale are of good moral character, that the jewelry proposed to be sold at public auction is a bona fide part of applicant’s stock in trade and not secured, purchased or brought into his place of business for or in anticipation of the proposed sale, that neither applicant nor any of its officers, directors or members have violated this chapter, and that the advertising and conducting of such sale will not be injurious to the peace, health, safety or welfare of the people of the city, he may issue a revocable permit to the person, firm or corporation applying for the same to advertise and conduct a sale at public auction, upon the applicant’s filing the bond provided for in this chapter.

D. The making of any abnormal purchase by the applicant within a period of six months prior to the application for a permit under this chapter shall prima facie be deemed made for the purpose of disposing of the same at such proposed public auction and shall be just cause for denial of the permit.

E. The license collector in considering the application and the attending facts shall exercise a reasonable and sound discretion in granting or denying the permit applied for. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 3, 1952).

5.24.050 Bond required.
A. No permit shall be granted until the applicant has filed with the license collector a surety bond in the sum of $2,500, conditioned for the faithful performance of all the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state pertaining to auctions and closing-out sales, and shall also indemnify any purchaser at a public auction who suffers any loss by reason of any misrepresentation or deception made or practiced by applicant, his agents, servants or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever printed or circulated by the principal, his agents, servants or employees.

B. Such bond shall contain the further provisions that it insures to the benefits of any and all persons who may be damaged by reason of any failure on the part of the person or persons named therein to comply with the provisions of said bond, and that any person or persons so damaged may maintain an action thereon against the person or persons named in said bond, and the surety or sureties upon said bond, and that said bond may be sued and recovered upon in several actions until the whole penalty is exhausted. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 4, 1952).

5.24.060 Permit – Revocation.
Whenever the license collector finds that the holder of a permit hereunder has violated any of the conditions or provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or law pertaining to his operations, or that the permit was obtained by misrepresentations, that he has failed to maintain the bond required by this chapter, or that the auction is being conducted in a manner which will be injurious to the peace, health, safety or welfare of the people of the city, he may revoke the permit upon giving the holder thereof 48 hours’ previous notice in writing by personal service upon him or upon the auctioneer conducting said auction, or by mail addressed to him at his place of business in the city or the place where said auction is being conducted as shown on his application. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct an auction sale as herein defined after his permit to do so has been revoked. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 5, 1952).

5.24.070 Appeal.
Any applicant or applicants dissatisfied with the action of the license collector not to grant a permit or for the revocation of a permit may appeal to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. Upon such hearing the city council may sustain, suspend or overrule the decision of the license collector and its decision shall be final and conclusive. Pending the hearing before the council, the decision of the license collector shall remain in full force and effect and any reversal thereof by the city council shall not be retroactive but shall take effect as of the date of the council’s decision. (Ord. 07-31 § 1; Ord. 761 M.C. § 6, 1952).

5.24.080 Labeling requirements.
It is unlawful for the holder of a permit hereunder or for his agents, servants or employees to sell or offer for sale at auction any jewelry to which there is not attached a card or label containing a true and correct statement plainly written or printed in the English language specifying the kind and quality of metal of which such article is made or composed, or the percentage or karat or purity of such metals. If such articles are plated or overlain, then such tag or label shall contain a true statement of the kind of plate. When precious stones are sold or offered for sale at auction, as such or as part of an article of jewelry, such statement shall set forth the true name of said stones. When imitations of precious or semiprecious stones are offered for sale or sold at auction as such or as part of an article of jewelry, said imitations shall be described or defined as synthetic or imitations of such stones as they purport to represent. When watches or clocks are sold or offered for sale at public auction the true names of the manufacturers shall be stated in writing and no parts of the movements or mechanism thereof shall be substituted or contain false or misleading names or trademarks; neither shall secondhand or old movements be offered for sale in new cases without a true statement to that effect. Used and rebuilt watches shall be so indicated. Such card, tag or label shall remain securely attached to any such article of merchandise, shall be delivered to the purchaser as a true and correct description and representation of the article sold and shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to defraud in case such written statement is not a true and correct description or representation of such article sold. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 7, 1952).

5.24.090 Inventory requirements.
No article of jewelry shall be sold or offered for sale or advertised for sale at public auction which is an addition to the stock on hand of the holder of a permit hereunder or which is not included in the inventory filed with the license collector with the application for a permit hereunder. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 8, 1952).

5.24.100 False statements or misrepresentations prohibited.
It is unlawful for any permittee, his agents, servants, or employees to make any statements which are false in any particular, or which have a tendency to mislead, or to make any misrepresentations whatsoever with reference to any article of jewelry sold or offered for sale at public auction. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 9, 1952).

5.24.110 False bidding prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any auctioneer or for any person, firm or corporation conducting a sale of jewelry at public auction to use any person as a false bidder for the purpose of increasing the price of any article offered for sale at such auction.

B. It is unlawful for any person to make or offer a false bid or any other than a bona fide bid at a public auction or to act as a by-bidder or what is commonly known as a “capper,” “booster” or “shiller” at any auction, or falsely to pretend to buy any jewelry at any auction sale. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 10, 1952).

5.24.120 Certain noises, searchlights prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any auctioneer, person, firm or corporation conducting an auction sale, or its agents, servants or employees to ring a bell or cause or permit the same to be rung in or about the front of the premises, or in any place on or near said premises where the same may be heard on the public street or sidewalk in front of said premises where there is conducted an auction sale, before, after or during such sale for the purpose of attracting the public to such auction sale.

B. It is unlawful for any auctioneer, person, firm or any corporation conducting an auction sale, or its agents, servants or employees, or to use a searchlight or similar light to solicit or permit the soliciting by music, singing or loud or unusual noises to be made or done for the purpose of attracting the public to an auction sale. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 11, 1952).

5.24.130 Hours designated.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or allow, permit or suffer to be conducted, any auction sale between the hours of 6:00 p.m. on any day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 761 M.C. § 12, 1952).

5.24.140 Violation.
Each separate sale or offering for sale of jewelry at auction in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 03-9 § 9; Ord. 761 M.C. § 16, 1952).

Chapter 5.28
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS1
Sections:

5.28.010    Findings – Purpose.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.030    Certain activity prohibited.

5.28.040    Exceptions.

5.28.050    Registration and permit requirements.

5.28.060    Application investigation.

5.28.070    Permit – Denial – Issuance.

5.28.080    Permit – Denial – Appeal.

5.28.090    Permit – Term – Renewal.

5.28.100    Permit – Revocation – Grounds.

5.28.110    Permit – Revocation – Appeal.

5.28.120    Identification requirements.

5.28.130    Effect on conflicting provisions.

5.28.010 Findings – Purpose.
The city council finds that the unregulated practice of solicitation, canvassing, and peddling can be a nuisance in that:

A. If activity is carried on at night it may cause annoyance to residents and intrude into their privacy;

B. The methods used by some of those engaged in the activity can cause apprehension in people solicited;

C. The activity is one which can be used as a front or cover for gaining access to premises for the purpose of engaging in criminal activity;

D. The nature of the activity permits those engaged in it to leave the city before they become widely known and enables them to avoid complying with the law; and

E. Persons engaged in this activity may be nonresidents and with no fixed or permanent place of business and the regulation of them through the licensing for business does not give the city sufficient control to correct the abuses in this activity.

Based on these findings, the council concludes that the unregulated and uncontrolled activity of solicitation, canvassing, and peddling affects the welfare of the city and is a public nuisance. It is the purpose of this chapter to define the activity sought to be regulated; to impose upon those seeking to engage in it conditions and requirements which will permit the city to protect the welfare of its citizens, and to prevent intrusion into their privacy; and to regulate the activity to prevent abuses of it. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-401).

5.28.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Charitable solicitation” means the act of going from place to place for any reason in connection with a nonprofit organization as defined by Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. The term does not include solicitation carried on for a bona fide political or religious purpose.

B. “Peddler” means one who engages in the act of peddling.

C. “Peddling” is the act of going from place to place, carrying or transporting goods of any kind and offering them for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers. “Peddling” includes hawking.

D. “Solicitation” or “canvassing” means the act of going from place to place in the city for the purpose of displaying or taking orders for the sale of goods for future delivery, or for services to be furnished.

E. “Solicitor” or “canvasser” means a person who engages in the conduct of solicitation or canvassing.

F. “Chief of police” refers to the chief of the Benicia police department or his or her authorized representative. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-402).

5.28.030 Certain activity prohibited.
No person may solicit, canvass, or peddle in the city:

A. Without a registration permit;

B. Before the hour of 9:00 a.m. PST of any day and after the hour of 6:00 p.m. PST or 8:00 p.m. PDT;

C. Upon the premises posted with a sign stating in substance that no solicitors, peddlers, canvassers, or littering are permitted. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-415. Formerly 5.28.140).

5.28.040 Exceptions.
BMC 5.28.030(A) does not apply to a person who:

A. Solicits orders for products sold on an established route such as ice, bakery, water, or dairy products route;

B. Solicits orders from businesses on behalf of a wholesaler, jobber or manufacturer;

C. Solicits for a bona fide political or religious purpose;

D. Participates as a vendor in farmer’s markets/street or community fairs and is duly licensed in accordance with the provisions of BMC 5.06.060(B) or (C);

E. Is under 15 years of age;

F. Distributes handbills, pamphlets, circulars, or other informational materials door-to-door within the city, including commercial information disseminated in a way that does not involve face-to-face solicitation or peddling; or

G. Does charitable solicitation. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 96-4 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-413).

5.28.050 Registration and permit requirements.
A. Each person who desires to solicit, canvass or peddle in the city shall file with the chief of police a sworn registration application on a form furnished by the chief of police. The applicant shall give the following information:

1. Name and description;

2. Permanent home address and local address;

3. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the relationship;

4. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;

5. The length of time for which the permit is sought;

6. Three photographs and a letter of reference from each of three reliable citizens attesting to the applicant’s good character sufficient to enable an investigator to evaluate his character and business responsibility;

7. Fingerprints of the applicant;

8. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime or violation of a local agency ordinance, and the nature of the offense and penalty imposed for it.

B. If the chief of police knows the applicant sufficiently to be able to evaluate the applicant’s character and responsibility without the information from subsections (A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section, the chief of police need not require the applicant to furnish that information.

C. A one-time background security check fee that covers the cost of a Department of Justice records review, a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) records review, and fingerprinting process shall be charged to the applicant. The amount of this fee shall be established, and may be adjusted as necessary, by resolution of the city council of the city of Benicia. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 96-4 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-404).

5.28.060 Application investigation.
Upon receipt of an application, the chief of police shall make an investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-405).

5.28.070 Permit – Denial – Issuance.
A. The chief of police may deny an applicant a permit for soliciting, canvassing, or peddling on one or more of the following grounds:

1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for registration permit;

2. Violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city;

3. Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor involving drugs, theft, trespassing, or of a violent nature;

4. Conducting the business of soliciting, canvassing or peddling in any other city in an unlawful manner or in a manner which is a breach of the peace or a nuisance or is a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or

5. Unsatisfactory business responsibility or unsatisfactory character of applicant.

The chief of police shall notify the applicant of his decision in writing within 15 days after the application is filed. The decision is final 10 days from the date that notice of denial is given.

B. If the chief of police finds that the applicant’s character or business responsibility, or both, is satisfactory, he or she shall approve the registration permit and recommend the issuance of a business license. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-406. Formerly 5.28.090).

5.28.080 Permit – Denial – Appeal.
A person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police may appeal the decision in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 07-32 § 1; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-407. Formerly 5.28.100).

5.28.090 Permit – Term – Renewal.
A. A registration permit authorizes the holder to engage in solicitation, canvassing, or peddling described in the application for a period of not more than one year. The chief of police may specify a shorter effective period.

B. A permit holder may renew the permit by filing an application for renewal upon a form prescribed by the chief of police. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-410. Formerly 5.28.080).

5.28.100 Permit – Revocation – Grounds.
A. The chief of police may revoke the registration permit of a solicitor, canvasser, or peddler on one or more of the following grounds:

1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of solicitation, canvassing or peddling;

2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for registration permit;

3. Violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city;

4. Conviction of a crime or misdemeanor involving drugs, theft, trespassing, or of a violent nature; or

5. Conducting the business of soliciting, canvassing or peddling in an unlawful manner or in a manner which is a breach of the peace or a nuisance or is a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

B. The revocation takes effect three days after the chief of police mails notice of revocation to the applicant. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-411. Formerly 5.28.110).

5.28.110 Permit – Revocation – Appeal.
A person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in revoking a registered permit may appeal the action in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. During the appeal, the permit is suspended and the solicitor or peddler may not conduct his or her business in the city. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 07-32 § 1; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-407. Formerly 5.28.100).

5.28.120 Identification requirements.
Each solicitor, canvasser and peddler shall wear an identification card issued by the chief of police while engaged in solicitation, canvassing or peddling. The card shall be affixed to the clothing so that it is easily visible. In addition, each solicitor, canvasser, or peddler shall carry the permit, and shall exhibit it at the request of any citizen. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-409. Formerly 5.28.130).

5.28.130 Effect on conflicting provisions.
This chapter does not repeal, amend or modify the provisions of this code relating to business licenses. This chapter is a regulatory chapter and is not intended as a revenue raising measure. To the extent that Chapters 5.04 and 5.06 BMC conflict with or duplicate this chapter, Chapters 5.04 and 5.06 BMC hold controlling authority. (Ord. 13-12 § 1, 2013; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 4, 1972; prior code § 5-414. Formerly 5.28.150).

1
    Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 5-403 and 5-408, amendments during 1980 codification.


Chapter 5.32
TAXICABS1
Sections:

5.32.010    Definitions.

5.32.020    Exceptions.

5.32.030    Carrier/owner permit – Required.

5.32.040    Carrier/owner permit application.

5.32.050    Carrier/owner permit – Fee.

5.32.060    Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Notice.

5.32.070    Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Council determination.

5.32.080    Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Matters for consideration.

5.32.090    Carrier/owner permit – Terms and conditions of issuance.

5.32.100    Carrier/owner permit – Suspension or revocation – Grounds.

5.32.110    Carrier/owner permit – Suspension or revocation – Hearing.

5.32.120    Driver’s permit – Required.

5.32.130    Driver’s permit – Application.

5.32.140    Driver’s permit – Fee.

5.32.150    Driver’s permit – State motor vehicle operator’s permit required.

5.32.160    Driver’s permit – Applicant investigation.

5.32.170    Driver – Permit – Approval or rejection by city manager.

5.32.180    Driver’s permit – Issuance – Term.

5.32.190    Driver’s permit – Display.

5.32.200    Driver’s permit – Suspension and revocation.

5.32.210    Compliance with applicable laws required.

5.32.220    Driver’s duties and responsibilities.

5.32.230    Information to be displayed.

5.32.240    Rate schedule to be filed with the city.

5.32.250    Fare receipts to be given.

5.32.260    Daily manifests to be kept.

5.32.270    Recordkeeping.

5.32.280    Service business requirements.

5.32.290    Liability insurance required.

5.32.300    Identification markings.

5.32.310    Cleanliness required.

5.32.320    Open stands – Establishment.

5.32.330    Open stands – Use.

5.32.370    Nonliability of city.

5.32.380    Inspection – Certification.

5.32.390    Inspections – Periodic.

5.32.400    Charging of unlawful rates prohibited.

5.32.410    Refusal to pay fare prohibited.

5.32.420    Carrying of additional passengers prohibited when.

5.32.430    Exceeding seating capacity of vehicles prohibited.

5.32.440    Refusal to carry passengers prohibited.

5.32.010 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Carrier/owner” means a person engaged in operating a taxicab business, but does not include one employed as a driver.

B. “Compensation” means money, thing of value, payment, or other consideration paid in exchange for transportation.

C. “Taxicab” means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, operated at rates per mile or portion thereof, or flat rates, or for wait time, or for any combination thereof, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the city, and not over a fixed route, and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or of such persons hiring the same.

D. “Driver” means every person driving any taxicab, either as agent, employee, or otherwise under the direction of the carrier/owner, or as carrier/owner, as herein defined. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-501).

5.32.020 Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to:

A. A vehicle transporting a passenger from a point outside to a point inside the city, or a vehicle going to a point outside the city, which does not carry a passenger from the city;

B. A vehicle operated under authority of the State Public Utilities Commission;

C. A vehicle operated under what is commonly referred to as a “share the ride” arrangement, where a person going from his place of residence to his place of business, or vice versa, transports another person living and working in the same general vicinity for a payment to cover the actual or approximate cost of operating the vehicle;

D. A vehicle operated as an ambulance;

E. A vehicle rented or leased for self operation under a plan commonly known as “u-drive,” which is not used for transporting other persons for compensation. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-502).

5.32.030 Carrier/owner permit – Required.
It is unlawful to operate a taxicab in the city unless the carrier/owner shall apply for and obtain a license to do so, which license shall be applied for, granted and be in effect, all in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No license issued hereunder shall be transferable. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S., 1972; prior code § 5-511).

5.32.040 Carrier/owner permit application.
A person who desires to operate as a carrier/owner shall file an application with the city. The application shall include the following information:

A. The name and address of the applicant and all persons, firms, or corporations directly interested in the license;

B. The type of business organization;

C. The number of vehicles to be operated;

D. A description of every vehicle which the applicant proposes to use as a taxicab, giving:

1. Trade name, year and model;

2. Motor and serial number;

3. State license number;

4. Seating capacity;

5. Body style; and

6. Company vehicle I.D. number;

E. The proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged for carrying passengers;

F. The distinctive color scheme, name of the taxicab company, monogram, or insignia to be used on the vehicle;

G. The make and type of taximeter, if any, to be used in each taxicab;

H. The past experience of the applicant;

I. A statement showing whether or not a permit has been revoked, and if so, the circumstances of the revocation;

J. Such further information as the city prescribes. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-512).

5.32.050 Carrier/owner permit – Fee.
The application fee for a carrier/owner’s permit as required under BMC 5.32.030 shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; prior code § 5-571).

5.32.060 Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Notice.
Upon the filing of an application, the city manager shall set a time for a public hearing on the application. The city manager shall give notice of the hearing at least 10 days before the date of the hearing by mailing notice of the hearing to all other applicants or permit holders, and publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-513).

5.32.070 Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Council determination.
A. At the time set for the hearing of the application, the council may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter.

B. The council shall determine whether the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance or the denial of the permit. If the council finds that taxicab service is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit and able to perform the service, then the council shall by resolution issue a carrier/owner’s permit. The resolution permit shall state the name and address of the carrier/owner, the number of vehicles authorized and the date of issuance of the permit. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-514).

5.32.080 Carrier/owner permit – Hearing – Matters for consideration.
In making the findings on the question of whether the public convenience and necessity require the issuance of a permit, the council shall consider:

A. The number of taxicabs already in operation;

B. Whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need;

C. The effect of increased service on local traffic; and

D. The character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-515).

5.32.090 Carrier/owner permit – Terms and conditions of issuance.
The council may impose conditions on the exercise of the carrier/owner permit if it finds that the interests of the public require it. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-516).

5.32.100 Carrier/owner permit – Suspension or revocation – Grounds.
The city may revoke or suspend the permit issued to a carrier/owner if the carrier/owner:

A. Violates this chapter;

B. Discontinues operation for more than 48 hours;

C. Violates any ordinance of the city or the laws of the United States or the state, which reflects unfavorably on the carrier/owner’s fitness to offer public transportation. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-517).

5.32.110 Carrier/owner permit – Suspension or revocation – Hearing.
Before the city revokes or suspends the permit of a carrier/owner, the city shall give the carrier/owner notice of the proposed action, and the carrier/owner has the right to be heard upon the matter before the city council. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-518).

5.32.120 Driver’s permit – Required.
No person may drive a taxicab without a valid driver’s permit. A valid driver’s permit is a permit either (1) issued by the city of Benicia in accordance with this chapter; or (2) issued by the city of Vallejo and the driver is employed by a carrier/owner that has a carrier/owner permit authorized by the city of Benicia. The city manager may require a driver with a Vallejo driver’s permit to obtain a city of Benicia driver’s permit if the city manager is unable to rely upon the Vallejo permitting process or if the city of Vallejo changes its requirements for driver’s permits. (Ord. 08-01 § 1; Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-521).

5.32.130 Driver’s permit – Application.
A person other than the carrier/owner set forth in the carrier/owner permit who desires to drive a taxicab shall file an application with the city on a form prescribed by it. The application shall be under oath and shall contain the following information:

A. The names and addresses of two persons who have known the applicant for a period of two years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant;

B. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

C. Such other information as the city prescribes. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician in Solano County or Contra Costa County certifying that in his opinion the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-522; amended during 1980 codification).

5.32.140 Driver’s permit – Fee.
The application fee for a driver’s permit as required by BMC 5.32.120 shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-572).

5.32.150 Driver’s permit – State motor vehicle operator’s permit required.
Before an application is approved by the city, the applicant shall show that he has a current motor vehicle operator’s permit issued by the state. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-523).

5.32.160 Driver’s permit – Applicant investigation.
The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit and attach a report of the investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant to the application for the consideration of the police chief. Within five business days of receipt of a driver application by the police department, the police department may issue a temporary driver’s permit valid for 30 days. The police department may extend such temporary driver’s permit for an additional 30 days for a total of 60 days. If, at the end of the 60-day period, the investigation of the background of the applicant is still pending issuance of a permanent driver’s permit, the police chief may extend the temporary driver’s permit an additional 30 days for a total of 90 days. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-524).

5.32.170 Driver – Permit – Approval or rejection by city manager.
The city manager shall consider the application and the reports and shall approve or reject the application. If the city manager rejects the application, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the city manager to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-525).

5.32.180 Driver’s permit – Issuance – Term.
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver’s permit the city manager shall issue a permit to the applicant. The license shall contain the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. This permit is valid for four years unless revoked. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-526).

5.32.190 Driver’s permit – Display.
Each driver licensed under this chapter shall post his driver’s permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-527).

5.32.200 Driver’s permit – Suspension and revocation.
The city manager may suspend a driver’s permit issued under this chapter for a driver’s failing or refusing to comply with this chapter. The suspension shall last for a period of not more than five days. The city manager may revoke a driver’s license for failure to comply with this chapter; however, the city manager may not revoke a license unless the driver is given notice and an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-528).

5.32.210 Compliance with applicable laws required.
Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. The city manager may revoke a license for failure to do so. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-529).

5.32.220 Driver’s duties and responsibilities.
Each driver shall:

A. Take the most direct route possible which carries the passenger to his destination safely and expeditiously;

B. Give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare when requested to do so;

C. Accept only those passengers which will not exceed the rated seating capacity of the vehicle;

D. Report to the police department all property left in the taxicab;

E. Obey all orders and instructions of any peace officers. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-551).

5.32.230 Information to be displayed.
Each taxicab shall carry at all times and display in a manner so that it is visible to all passengers the following information:

A. The driver’s permit;

B. A card stating the authorized rates of fare;

C. Seating capacity of the vehicle. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-535).

5.32.240 Rate schedule to be filed with the city.
Each carrier/owner shall file with the city a statement setting forth tariffs or schedules of fares which the carrier/owner will charge for local service. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-541).

5.32.250 Fare receipts to be given.
The driver of the taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, give a receipt for the amount charged. The receipt shall show the name of the carrier/owner of the firm, vehicle license number, driver’s name, amount of meter reading (if any) or charges, and date of the transaction. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-542).

5.32.260 Daily manifests to be kept.
Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. The carrier/owner shall preserve all drivers’ manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year subsequent to the current calendar year. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-553).

5.32.270 Recordkeeping.
A. Every carrier/owner shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating information as may be required by the city manager. Such information shall be made readily accessible for examination by the city manager.

B. All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any vehicles or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $500.00 shall be reported within 24 hours, from the time of occurrence, to the police department.

C. Each carrier/owner shall file with the city copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda, or other writings relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel, theater, hall, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-554).

5.32.280 Service business requirements.
Every carrier/owner shall maintain a central place of business and keep it open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. The carrier/owner shall answer all calls received for service inside the city as soon as it can do so, and if service cannot be given within a reasonable time the carrier/owner shall notify the prospective passenger how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason for delay. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-555).

5.32.290 Liability insurance required.
Each carrier/owner shall maintain insurance in a form approved by the city on each taxicab, insuring the carrier/owner and the driver against liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of a person as a result of the ownership, operation or use of the vehicle. The minimum general liability limit for each vehicle is $1,000,000. The combined single limit for auto liability that includes bodily injury to one or more persons is $1,000,000. The minimum liability for property damage is $100,000. The city may require additional insurance or may increase the limits. The carrier/owner shall file copies of the insurance certificate naming the city as an additional insured with the city manager. (Amended during 2004 republication; Ord. 98-1 N.S.; prior code § 5-535).

5.32.300 Identification markings.
Each taxicab shall have painted on the outside of each rear door in letters of between four and six inches the name of the firm and may also contain an identifying design. No taxicab may be licensed whose color scheme or identifying design conflict with or imitate the color scheme or identifying design used on a taxicab already operating. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-534).

5.32.310 Cleanliness required.
The carrier/owner and each driver shall keep the taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-533).

5.32.320 Open stands – Establishment.
The city manager may establish open stands in places upon the streets as he considers necessary for the use of taxicabs. In establishing an open stand, the city manager shall consider the need for the stands by the carrier/owner and the convenience to the general public. The city manager shall fix the number of cabs that may occupy the open stand. The city manager may not create an open stand in front of a place of business where the stand would tend to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the business conducted by adjoining property owners. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-556).

5.32.330 Open stands – Use.
Drivers may use an open stand on a first-come, first-served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their cabs and may not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-557).

5.32.370 Nonliability of city.
The carrier/owner shall agree to indemnify and hold the city harmless from all claims and demands resulting from the operation of the taxicab business. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-537).

5.32.380 Inspection – Certification.
A. The police department, or an automotive repair facility registered with the State Bureau of Automotive Repair and approved by the police department, shall inspect every vehicle intended to be used as a taxicab. Each vehicle shall comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the police department. These rules and regulations shall be adopted to provide safe transportation. They shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the police department finds necessary.

B. When the police department finds that a vehicle has met the standards established, the department shall issue a letter certifying to this fact and establishing the authorized seating capacity of the vehicle. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-531).

5.32.390 Inspections – Periodic.
The police department, or an automotive repair facility registered with the State Bureau of Automotive Repair and approved by the police department, shall inspect each taxicab at least once annually, and at such more frequent intervals as it establishes, to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-532).

5.32.400 Charging of unlawful rates prohibited.
A carrier/owner or driver may not charge compensation for the use of the taxicab which is different than or not specified in the tariff on file with the city. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-582).

5.32.410 Refusal to pay fare prohibited.
No person may refuse to pay the lawful fare of a taxicab after hiring the vehicle. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-581).

5.32.420 Carrying of additional passengers prohibited when.
A person who hires a taxicab has the exclusive right to the full use of the rear seat. The driver may not solicit or carry additional passengers without the consent of the person first hiring the vehicle. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-552).

5.32.430 Exceeding seating capacity of vehicles prohibited.
No driver shall permit more persons in a taxicab as passengers than the rated capacity of his vehicle. However, children under 12 years of age with an adult may be taken in addition thereto; provided, however, each child under 12 years of age must have a safety belt meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards, and children under four years of age must have a child passenger restraint system meeting applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards. (Ord. 98-1 N.S.; Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-583).

5.32.440 Refusal to carry passengers prohibited.
No driver may refuse or neglect to convey an orderly person upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. (Ord. 72-6 N.S. § 5, 1972; prior code § 5-584).

1
    For statutory provisions on local authority to license and regulate vehicles for hire, see Vehicle Code §§ 21100 and 21112; for provisions on financial responsibility of commercial passenger vehicles, see Vehicle Code § 16500 et seq.


Chapter 5.36
CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURES
Sections:

5.36.010    Purpose and authority.

5.36.020    Definitions.

5.36.030    Exemptions – Banks and insurance companies.

5.36.040    Exemptions – Charitable, religious or educational institutions.

5.36.050    Exemptions – Filing of claim.

5.36.060    License tax – Amounts established.

5.36.070    License tax – Time and place of payment.

5.36.080    Use of proceeds.

5.36.090    Refunds.

5.36.100    Appeals.

5.36.010 Purpose and authority.
The city council declares that the license taxes required to be paid under this chapter are assessed pursuant to Section 37101 of the Government Code of the state and the taxing power of the city and solely for the purpose of producing revenue. The continued increase in the development of dwelling units and commercial and industrial facilities in the city, with the consequent increase in the population of the city and in the use of public facilities of the city, has created an urgency in that there are insufficient funds available to meet the increased requirements for capital improvements, including, but not limited to, public buildings such as fire stations, libraries, etc., storm drainage facilities and other public utility improvements, and major streets and bridges to serve the increasing population of the city and the increase in commercial and industrial establishments within the city. (Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 1, 1977).

5.36.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

A. “Commercial facility” means any structure, premises or facility which is not a single-family residence, multiple dwelling structure, or industrial facility.

B. “Family” means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. A family shall be deemed to include necessary servants.

C. “Industrial facility” means any structure, premises or facility used for manufacturing, processing or other industrial purposes.

D. “Multiple dwelling structure” means any structure, facility or premises designed for occupation by more than one family, with each such family living independently of each other in a room or suite of rooms separated by a common wall or floor. Each such room or suite of rooms shall constitute a habitation unit. The term “multiple dwelling structure” includes condominiums, apartment houses, duplexes and similar structures. The term “multiple dwelling structure” excludes hotels, motels, boardinghouses, rest homes and similar facilities designed for temporary occupancy.

E. “Person” means any person; firm; association; partnership; corporation, whether public or private; or any other legal entity.

F. “Single-family residence” means any detached structure designed for occupation by one family. The term “single-family residence” includes mobile home spaces designed to be used for parking a mobile home on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent basis. (Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 2, 1977).

5.36.030 Exemptions – Banks and insurance companies.
There shall be excluded from the license taxes established pursuant to BMC 5.36.060, banking institutions, insurance companies and any other person exempted from municipal licenses by the constitution of the state or other statutes of the state. (Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 6, 1977).

5.36.040 Exemptions – Charitable, religious or educational institutions.
Any charitable, religious, educational or governmental association or entity is exempted from payment of the license taxes established in this chapter as to any residence, structure, or facility to be constructed and used solely for conducting its charitable, religious, educational or governmental activities. (Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 10, 1977).

5.36.050 Exemptions – Filing of claim.
A claim for exclusion or exemption must be made in writing and submitted to the building official at the time the person applies for a building permit. If the building official determines that an exclusion or exemption applies, he or she shall issue the building permit without collecting the license tax as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 07-33 § 1; Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 7, 1977).

5.36.060 License tax – Amounts established.
Every person constructing or altering or causing to be constructed or to be altered through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor, or otherwise, any single-family residence, multiple dwelling structure, commercial facility or industrial facility in the city for which a building permit is issued on or after July 1, 1977, shall pay a license tax computed as follows (see also BMC 1.20.030):

A. Single-Family Residence. Eight hundred sixty-two dollars;

B. Multiple Dwelling Structures. Four hundred thirty-one dollars for each habitation unit to be contained in a multiple dwelling structure;

C. Commercial Facilities. For each square foot contained in a commercial facility:

1. One dollar and five cents per square foot for the first 15,000 square feet, plus

2. Eighty-four cents per square foot for the next 15,000 square feet, plus

3. Sixty-one cents per square foot for the next 70,000 square feet, plus

4. Forty-seven cents for each square foot over the first 100,000 square feet;

D. Industrial Facilities. For each square foot contained in an industrial facility:

1. Fifty-four cents per square foot for the first 15,000 square feet, plus

2. Thirty-eight cents per square foot for the next 15,000 square feet, plus

3. Thirty-one cents per square foot for the next 70,000 square feet, plus

4. Twenty-five cents per each square foot over the first 100,000 square feet;

E. For the purpose of subsection (D) of this section, the number of square feet contained in a facility is obtained by adding the number of square feet in each level of the facility above the ground;

F. For the alteration of dwelling structures, the license tax shall be computed only on the additional habitation units, if any, resulting from the alteration, and for the alteration of commercial and industrial facilities, the license tax shall be computed only upon the additional square footage, if any, resulting from the alteration. (Amended during 2004 republication; Ord. 83-13 N.S. § 1, 1983; Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 3, 1977).

5.36.070 License tax – Time and place of payment.
A. The license taxes established pursuant to BMC 5.36.060 shall be due and payable at the office of the building inspector, City Hall, Benicia, California, upon issuance of a building permit for the construction of a single-family residence, multiple dwelling structure, commercial facility or industrial facility unless the time for payment is deferred pursuant to subsection (B) of this section.

B. The time for payment of the license tax may be deferred if the person obligated to pay the tax applies for, and is granted, a tax deferment by the city manager. The criteria for qualifying for such deferment and the conditions on such deferment shall be established by city council resolution. (Ord. 95-4 N.S.; Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 4, 1977).

5.36.080 Use of proceeds.
All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the capital outlay fund and shall be used solely for capital expenditures for public buildings such as fire stations, libraries, etc.; storm drains; major streets and bridges; and other public utility improvements, as needed. (Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 5, 1977).

5.36.090 Refunds.
Any license tax collected under this chapter which is collected in error or collected illegally, or any duplicate payment shall be refunded to the person from whom it was collected. There shall be a refund of any license tax collected in the event the building permit is not used for the construction for which the tax was collected. (Ord. 95-4 N.S.; Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 8, 1977).

5.36.100 Appeals.
Any person dissatisfied with any decision rendered pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. The determination by the city council shall be made within 15 days after receiving said appeal. (Ord. 07-33 § 2; Ord. 77-17 N.S. § 9, 1977).

Chapter 5.37
LIBRARY BOOK FEE
Sections:

5.37.010  Findings and intent.

5.37.020  Purpose.

5.37.030  Definitions.

5.37.040  Establishment of a library book fee.

5.37.050  Exemptions.

5.37.060  Public service projects.

5.37.070  Calculation of required fees.

5.37.080  Payment of fees.

5.37.090  Fee adjustments.

5.37.100  Fee refunds.

5.37.110  Fee credits for on-site or off-site construction of affordable housing.

5.37.120  Development agreement projects exempt.

5.37.130  Fees in effect at time required.

5.37.010 Findings and intent.
The city council finds as follows:

A. New development projects in the city of Benicia (hereinafter "city") have had and will continue to have significant impacts on the adequacy of the quantity and quality of books in the city’s library.

B. The city has secured state funds for and has budgeted the moneys for the construction of a new library to meet the needs of the existing city as well as future citizens who will be moving into the city in homes developed under the land use guidelines contained in the city’s general plan.

C. On January 8, 1991, the Benicia public library board of trustees adopted a plan of service goals for the Benicia public library. These goals include building a new library, automating current functions, and improving collections and services. The plan is fairly specific in regard to the kind of services and the types of collection development and expansion that is targeted. By adopting the 1991 Library Grant Application, the library board approved the grant guidelines of 2.5 books per capita.

D. The city librarian has conducted a study analyzing the per household demand for library books and has, through her study, shown the reasonable relationship between the demand for new library books caused by new residential development, the costs of providing new books and the need to impose a fee to pay for those books. Said study is memorialized in a staff memorandum dated September 23, 1991, entitled "New Development’s Impact on the Benicia Public Library."

E. City staff has determined that sources of city revenue other than development fees, including tax revenues which will be paid by new residential development, will be needed for many public purposes and therefore will not be sufficient to offset the need for new library books created by new residential development. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a library book fee that imposes upon future residential development projects an equitable share of the cost of mitigating library book needs created by such projects. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. "Building permit" means a "building permit" as defined in Chapter 15.04 BMC.

B. "Certificate of occupancy" means an entitlement to occupy and use a building granted pursuant to city ordinance, rule or policy.

C. "Governmental or public facilities" means publicly owned buildings and structures used for the purposes of conducting city, county, state or federal government business. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, city halls, police and fire stations, offices, equipment yards, sanitation facilities, schools, recreation centers, and similar facilities. Private commercial development projects leasing publicly owned land shall not be considered governmental or public facilities. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.040 Establishment of a library book fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, developers of residential development projects shall pay a library book fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. See Resolution No. 02-146. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.050 Exemptions.
The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A. Governmental or public facilities;

B. Developments on real property owned by a government transportation agency which are used exclusively for public transportation purposes;

C. Churches, temples, synagogues, and other buildings or structures used for religious worship;

D. Public elementary schools and secondary schools;

E. Private schools which meet the requirements contained in California Education Code Section 48222, or its successor, so that attendance at such schools complies with California compulsory education requirements. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.060 Public service projects.
In order to ensure that the imposition of fees pursuant to this chapter will not be contrary to the public interest, or prevent the development of a public service project, the city council may waive all, or any portion of, the fees required by this chapter if the council finds that a residential development project will serve a public purpose or satisfy a public need and involves direct city participation in the development. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.070 Calculation of required fees.
The community development director, or the director’s designee, shall be responsible for calculating the fees required by this chapter. This calculation shall be made at the time of application for the building permit for the dwelling unit. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.080 Payment of fees.
Fees required by this chapter from a residential developer shall be paid at the time that the city issues a building permit for each residential unit or group of units. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.090 Fee adjustments.
Any person subject to a fee required by this chapter may apply to the city council for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of that fee based upon the absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that person’s residential development project on library book demands in the city of Benicia and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be provided.

A. Application. There shall be a separate application for each fee adjustment request made pursuant to this section. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the community development director and shall be filed with the city clerk not later than the time of application for a building permit for the residential development project. Each application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction, adjustment or waiver.

B. Hearing. The city council shall consider the fee adjustment application at a public hearing held within 60 days after the fee adjustment application is deemed complete by the city clerk. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.100 Fee refunds.
Upon application, fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded under the following circumstances:

A. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter are erroneously or illegally collected. An application for refund pursuant to this subsection (A) shall be filed with the community development director no later than 90 days after the initial payment of the fee pursuant to BMC 5.37.080.

B. The building permit expires, and no extension has been granted, for the residential development project upon which fees were imposed pursuant to this chapter. An application for refund pursuant to this subsection (B) shall be filed with the community development director no later than 90 days after expiration of the building permit. The amount of refund shall be reduced by an amount to cover the cost to the city for processing the refund. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.110 Fee credits for on-site or off-site construction of affordable housing.
A person may be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the fees required by this chapter, in an amount to be determined by the city council, if that person constructs affordable housing in accordance with the Benicia Housing Element, Policy 2.04 and Program 2.05. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.120 Development agreement projects exempt.
Any development project which is approved under a development agreement adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq. shall be exempt from the fees established by this chapter. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.37.130 Fees in effect at time required.
The amount of the fees to be paid under this chapter shall be the amount of the fee in effect at the time the fees are required to be paid. See Resolution No. 02-146. (Ord. 92-5 N.S. § 1, 1992).

Chapter 5.38
TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION
Sections:

5.38.010    Findings and intent.

5.38.020    Purpose.

5.38.030    Definitions.

5.38.040    Establishment of traffic impact mitigation fee.

5.38.050    Exemptions.

5.38.060    Public service projects.

5.38.070    Calculation of required fees.

5.38.080    Payment of fees.

5.38.090    Fee adjustments.

5.38.100    Fee refunds.

5.38.110    Fee credits for implementation and administration of trip mitigation measures and/or construction of transportation facilities.

5.38.120    Fee credits for improvements extra to the project or within assessment districts.

5.38.130    Development agreement projects exempt.

5.38.140    Fees in effect at time required.

5.38.010 Findings and intent.
The city council finds as follows:

A. New development projects in the city have had and will continue to have significant citywide (other than site specific) impacts on the availability and adequacy of transportation facilities and programs.

B. The impacts of future development on transportation and traffic operations have been studied and analyzed and such analysis demonstrates a reasonable relationship between new development and the demand for transportation facilities and programs, as well as estimates the costs of providing facilities and programs to mitigate the traffic impacts of new development.

C. City staff has determined that sources of city revenue other than development fees, including tax revenues, utility user fees and other revenues which will be paid by new development, will be needed for many public purposes and therefore will not be sufficient to offset the burdens on transportation facilities and programs created by new development. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a traffic mitigation fee that imposes upon future development projects an equitable share of the cost of mitigating future transportation facilities and programs which are impacted or necessitated by such projects. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Building permit” means a “building permit” as defined in Chapter 15.04 BMC.

B. “Governmental or public facilities” means publicly owned buildings and structures used for the purposes of conducting city, county, state or federal government business. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, city halls, police and fire stations, offices, equipment yards, sanitation facilities, schools, recreation centers, and similar facilities. Private commercial development projects leasing publicly owned land shall not be considered governmental or public facilities.

C. “Transportation facilities” means transportation system improvement projects that require physical alteration of the transportation system. Examples of transportation facilities include, but are not limited to, roadway improvements, signalization improvements, and other public right-of-way improvements such as bus shelters.

D. “Transportation programs” means transportation system improvement projects that do not require physical alteration of the transportation system. Examples of transportation programs include, but are not limited to, ride-sharing programs, transit subsidies, alternative work-week scheduling, and education/marketing programs designed to reduce automobile trips.

E. “New development” means all new building construction, conversion to a use which generates a higher number of trips, expansion of an existing building, additional use within an existing building, and any other conditional use required to mitigate traffic impacts. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.040 Establishment of traffic impact mitigation fee.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, developers of residential, commercial and industrial development projects as defined in BMC 5.38.030(E) shall pay a traffic impact mitigation fee (“traffic fee”) in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.050 Exemptions.
The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

A. Governmental or public facilities;

B. Developments on real property owned by a government transportation agency which are used exclusively for public transportation purposes;

C. Churches, temples, synagogues, and other buildings or structures used for religious worship;

D. Public elementary schools and secondary schools;

E. Private schools which meet the requirements contained in California Education Code Section 48222, or its successor, so that attendance at such schools complies with California compulsory education requirements. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.060 Public service projects.
In order to ensure that the imposition of fees pursuant to this chapter will not be contrary to the public interest, or prevent the development of a public service project, the city council may waive all, or any portion of, the fees required by this chapter if the council finds that a development project will serve a public purpose or satisfy a public need and involves direct city participation in the development. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.070 Calculation of required fees.
The public works director, or the director’s designee, shall be responsible for calculating the fees required by this chapter. This calculation shall be made at the time of application for the building permit or at the time of approval for a change in use. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.080 Payment of fees.
A. The fees required by this chapter from a developer shall be paid at the time the city issues a building permit for each development project, residential unit or group of units, unless the developer applies for and is granted a fee deferral as provided for in subsection (B) of this section.

B. A person required by this chapter to pay a traffic impact mitigation fee may apply for a fee deferral. The application shall be reviewed and considered by the public works director, and shall be granted if the applicant’s project meets the criteria for fee deferrals established by city council resolution, unless the director finds (1) that the fee is needed for improvements or facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated, and for which the city has adopted a construction schedule or plan, or (2) the fees are needed to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made. The council resolution shall also establish conditions to be imposed upon the granting of a fee deferral. (Ord. 95-5 N.S.; Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.090 Fee adjustments.
Any person subject to a fee required by this chapter may apply to the public works director for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of that fee based upon the absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that person’s development project on transportation facilities and programs in the city and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be provided.

A. Application. There shall be a separate application for each fee adjustment request made pursuant to this section. Such application shall be made in writing and submitted to the public works director for his/her review and shall be filed with the city clerk not later than 10 days after the city notifies the developer of the amount of the fee to be charged. Additional time, as determined by the public works director, will be allowed when significant additional information is required of the developer. Each application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction, adjustment or waiver. If applicant desires to receive a building permit prior to the completion of the appeal process, applicant shall deposit the fee being appealed with the application. Such fee or portion thereof will be refunded if the appeal is successful.

B. Hearing. An applicant may appeal the decision of the public works director in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-34 § 1; Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.100 Fee refunds.
Upon application, fees collected by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded under the following circumstances:

A. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter are erroneously or illegally collected. An application for refund pursuant to this subsection (A) shall be filed with the public works director no later than 90 days after the initial payment of the fee pursuant to BMC 5.38.080;

B. The building permit expires, and no extension has been granted, for the development project upon which fees were imposed pursuant to this chapter. An application for refund pursuant to this subsection (B) shall be filed with the public works director no later than 90 days after expiration of the building permit. The amount of refund shall be reduced by an amount to cover the cost to the city for processing the refund. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.110 Fee credits for implementation and administration of trip mitigation measures and/or construction of transportation facilities.
A person shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the fees required by this chapter, in an amount to be determined by the public works director, if that person constructs, implements and administers trip mitigation measures or develops transportation facilities consistent with guidelines established by resolution of the city council. The public works director’s determination shall be based upon the actual costs reasonably incurred in constructing the transportation facility or implementing or administering the trip mitigation measure. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.120 Fee credits for improvements extra to the project or within assessment districts.
A person shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the traffic fees required by this chapter, in an amount to be determined by the public works director, if that person’s development project was required to construct specific transportation improvements which are extra to the project, or the development project is located within the boundaries of an assessment or other special district in which transportation facilities were constructed (or are intended to be constructed) with the use of funds derived by virtue of said district and that person’s property for which development is proposed has been financially encumbered or otherwise burdened to pay for all or a portion of the transportation improvements paid for or to be paid for by assessments levied by the district, if the improvements constructed are in excess of improvements otherwise determined to be necessitated by the development project. The public works director’s determination of the amount of reduction required pursuant to this section shall be based upon the actual costs reasonably incurred in constructing the transportation improvements and assessed to the developer. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.130 Development agreement projects exempt.
Any development project which is approved under a development agreement adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq. or which is undertaken pursuant to a specific plan shall be exempt from the fees established by this chapter; provided, that the development agreement and/or specific plan requires the developer to construct, or pay for the construction of, transportation facilities the value of which equals or exceeds the fee that otherwise would have been required of the developer pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

5.38.140 Fees in effect at time required.
The amount of the fees to be paid under this chapter shall be the amount of the fee in effect at the time the fees are required to be paid. In the event a fee deferral is granted as provided in BMC 5.38.080, the amount of the fee to be paid shall be the amount of the fee in effect at the time the city issues the project’s building permit. (Ord. 95-5 N.S.; Ord. 92-6 N.S. § 1, 1992).

Chapter 5.40
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Sections:

5.40.010    Purpose and application.

5.40.020    State video franchise and PEG fees.

5.40.030    Audit authority.

5.40.040    Customer service penalties.

5.40.050    City response to state video franchise.

5.40.010 Purpose and application.
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city pursuant to that franchise. On January 1, 2007, the state of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the city of Benicia shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government (PEG) purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city intends to exercise its authority to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards. (Ord. 17-08 § 2).

5.40.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
A. Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall submit a fee to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. “Gross revenue,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5660.

B. Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall submit a PEG fee to the city, or the city’s designee, for support of public, educational, and/or governmental (PEG) purposes that are consistent with state and federal law. The PEG fee shall be one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder. (Ord. 17-08 § 2).

5.40.030 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with BMC 5.40.020. (Ord. 17-08 § 2).

5.40.040 Customer service penalties.
A. The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

B. The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

1. For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to $500.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each violation.

2. For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $1,000 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.

3. For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $2,500 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.

C. A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city administrator to the city council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 17-08 § 2).

5.40.050 City response to state video franchise.
A. Applications. Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the city manager.

B. Within 30 days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 17-08 § 2).

Chapter 5.44
ADULT BUSINESS LICENSES AND OPERATING REGULATIONS1
Sections:

5.44.010    Purpose.

5.44.020    Definitions.

5.44.030    Adult business regulatory license required.

5.44.040    Investigation and action on application for adult business regulatory license.

5.44.050    Operating standards.

5.44.060    Transfer of adult business license.

5.44.070    Suspension or revocation of adult business license.

5.44.080    Appeal procedures.

5.44.090    Violations.

5.44.100    Regulations nonexclusive.

5.44.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and the deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses.

It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform operational standards for adult businesses. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.020 Definitions.
In addition to any other definitions contained in the municipal code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the municipal code, these definitions shall prevail.

A. “Adult arcade” shall mean a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin, card or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Such devices shall be referred to as “adult arcade devices.”

B. “Adult retail store” shall mean a business establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, adult-oriented material.

C. “Adult booth/individual viewing area” shall mean a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes:

1. Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

2. Where adult arcade devices are located.

D. “Adult business” shall mean:

1. A business establishment or concern that as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an adult retail store, adult motion picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, adult modeling studio; or

2. A business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes adult-oriented material or sexually oriented merchandise, or which offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law.

E. “Adult cabaret” shall mean a business establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) that features adult live entertainment.

F. “Adult cabaret dancer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult cabaret or adult business and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a sexually oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go go dancer or similar dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer’s breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but does not involve exposure of specified anatomical areas or depicting or engaging in specified sexual activities. “Adult cabaret dancer” does not include a patron.

G. “Adult hotel/motel” shall mean a “hotel” or “motel” (as defined in the municipal code) that is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis images through closed circuit television, cable television, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image producing devices that are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

H. “Adult live entertainment” shall mean any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in alone or with other persons including, but not limited to, singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which:

1. The performer (including, but not limited to, topless and/or bottomless dancers, go go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, specified anatomical areas; and/or

2. The performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered.

I. “Adult modeling studio” shall mean a business establishment which provides, for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model, who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such services. “Adult modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California.

J. “Adult motion picture theater” shall mean a business establishment, with or without a stage or proscenium, where, on a regular and substantial basis and for any form of consideration, material is presented through films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser disks, digital video disks, holograms, virtual reality devices, or similar electronically generated reproductions that is characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

K. “Adult-oriented material” shall mean accessories, paraphernalia, books, magazines, laser disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes, holograms or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. “Adult-oriented material” shall include sexually oriented merchandise.

L. “Establishment of an adult business” shall mean any of the following:

1. The opening or commencement of any adult business (as defined above) as a new business;

2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult business, to any adult business;

3. The addition of any adult business to any other existing adult business;

4. The relocation of any adult business; or

5. Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing adult business by more than 10 percent.

M. “Owner/license holder” shall mean any of the following:

1. The sole proprietor of an adult business;

2. Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult business;

3. The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation or L.L.C. that owns and operates an adult business; or

4. The person designated by the officers of a corporation or the members of an L.L.C. to be the license holder for an adult business owned and operated by the corporation.

N. “Nonperformer” shall mean a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business who works in that adult business during regular business hours. This shall not include after hours workers providing janitorial, trash or similar after hours services.

O. “Performer” shall mean a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.

P. “Sexually oriented merchandise” shall mean sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia, or novelty items such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Q. “Specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

1. Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to be reasonably anatomically correct, even if completely and opaquely covered, human:

a. Genitals, pubic region;

b. Buttocks, anus; or

c. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.

R. “Specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, irrespective of whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; and/or

3. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; and/or

4. Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain, or bondage and/or restraints; and/or

5. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or

6. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.030 Adult business regulatory license required.
All adult businesses are subject to the adult business regulatory license requirements of this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state of California.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult business within Benicia unless the person first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult business regulatory license as herein required. Any occurrence of the establishment of an adult business as defined in this chapter shall require a new application for an adult business regulatory license. The adult business regulatory license shall be subject to the development and operational standards of this chapter and the underlying zone where the facility is located.

B. The community development director or his/her designee (hereinafter “director”) shall grant, deny and renew adult business regulatory licenses in accordance with these regulations.

C. License applicants shall file a written, signed and verified application on a form provided by the community development department. Such application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

1. If the license applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2. If the license applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3. If the license applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.

4. A signed and verified statement that the license applicant, if an individual, or if a partnership or corporation by its partners, its officers or its directors, has not pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related offense, including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or obscenity, and (a) more than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) more than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) more than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

5. The license applicant shall maintain a list of all nonperformers, which includes the nonperformer’s legal name, and mailing address, and satisfactory written proof that each nonperformer is at least 18 years of age.

6. Each nonperformer working for a license applicant shall provide the license applicant with a signed and verified statement that the nonperformer has not pled guilty or pled nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related offense, including crimes involving moral turpitude, prostitution, or obscenity, and (a) more than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) more than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) more than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

7. The license applicant shall sign the application. All persons who sign the application must also provide names, aliases, addresses, and dates of birth.

8. If the license applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the license applicant, the license applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

9. A description of the type of adult business for which the license is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site.

10. The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

11. A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be oriented to the north or some other designated street or object and drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

12. A diagram of the off-street parking areas and entries to the premises of the adult business, also showing the location of the lighting system required by this chapter.

D. The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of such fees shall be set by resolution of the city council.

E. The completeness of an application for an adult business regulatory license shall be determined by the director or within five city business days of its submittal. If the director determines that the license application is incomplete, the director shall immediately notify in writing the license applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five city business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the provisions set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided herein until such time as the application is found to be complete.

F. The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of state or city licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business regulatory license. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.040 Investigation and action on application for adult business regulatory license.
A. Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and license fees, the director shall immediately write or stamp the application “Received” and, in conjunction with city staff, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether an adult business regulatory license shall be granted. Investigation shall not be grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing pursuant to this section.

B. Within 21 days of receipt of the completed application, the investigation shall be completed and the director shall notice and conduct a public hearing with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905.

C. In reaching a decision on the application, the director shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in the California Evidence Code.

D. The director shall render a written decision on the application for an adult business regulatory license within two city business days of the public hearing required by this section. The failure of the director to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to compliance with all operational standards of BMC 5.44.050 and all city zoning requirements, including those found in BMC 17.28.020 and 17.32.020, and Chapter 17.102 BMC, and shall be subject to appeal to the city council, pursuant to BMC 5.44.080. The decision of the director shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this code.

E. Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

F. The director shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

1. The director shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial.

3. If the application is granted, the director shall attach to the application an adult business regulatory license.

G. The director shall grant the application and issue the adult business regulatory license upon findings that the proposed business meets, or will meet, all of the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied based upon one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (I) of this section.

H. If the director grants the application, the applicant may begin operating the adult business for which the license was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter. The license holder shall post the license conspicuously in the premises of the adult business.

I. The director shall deny the application if the applicant fails to establish any of the following:

1. The adult business complies with the city’s zoning requirements as to its underlying zoning designation and other locational requirements of BMC 17.28.020 and 17.32.020, and Chapter 17.102 BMC.

2. The adult business complies with the development, operational or performance standards found in this chapter.

3. The license applicant is at least 18 years of age.

4. The required application fees have been paid.

5. The application complies with BMC 5.44.030.

J. A permittee, applicant or substantially related entity wherein the new application is made by an individual or previous entity exercising management or oversight or control of the adult facility, cannot re-apply for an adult business regulatory license for a particular location within one year from the date of prior denial.

K. Any affected person may appeal the decision of the director in writing within 10 days in accordance with the provisions of BMC 5.44.080. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.050 Operating standards.
A. Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to license any employee, independent contractor or performer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any day, excepting herefrom an adult hotel/motel.

B. Exterior Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas, including parking lots, of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.50 foot candle, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties and to avoid night pollution. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours.

C. Interior Lighting Requirements. All interior areas of the adult business, excepting therefrom adult hotels/motels, shall be illuminated at a minimum of 1.00 foot candle, maintained and evenly distributed at floor level. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 24 hours, excepting herefrom an adult hotel/motel.

D. Regulation of Adult Booth/Individual Viewing Area.

1. No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time.

2. Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from the main aisle. Any adult business may have more than one manager station in order to ensure compliance with this regulation. At all times, the manager station(s) shall be maintained to ensure a clear line of sight into the interior of the adult/booth individual viewing area. Further, no one shall maintain any adult booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from the manager station(s). The entire body of any patron in any adult booth/individual viewing area must be visible from the main aisle and the manager station(s) without the assistance of mirrors or any other device.

3. No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed adult booths/individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed adult booths/individual viewing areas shall be maintained.

4. No holes or other openings shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within 24 hours using “pop” rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates.

5. No beds, couches or chairs with a sitting area greater than 24 inches wide shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area.

E. On-Site Manager. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least 18 years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may serve as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall provide his/her name to the chief of police to receive all complaints and be given by the owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations taking place on the premises.

F. Interior of Premises. No exterior door or window on the premises of an adult business shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque coverings at all times.

G. Displays of Adult-Oriented Materials. All displays of materials characterized or distinguished by matters describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in this code, shall be completely screened from public view as viewed from adjacent sidewalks or public rights-of-way.

H. Signs. All adult businesses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in addition to those of the Benicia Municipal Code. Should a conflict exist between the requirements of the Benicia Municipal Code and this subsection, the more restrictive shall prevail.

If an adult business does not serve alcohol, it shall post a notice prior to entry to the area of public assembly and within 10 feet of every entrance used by customers for access to the establishment, stating that persons below the age of 18 years of age are prohibited from entering onto the premises or within the confines of the adult business. This notice shall be posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The dimensions of the notice shall be no less than six inches by six inches, with a minimum typeface of 25 points. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall comply with all notice and posting requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department.

I. Regulation of Public Restroom Facilities. If the adult business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from adult-oriented material. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the adult business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall ensure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and that the restroom facilities are used only for their intended sanitary purposes. Access to restrooms for patron use shall not require passage through an area used as a dressing area by performers.

J. Trash. All interior trash cans shall be emptied into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag or with individually bagged trash at least once a day. At least four times a day, the front and rear exteriors of any adult business, along with the parking lot, shall be inspected for trash and debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag.

K. Adult Business Offering Adult Live Entertainment – Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult businesses providing adult live entertainment:

1. No person shall perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business, except upon a permanently fixed stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor, and surrounded with a three-foot-high barrier or by a fixed rail at least 30 inches in height. No patron shall be permitted on the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer(s) and/or adult cabaret dancer(s). This provision shall not apply to an individual viewing area where the performer is completely separated from the area in which the performer is viewed by an individual by a permanent, floor to ceiling, solid barrier.

2. No performer or adult cabaret dancer shall be within six feet of a patron, measured horizontally, while the performer or adult cabaret dancer is performing adult live entertainment. While on stage, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer or adult cabaret dancer.

3. As to off-stage performances, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall perform adult live entertainment off-stage. As to an adult cabaret dancer performing off-stage, a distance of at least six feet shall be maintained between the adult cabaret dancer and the patron(s) at all times. During off stage performances, no adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any adult cabaret dancer.

4. In addition, while on the premises, no performer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment or off-stage performances by such performer or adult cabaret dancer. Patrons shall be advised of the no-touching requirements by signs and, if necessary, by employees, independent contractors, performers, or adult cabaret dancers of the establishment. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching.

5. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no-touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no-touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment.

6. All employees and independent contractors of the adult facility, excepting therefrom performers while performing on the fixed stage, while on or about the premises or tenant space, shall wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas.

7. Patrons shall not throw money to performers, place monies in the performers’ costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. If patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips may be placed in containers. Patrons shall be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the tipping and gratuity requirements by employees or independent contractors of the adult business.

8. The adult business shall provide dressing rooms for performers, that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers’ use and which the performers shall use. Same gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms.

9. The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use at all times.

10. The adult business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three-foot-wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers and the patrons must also be three feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility.

11. All adult businesses featuring live entertainment shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

a. Provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open.

b. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 21 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

c. Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of these regulations. Security guard(s) shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed and bonded as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

d. Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 30 minutes after the established closing time of the facility, security guard(s) shall regularly patrol the parking lot and adjacent outdoor areas of the facility to maintain order therein and prevent any illicit or nuisance activity.

e. Security guard(s) shall be regularly posted at the doors used by the performers when said doors are in use.

12. The adult business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas.

L. Adult Motion Picture Theater Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:

1. If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions:

a. Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area;

b. Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and

c. Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area.

M. Employment of and Services Rendered to Persons Under the Age of 18 Years Prohibited; 21 If Liquor Is Served.

1. Employees/Independent Contractors. Employees and independent contractors of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employees, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, employees and independent contractors of the adult business must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least 21 years of age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons seeking to contract with, be employed by, or otherwise service the adult business.

2. Patrons. Patrons of an adult business must be at least 18 years of age. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, independent contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 18 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, patrons must be at least 21 years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a 10 percent or greater interest, employee, independent contractor, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least 21 years of age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons entering the adult business.

3. X-Rated Movies. The selling, renting and/or displaying of X-rated movies, videotapes, digital video disks (DVDs), compact disks (CDs) and laser disks shall be restricted to persons over 18 years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to the establishment to persons under 18 years of age sells, rents, or displays movies, videos, DVDs, CDs or laser disks that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-17” by the motion picture rating industry (“MPAA”), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, said movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, and laser disks shall be located in a specific section of the establishment where these items are not visible to persons under the age of 18 and from which persons under the age of 18 shall be prohibited.

4. Inspections. Each owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business or other person in charge of an adult business shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, community development department, business license division and other city departments, to inspect the adult business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the laws and operating standards applicable to adult businesses at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.060 Transfer of adult business license.
A. A license holder shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business license at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application for the license.

B. In the event of a transfer of ownership of the adult business, the new owner shall be fully informed of the requirements of this chapter, including the operational and development standards herein.

C. In the event of a transfer of the adult business or the adult business license, the transferee must provide the director with the following information within seven days of the transfer:

1. If the transferee is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.

2. If the transferee is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

3. If the transferee is a corporation or L.L.C., the entity shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation or organization, evidence that it is in good standing under the laws of the State of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, managers or members having supervisory or managerial control over the facility, the name of the registered agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.070 Suspension or revocation of adult business license.
A. On determining that grounds for license suspension or revocation exist, the community development director (“the director”) shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the license holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent municipal code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be noticed in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and conducted by the community development director or his/her designee (hereinafter “director”), which may include a third party hearing officer. Hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director but, at a minimum, shall include the following:

1. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel.

2. The director shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

3. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the license holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a license holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on license suspensions or revocations.

4. The director’s decision may be appealed in accordance with BMC 5.44.080.

B. A license may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the license holder, or an employee, independent contractor, partner, director, or manager of the license holder:

1. The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult business fails to comply with all provisions of these regulations and this section relating to adult businesses, including the adult business operational standards contained in BMC 5.44.050 and the zoning requirements of BMC 17.28.020 and 17.32.020, and Chapter 17.102 BMC, and all other applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Benicia Municipal Code.

2. The license holder has failed to obtain or maintain all required city licenses.

3. The license holder has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business license.

4. The license is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued.

5. That an individual employed by, or performing in, the adult business (whether classified as an employee or independent contractor) has been convicted of two or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the licensed premises within a 12-month period and was employed by, or performing in, the adult business at the time the offenses were committed.

6. That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more.

7. That the transferee/new owner of an adult business or adult business license failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

8. The license holder, partner, director, or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted, or has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business; or a licensee has been convicted of violating any of the following state laws on the premises of the adult business:

a. Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

b. Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur.

c. Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

d. The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of the Section 647b of the California Penal Code.

e. Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4.

f. Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession, or possession for sale of any controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code.

g. An act or omission in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter if such act or omission is with the knowledge, authorization, or approval of the license holder or is as a result of the license holder’s negligent supervision of the employees or independent contractors of the adult facility. This includes the allowance of activities that are or become a public nuisance, which includes the disruptive conduct of business patrons whether on or immediately off the premises where such patrons disturb the peace, obstruct traffic, damage property, engage in criminal conduct, violate the law and otherwise impair the free enjoyment of life and property.

C. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the director finds and determines that there are grounds for suspension or revocation, the director shall impose one of the following:

1. Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six months; or

2. Revocation of the license.

The director shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the license holder within five days of the public hearing.

D. In the event a license is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business license to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the licensee or an entity related to the licensee within 12 months after the date of such revocation. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.080 Appeal procedures.
A. After approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a license, any affected person may appeal the decision to the city council in writing within 10 days after the written decision.

B. Consideration of an appeal of the decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code Sections 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within 30 days of the filing or initiation of the appeal.

C. The city council action on the appeal of the decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the appeal. The city council’s decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within four city business days of the hearing, such written decision to be mailed to the party appealing the director’s decision.

D. In reaching its decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

E. Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

F. Failure of the city council to render a decision to grant or deny an appeal of a license denial within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the adult business license.

G. The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

H. Notice of the city council’s decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

I. Any applicant or license holder whose license has been denied pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.090 Violations.
A. Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including license revocation. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

B. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.

C. The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section constitute a licensing process, and do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Benicia Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter related to sexual conduct or activities. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

5.44.100 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other provisions of the municipal code and/or any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of Benicia. (Ord. 09-01 § 2).

1
    Prior legislation: Ord. 80-11 N.S.


Chapter 5.45
ADULT BUSINESS PERFORMER LICENSE
Sections:

5.45.010    Purpose.

5.45.020    Adult business performer license.

5.45.030    Investigation and action on application for adult business performer license.

5.45.040    Revocation/suspension/denial of adult business performer license.

5.45.050    Display of license identification cards.

5.45.060    Adult business performer license nontransferable.

5.45.070    Violations.

5.45.080    Regulations nonexclusive.

5.45.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the licensing of adult business performers in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. The goals of the performer licensing provisions are (A) to protect minors by requiring that all performers be over the age of 18 years; (B) to assure the correct identification of persons performing in adult businesses; (C) to enable the city to deploy law enforcement resources effectively; and (D) to detect and discourage the involvement of crime in adult businesses by precluding the licensing of performers with certain sex-related convictions within a prior time period. It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of performers or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof.

The definitions contained in Chapter 5.44 BMC shall govern for purposes of these regulations. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.020 Adult business performer license.
A. No performer shall be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in an adult business to participate in or give any live performance displaying specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities without first having a valid adult business performer license issued by the city.

B. The chief of police or his/her designee shall grant, deny, and renew adult business performer licenses in accordance with these regulations.

C. License applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal application on a form provided by the chief of police. Such application shall contain the following information:

1. The license applicant’s legal name and any other names (including stage names and aliases) used by the applicant.

2. Principal place of residence.

3. Age, date and place of birth.

4. Height, weight, hair and eye color, and tattoo descriptions and locations.

5. Each present and/or proposed business address(es) and telephone number(s) of the establishments at which the applicant intends to work.

6. Driver’s license or identification number and state of issuance.

7. Social Security number.

8. Satisfactory written proof that the license applicant is at least 18 years of age.

9. The license applicant’s fingerprints on a Livescan form provided by the Benicia police department and two color two-by-two-inch photographs clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints and photographs shall be taken within six months of the date of application.

10. Whether the license applicant has pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

11. If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the license applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

D. The information provided in subsection (C) of this section which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the California Public Records Act or the open government ordinance. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address, telephone number, date of birth, age, driver’s license and Social Security number. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause the same to be redacted from any copy of a completed application form made available to any member of the public, the above-mentioned information.

E. The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and an annual license fee. The amount of such fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council.

F. The completeness of an application shall be determined within six business hours by the chief of police. The chief of police or his/her designee must be available during normal working hours Monday through Friday to accept adult business performer applications. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete, the chief of police shall immediately inform the applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult business performer application and payment of the license fee specified in section (E) of this section, the chief of police shall immediately issue a temporary license which shall expire of its own accord 10 business days from the date of issuance and shall only be extended as provided in BMC 5.45.030.

G. This temporary adult business performer license shall authorize a performer to commence performance at an adult business establishment that possesses a valid adult business license authorized to provide live entertainment.

H. The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business performer license. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.030 Investigation and action on application for adult business performer license.
A. Upon submission of a completed application, payment of license fees, and issuance of a temporary adult business performer license pursuant to BMC 5.45.020, the chief of police shall immediately stamp the application “Received” and in conjunction with city staff, including members of the police department, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the license applicant should be issued an adult business performer license.

B. Investigation shall not be grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. The chief of police’s decision to grant or deny the adult business performer license shall be made within 10 business days from the date the temporary license was issued and in no case shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made after the expiration of the temporary license. In the event the chief of police is unable to complete the investigation within 10 business days, he/she shall promptly notify the license applicant and extend the temporary license for up to 10 additional business days. In no case shall the investigation exceed 20 days, nor shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made after the expiration of the temporary license.

C. The chief of police shall render a written decision to grant or deny the license within the foregoing 10-day time period set forth in subsection (B) of this section. Said decision shall be mailed first class postage prepaid or hand delivered to the applicant, within the foregoing 10-day period or 20-day period if extended pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, at the address provided by the applicant in the application.

D. The chief of police shall notify the applicant as follows:

1. The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the license applicant may appeal the denial to the city manager. The city manager or a designated hearing officer shall conduct a hearing as described in BMC 5.45.040.

3. If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult business performer license.

4. The application, as acted upon, and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, or hand delivered, addressed to the license applicant at the residence address stated in the application in accordance with the time frames established herein.

E. The chief of police shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied based on one of the grounds set forth in subsection (F) of this section.

F. The chief of police shall deny the application based on any of the following grounds:

1. The license applicant has made false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business performer license.

2. The license applicant is under 18 years of age.

3. The adult business performer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by laws of the state or city or a business that does not have a valid adult business license.

4. The license applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

G. Failure of the chief of police to render a decision on the license within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval.

H. Each adult business performer license, other than the temporary license described in BMC 5.45.020(F), shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the chief of police a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual license fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. If said application conforms to the previously approved application and there has been no change with respect to the license holder being convicted of any crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, the chief or police or his/her designee shall renew the license for one year. Any plea to or conviction of a sex-related offense requires the renewal application to be set for hearing before the chief of police in accordance with the provisions of this section. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for action upon applications for license. The chief of police’s denial of a renewal application is subject to the hearing provisions of BMC 5.45.040. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.040 Revocation/suspension/denial of adult business performer license.
A. On determining that grounds for denial of a license, license revocation or suspension exist, the chief of police or his/her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed action to the applicant/license holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing before the city manager or a designated hearing officer and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Benicia Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant/license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

B. On determining that grounds for denial of a license exist, the chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed action to the applicant/license holder. The decision of the chief of police shall be appealable to the city manager by filing a written request for a hearing with the city clerk within 15 days following the day of mailing of the chief of police’s decision and paying the fee for appeals provided under this code. All such appeals shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be public records. The city manager shall issue a notice which shall set forth the time and place of a hearing before the city manager or a designated hearing officer which is within 30 days from the date the appeal was filed and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Benicia Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant/license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

C. The applicant shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. The city manager or designated hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the licensee. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a licensee/appellant shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on license suspensions or revocations.

D. A license may be revoked based on any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the license holder:

1. The licensee has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a performer license.

2. The licensee has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

3. Failure to comply with the operating standards of Chapter 5.44 BMC or the requirements of this chapter.

E. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the city manager or designated hearing officer finds and determines that there are grounds for revocation or suspension, the city manager or designated hearing officer shall revoke or suspend the license. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section on the denial of a license, the city manager or designated hearing officer shall decide to sustain the decision, modify the decision or order the decision stricken and issue such order as the city manager or designated hearing officer finds is supported by the entire record. The city manager or designated hearing officer shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the applicant/license holder within four working days of the hearing. The city manager or designated hearing officer’s failure to render such a decision within this time frame shall constitute an approval or reinstatement of the license.

F. In the event a license is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business performer license shall not be granted to the licensee within 12 months after the date of such revocation.

G. The decision of the city manager or designated hearing officer shall be final.

H. The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city manager or designated hearing officer is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

I. Notice of the city manager’s or designated hearing officer’s decision and his/her findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

J. Any applicant or license holder whose license has been denied, suspended, or revoked, pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.050 Display of license identification cards.
The chief of police shall provide each adult business performer required to have a license pursuant to this chapter with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and license number of such performer. Every performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which he or she is on the premises of the adult business at which he or she performs. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.060 Adult business performer license nontransferable.
No adult business performer license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any licensee or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business performer license, and the license thereafter shall be null and void. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.070 Violations.
A. Any licensee violating or causing the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business performer licenses shall be subject to license revocation/suspension pursuant to BMC 5.45.040, a fine of not more than $1,000 pursuant to Government Code Sections 36900 and 36901, and any and all other civil remedies. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

B. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business performer licenses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined.

C. The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section are part of a regulatory licensing process, and do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Benicia Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter related to sexual conduct or activities. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

5.45.080 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult business performer licenses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the licensing provisions as adopted by the city council of Benicia. (Ord. 09-01 § 3).

Chapter 5.46
ADULT BUSINESS BACKGROUND CHECK FOR NONPERFORMERS
Sections:

5.46.010    Purpose.

5.46.020    Adult business nonperformer work applicant background check.

5.46.030    Investigation and action on adult business nonperformer work application.

5.46.040    Denial of adult business nonperformer application for work.

5.46.050    Violations.

5.46.060    Regulations nonexclusive.

5.46.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to require certain background checks on nonperformers who work in adult businesses during regular business hours to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. The goals of these nonperformer employee provisions are (1) to protect minors by requiring that all nonperformers regularly employed be over the age of 18 years; (2) to assure the correct identification of persons working in adult businesses; (3) to enable the city to deploy law enforcement resources effectively; and (4) to detect and discourage the involvement of crime in adult businesses by precluding the employment of nonperformers with certain sex-related convictions within a prior time period. It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of adult business employees or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof.

The definitions contained in Chapter 5.44 BMC shall govern for purposes of these regulations. (Ord. 09-01 § 4).

5.46.020 Adult business nonperformer work applicant background check.
A. No individual who works as a nonperformer in an adult business shall be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in an adult business without first submitting to a background check as provided below.

B. Individuals who wish to work as nonperformers in an adult business shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal application on a form provided by the chief of police. Such application shall contain the following information:

1. The employee applicant’s legal name and all used aliases.

2. Date of birth.

3. Driver’s license or identification number and state of issuance or other state identification which confirms the name of the applicant.

4. The license applicant’s fingerprints on a Livescan form provided by the Benicia police department. Any fees for fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints shall be taken within six months of the date of application.

5. Whether the nonperformer employee applicant has pled guilty or pled nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. Any applicant who admits to a recent prior sex-related offense as specified above shall be denied employment in an adult business during the applicable time period for disqualification called out herein.

C. The information provided above in subsection (B) of this section which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the nonperformer employee to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the California Public Records Act. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s mailing address, date of birth, age, driver’s license number and Social Security number. The city council in adopting the application system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality and/or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause the above-mentioned information to be redacted from any copy of a completed application form made available to any member of the public.

D. The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and an annual license fee. The amount of such fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council.

E. The chief of police or his/her designee must be available during normal working hours Monday through Friday to accept adult business nonperformer employee applications. The chief of police or his/her designee shall determine if an application is complete within five business days. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete, the chief of police shall immediately inform the applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult business nonperformer employee application in which the applicant denies any recent conviction of a sexual offense as specified in subsection (B)(5) of this section and payment of the license fee specified in subsection (D) of this section, the chief of police or his/her designee shall permit temporary employment of such applicant in an adult business that possesses a valid adult business license. (Ord. 09-04 § 1; Ord. 09-01 § 4).

5.46.030 Investigation and action on adult business nonperformer work application.
A. Upon submission of a completed nonperformer work application by an individual who wishes to work in an adult business during regular business hours, payment of license fees, and issuance of a temporary nonperformer application for work pursuant to BMC 5.46.020, the chief of police or his/her designee shall immediately stamp the application “Received” and in conjunction with city staff, including members of the police department, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the nonperformer employee applicant may be permitted to work in an adult business pursuant to the disqualifying terms of BMC 5.46.020(B)(5).

B. Investigation shall not be grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. The chief of police’s determination of any violation of BMC 5.46.020(B)(5) shall be made within 10 business days from the date the nonperformer employment application is filed with the chief of police. In the event the chief of police is unable to complete the investigation within 10 business days, he/she shall promptly notify the nonperformer employment applicant. In no case shall the investigation exceed 30 days.

C. The chief of police shall render a written decision to authorize or bar a nonperformer employee’s employment in a validly licensed adult business during regular business hours within the foregoing 10-day time period set forth in subsection (B) of this section. Said decision shall be mailed first class postage prepaid or hand delivered to the applicant, within the foregoing 10-day period or 30-day period if extended pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, at the address provided by the applicant in the application. Notice of such decision shall also be mailed first class postage prepaid or hand delivered to the owner or management of any adult business a nonperformer employee has applied to for employment within the time frame specified above for notification to the applicant.

D. The chief of police shall notify the applicant as follows:

1. The chief of police shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

2. If the application for work in an adult business during regular business hours is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the applicant may appeal the denial to the city manager. The city manager or a designated hearing officer shall conduct a hearing as described in BMC 5.46.040.

E. The chief of police shall grant the application for nonperformer work in an adult business unless the application is denied based on one of the grounds set forth in subsection (F) of this section.

F. The chief of police shall deny the application of a nonperformer to work in an adult business based on any of the following grounds:

1. The nonperformer work applicant has made a false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for work in a validly licensed adult business during regular business hours.

2. The nonperformer work applicant is under 18 years of age.

3. The nonperformer seeks work in a business prohibited by laws of the state or city or in a business that does not have a valid adult business license.

4. The nonperformer work applicant has pled guilty, or pled nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

G. Failure of the chief of police or his/her designee to render a decision on the application of a nonperformer for work in an adult business within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the nonperformer work application.

H. Each nonperformer work applicant must annually renew his/her work application with the chief of police or his/her designee by a written request for work renewal. If said application conforms to the previously approved application and there has been no change with respect to the applicant having been convicted of any crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, the chief of police or his/her designee shall renew the applicant’s availability for work in an adult business during regular business hours for one year. Any plea to or conviction of a sex-related offense requires the renewal application to be set for hearing before the chief of police in accordance with the provisions of this section. The request for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for action upon an initial application for nonperformer work in an adult business during regular business hours. The chief of police’s denial of a renewal application is subject to the hearing provisions of BMC 5.46.040. (Ord. 09-04 § 2; Ord. 09-01 § 4).

5.46.040 Denial of adult business nonperformer application for work.
A. On determining that grounds exist to deny a nonperformer work in an adult business during regular business hours, the chief of police or his/her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed action to the applicant. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing before the city manager or a designated hearing officer and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Benicia Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant, or shall be delivered to the applicant personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

B. On determining that grounds exist to deny work to a nonperformer in an adult business during regular business hours, the chief of police or his/her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed action to the applicant. The decision of the chief of police shall be appealable to the city manager by filing a written request for a hearing with the city clerk within 15 days following the day of mailing of the chief of police’s decision and paying the fee for appeals provided under this code. All such appeals shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be public records. The city manager shall issue a notice which shall set forth the time and place of a hearing before the city manager or a designated hearing officer which is within 30 days from the date the appeal was filed and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Benicia Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the applicant, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

C. The applicant shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. The city manager or designated hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the licensee. Extensions of time or continuances sought by an applicant/appellant shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on denial of an employment application of a nonperformer employee.

D. The application/request of a nonperformer to work in an adult business may be revoked, based on any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the applicant:

1. The applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for work as a nonperformer in an adult business during regular business hours.

2. The applicant has pled guilty, pled nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.

3. Failure to comply with the operating standards of Chapter 5.44 BMC or the requirements of this chapter.

E. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the city manager or designated hearing officer finds and determines that there are grounds to deny a nonperformer work in an adult business during regular business hours, the city manager or designated hearing officer shall deny the applicant work in an adult business establishment. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section on renewal of a work application, the city manager or designated hearing officer shall decide to sustain the decision, modify the decision or order the decision stricken and issue such order as the city manager or designated hearing officer finds is supported by the entire record. The city manager or designated hearing officer shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the applicant and any adult business where the applicant is working within four working days of the hearing. The city manager or designated hearing officer’s failure to render such a decision within this time frame shall constitute approved renewal of the applicant’s work during regular business hours in a validly licensed adult business.

F. If the continuing work of a nonperformer is denied pursuant to this section, the applicant may reapply for work with an adult business 12 months after the date of such denial.

G. The decision of the city manager or designated hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 09-01 § 4).

5.46.050 Violations.
Any violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business nonperformer work applications is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined. (Ord. 09-01 § 4).

5.46.060 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult business nonperformer employment applications are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the adult business licensing provisions as adopted by the city council of Benicia. (Ord. 09-01 § 4).

Chapter 5.48
MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTION, TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS AND COMMERCIAL STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
Sections:

5.48.010    Purpose of chapter.

5.48.020    Definitions.

5.48.030    Permits and exemptions.

5.48.040    Rules and regulations.

5.48.050    Applicants and issuance.

5.48.060    Liability provisions.

5.48.070    Violation.

5.48.080    Revocation or suspension.

5.48.090    Appeals.

5.48.010 Purpose of chapter.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide rules governing the issuance of filming permits for motion picture production, television productions and commercial still photography on location within the city. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that still photographers and motion picture, television commercial and nontheatrical filming companies will be encouraged to use locations for filming activities within the city so long as those activities are consistent with the public safety and protection of property. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Commercial still photography” shall mean photography by a photographer for profit, who uses public property and impedes use of the public property by others with props and/or other equipment.

B. “Designated city officer” shall mean the director of parks and community services.

C. “Motion picture, television, still photography or filming activities” shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and commercial still photography.

D. “News media” shall mean the filming or video taping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or cameramen.

E. “Permit” shall mean the filming permit issued by the designated city officer pursuant to this chapter.

F. “Private-family use” means and includes that noncommercial use for a group of people related by blood or marriage and their invited guests.

G. “Studio” shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.030 Permits and exemptions.
A. Permit Required. No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures or television pictures or commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the designated city officer. This permit does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy property not owned, leased or controlled by the city of Benicia. An applicant shall obtain the private property owner’s permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city. Evidence of such permission must be provided as part of the application submittal.

B. Permit Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following activities; provided, that the activity will not require the closure of a public street, substantially impede vehicular traffic thereon, or impact public safety:

1. News Media. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper, news services, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.

2. Private-Family Use. The filming or video taping of motion pictures solely for private-family use.

3. Noncommercial Still Photography. The photography or staging thereof when conducted for noncommercial purposes and such photography will not require the parking of more than two vehicles on any public street within the city.

4. The filming of commercial motion pictures or television pictures or commercial still photography conducted at studios as defined in BMC 5.48.020(G).

5. The filming of commercial motion pictures or television pictures or commercial still photography conducted by or for the city. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.040 Rules and regulations.
A. Rules. The designated city officer is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the form, time, and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He/she shall also provide for the issuance of filming permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following criteria:

1. The health and safety of all persons;

2. Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area;

3. The safety of property within the city; and

4. Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city.

B. Change of Date. Upon the request of the applicant, the issuing authority shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.050 Applicants and issuance.
A. Issuing Authority. The issuing authority shall be the designated city officer.

B. Applications. The application form will be provided by the parks and community services department. The application form will include, but not be limited to, the following information:

1. The name of the owner, the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted;

2. The specific location at such address or place;

3. The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;

4. A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

5. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity;

6. The exact number of personnel to be involved;

7. Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and

8. The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved.

C. Fees. A schedule for city services and use of city property shall be established by resolution of the city council.

D. Reimbursement for Personnel. The production company shall reimburse the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e., police, fire, traffic) for the purpose of assisting the production and any other related costs. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.060 Liability provisions.
A. Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a general liability special endorsement will be required in an amount of at least $1,000,000 naming the city as a coinsured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage for both public and private property. The city officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds. The endorsement shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days’ written notice to the city. A copy of the endorsement will remain on file with the department of parks and community services.

B. Workers’ Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for workers’ compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

C. Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.

D. Faithful Performance Bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond (in an amount to be determined by the city attorney) at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the bond may be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.070 Violation.
If an applicant violates any provision of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and conditions of the permit is considered a misdemeanor. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.080 Revocation or suspension.
A. Permit Revocation. The designated city officer may revoke the film permit if the permittee or any agents, employees or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the requirements set forth in the film permit or if the designated city officer determines after the film permit is issued that the film permit application was false in any material detail.

1. Notice of the grounds for revocation of the film permit shall be provided in writing by the designated city officer to the permit applicant or person in charge at the location of the filming activity.

2. Appeals of the film permit revocation shall be conducted in the manner specified in BMC 5.48.090.

B. Permit Suspension. The city employee assigned to monitor the filming activity site may suspend the film permit when the filming activity poses an immediate hazard to persons or property and the location manager will not, or cannot, prevent the hazard after being instructed to do so by the city employee.

1. The grounds for the permit suspension shall be provided in writing by the designated city officer to the permittee within one business day of the suspension.

2. Appeals of the permit suspension shall be conducted in the manner specified in BMC 5.48.090. (Ord. 98-8).

5.48.090 Appeals.
The permit applicant or permittee may appeal a permit denial, revocation, suspension, permit condition, insurance/fees requirement or the decision not to waive a deadline set forth in the policy. Such appeal shall be in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-35 § 1; Ord. 98-8).

Chapter 5.52
MASSAGE
Sections:

5.52.010    Purpose.

5.52.020    Definitions.

5.52.030    Permit required – Massage establishment – Home visit service – Massage therapist.

5.52.040    Business registration tax requirement.

5.52.050    Permit not required.

5.52.060    Massage establishment, home visit massage service permit application.

5.52.070    Massage establishment and home visit operating requirements.

5.52.080    Massage establishment facilities regulations.

5.52.090    Permits nonassignable.

5.52.100    Change of location or name.

5.52.110    Massage therapist – Permit required.

5.52.120    Massage therapist permit application.

5.52.130    Renewal of permits – Massage establishment, home visit massage service, massage therapist.

5.52.140    Application of regulations to existing massage establishments, home visit services, and massage therapists.

5.52.150    Prohibited conduct.

5.52.160    Suspension or revocation hearing.

5.52.170    Appeal procedures.

5.52.180    Burden of proof.

5.52.190    Public nuisance.

5.52.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of massage establishments, home visit massage services, and persons offering massage and bodywork be regulated in the interests of public health, safety and welfare by providing minimum building sanitation and health standards and to ensure that persons offering massage shall possess the minimum qualifications necessary to operate such businesses and to perform such services offered. Further, it is the intent of this chapter to ensure that such businesses and persons operate in a manner that prevents criminal behavior. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.020 Definitions.
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter:

“Applicant” means the permit applicant and each of the following persons: the managing responsible officer/employee, a general partner, a limited partner who owns or controls 20 percent or more of the business, a shareholder of a corporation who owns or controls 20 percent or more of the shares of the corporation which owns the business.

“Bodywork” means the skillful application of touch to enhance health and well-being. “Bodywork” includes a variety of philosophical approaches, theoretical frameworks, and techniques such as massage, movement and education. The term “bodywork” shall be deemed a form of massage and be subject to requirements of this chapter.

“Employee” means any and all persons, other than a massage therapist and independent contractors, employed by the massage establishment who may render any service to the permittee, and who receives compensation from the establishment and who has no physical contact with the customers or clients. The term “employee” shall include independent contractors who are regularly employed by the establishment and who work at the massage establishment.

“Home visit massage service” means any business where a function of such business is to engage in or carry on massage, not at a fixed location but at a location designated by the customer, massage therapist, or other person.

“Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes for any form of consideration (whether for the massage, as part of a membership, as part of other services or a product, or otherwise) by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances; or with or without supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice; or by baths, including but not limited to Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.

“Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any massage.

“Massage therapist,” “massage trainee,” or “massage/bodywork practitioner” mean a nonmedical health care professional who offers services to the public using a massage or bodywork specialty and health enhancement approach in caring for clients for any form of consideration (whether for the massage, as part of other services or a product, or otherwise) and has obtained a permit as required by this chapter.

“Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage and/or bodywork, which has been approved pursuant to the California Education Code. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. The city shall have the right to confirm that the applicant has actually attended class in a recognized school. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.030 Permit required – Massage establishment – Home visit service – Massage therapist.
It is unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises within the city, the operation of a massage establishment or home visit massage service or the function of a massage therapist without first having obtained a permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. A permit shall be valid for 24 months from the date of issuance unless revoked or suspended. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.040 Business registration tax requirement.
A massage establishment and home visit massage service shall pay any required business registration tax for such business and occupation including the business license tax. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.050 Permit not required.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties provided sufficient documentation verifying exempt status is furnished to the chief of police.

A. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or any physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California.

B. Barbers, beauticians and aestheticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses, except that this provision shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the customers.

C. Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums or any other health facilities duly licensed by the state of California.

D. Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

E. Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletes or athletic teams while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes.

F. Massage practitioners or massage therapists who are duly certified by the Massage Therapy Organization as set forth in Business and Profession Code Section 4600 et seq. (Ord. 09-06 § 1; Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.060 Massage establishment, home visit massage service permit application.
A. Any person, corporation, or partnership desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment or home visit massage service shall make application to the chief of police or authorized representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee set forth in the city fee schedule shall be paid. A copy of the receipt shall accompany the application.

B. The application and fee required under this section shall be in addition to any license, permit, fee or tax required under any other chapter of this code.

C. The application for permit does not authorize a massage establishment or home visit service to operate until such permit has been granted.

D. Each applicant for a permit shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury:

1. The full true name under which the business will be conducted.

2. The present or proposed address where the business is to be conducted.

3. The applicant’s full, true name, and other names used, date of birth, California driver’s license number or California identification number, social security number, present residence address and telephone number, sex, height, weight, color of hair, and color of eyes. Such other identification and information shall be provided, as required by the chief of police or his/her representative, necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified and required in the application.

4. The applicant’s residences, inclusive of dates at each address, for the last five years.

5. The applicant’s business, occupation, and employment history for five years preceding the date of application, and the inclusive dates of same.

6. The permit history of the applicant, whether such person has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license; whether the permit or license was revoked or suspended; or if a vocational or professional license or permit was issued, revoked, or suspended and the reason thereof.

7. All convictions for any crime involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or convictions of California Penal Code Sections 314, 315, 316, 318 and 647(b) (as now written or as amended), or convictions of crimes designated in Government Code Section 51032(b), or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence or moral turpitude. Convictions under the laws of other states or countries which proscribe the same conduct or similar conduct as the aforedesignated California crimes shall be provided. Convictions that have been expunged must be reported.

8. A complete definition of all services to be provided.

9. The name, address, and date of birth of each massage therapist or employee who is or will be employed in the massage establishment or home visit service.

10. The name and address of any massage business or other like establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given pursuant to this section.

11. Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.

12. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation.

13. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporate applicants shall apply to the corporate partner.

14. The applicant, corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer/employee. Such person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter. The corporation’s or partnership’s responsible managing officer must, at all times, meet all of the requirements set for permittees by this chapter or the corporation or partnership permit shall be suspended until a responsible managing officer who meets such requirements is designated. If no such person is found within 90 days, the corporation or partnership permit is deemed cancelled and a new application for permit must be filed.

15. The chief of police or his/her authorized representative may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of establishing identification. Fingerprinting will be taken at a place designated by the chief of police. Any required fingerprinting fee will be the responsibility of the applicant.

16. Two photographs of the applicant and managing responsible officer are to be taken by the police department.

17. A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises, or on adjoining premises, owned or controlled by the applicant.

18. The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the business is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and/or an acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his/her property.

19. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and into the background of the applicant and the responsible managing officer.

20. Proof of massage malpractice or professional liability insurance in the sum of not less than $500,000 per massage technician licensed, or to be licensed, at the massage establishment.

21. The applicant shall submit any change of address or fact which may occur during the procedure of applying for a massage establishment permit.

E. The chief of police or authorized representative shall have up to 60 days, after submission of all required information, including the required certificates of compliance, to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon the completion of the investigation, the chief of police, or authorized representative, shall grant the permit, with or without conditions, if the chief finds in the exercise of discretion all of the following:

1. The required fee has been paid.

2. The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter.

3. The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application.

4. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, or any officers or director, if the applicant is a corporation; or a partner if the applicant is a partnership, or the managing responsible officer has not been convicted within five years preceding application in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct which is a violation of the provisions of California Penal Code Sections 314, 315, 316, 318 and 647(b) (as now written or as amended), or of crimes that are designated in Government Code Section 51032(b), or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, violence or moral turpitude. Convictions under the laws of other states or countries which proscribe the same or similar conduct as the aforedesignated California crimes shall be considered.

5. Within five years preceding application, the applicant or managing responsible officer/employee has not had a massage establishment, home visit service massage therapist, or other similar permit or license revoked, or suspended by the city, or any other state or local agency prior to the date of approval, or engaged in conduct that would be a grounds for revocation of a permit under this chapter.

6. The applicant is at least 18 years of age.

7. The massage establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards.

F. If the chief of police or authorized representative, following investigation of the applicant, in the exercise of discretion, fails to make the findings stated in subsection E of this section, the chief shall deny said application by written notice to the applicant.

G. A massage establishment comprised entirely of persons exempt under BMC 5.52.050, Permit not required, shall not be required to obtain a massage permit. However, proper documentation shall be furnished to the chief of police to verify the exempt status.

H. In the event an applicant has a valid permit for massage with another city, then when able to do so, the chief of police may use the background investigation from that city to determine the extent necessary for the background investigation for the city. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.070 Massage establishment and home visit operating requirements.
No person shall engage in, conduct, carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any massage establishment or home visit service, unless each and all of the following requirements are met:

A. Each person employed or acting as a massage therapist shall have a valid permit issued by the chief of police which shall be clearly posted on the premises or visible on the massage therapist’s person during home visits. It is unlawful for any owner, manager, operator, responsible managing officer/ employee, or permittee to employ or permit a person to act as a massage therapist who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked massage therapist permit issued pursuant to this chapter. A trainee (person currently in the process of receiving certification and enrolled in a certification training program) may operate and provide massage therapy services under the direct supervision and guidance of the licensed operator/therapist. Trainees may not be paid or bill for their services.

B. The possession of a valid massage establishment permit does not authorize the possessor or any other person to perform work for which a massage therapist permit is required unless the owner/operator is a certified licensed therapist. Only one permit fee is required (owner/operator permit).

C. Massage shall be provided or given only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. No massage establishment shall be open and no customer shall be in the establishment between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. No home visit massage shall be provided or given before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.

D. A list of services available and the cost of such services shall be posted in an open public place within the premises, and shall be described in readily understandable language. No owner, manager, operator, responsible managing employee, or permittee shall permit, and no massage therapist shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted.

E. The massage establishment permit shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. The massage therapist working will also have their permit displayed in an open place on the premises.

F. Every massage establishment and home visit massage service shall keep a written client appointment and event record of the date and hour of each service provided; the name and address or business location or site of each patron and the service received; and the name of the massage therapist administering the service. Such records shall be open to inspection only by officials, including the police department and the city attorney, charged with enforcement of this chapter and for no other purpose, including a prohibition of use of the file by owners and employees of the establishment. Such records shall be retained on the premises of the massage establishment and at the home visit business office for a period of two years.

G. Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings and linens. Clean towels, coverings and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one patron, unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in separate, approved receptacles.

H. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously at the same massage establishment, a separate massage room or rooms and separate dressing facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons. A male patron and a female patron may both receive a massage in the same room if they both consent. A single toilet facility will be provided with a locking door. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the treatment of only one sex if that is in violation of any civil rights or other laws requiring service to both genders.

I. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the county health department. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned with a disinfectant approved by the health department after each use. All walls, ceilings, floors, and other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

J. Instruments utilized in performing massage shall not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sanitized using approved methods.

K. All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear clean, professional attire.

L. No person shall enter, be or remain in any part of a massage establishment while in possession of an open container of alcohol, or consuming or using any alcoholic beverage or drugs except (1) pursuant to a prescription for such drugs, or (2) if the establishment is closed for massages at that time. The owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager, or permittee shall not permit any such person to enter or remain upon such premises.

M. No massage establishment or home visit massage service shall operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.

N. No massage establishment or home visit massage service granted a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers that any service is available other than those services described in BMC 5.52.020, Definitions, “massage,” nor shall any massage establishment or home visit massage service employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services as described in this chapter.

O. No massage may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked in which those doors are locked during business hours. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures are acceptable on all inner dressing and treatment rooms in lieu of doors.

P. A massage shall not be given unless the patron is properly draped and covered and, in addition, a female patron’s breasts are fully covered.

Q. No massage establishment shall be open for business without at least one massage therapist on the premises unless there is a retail clerk selling merchandise or a receptionist taking appointments.

R. An industry standard massage table will be used meeting required health standards. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.080 Massage establishment facilities regulations.
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements:

A. Any signs shall be in conformance with the current ordinances of the city.

B. At least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons.

C. Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

D. Adequate equipment for disinfecting instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided.

E. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times.

F. Closed or covered cabinets shall be provided for storage of clean linens.

G. An adequate dressing area and toilet facility shall be provided for patrons.

H. A wash basin for employees shall be provided at all times. The basin shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to performing of massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin.

I. Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with a washable material.

J. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of the municipal code shall be provided prior to the issuance of any permit.

K. Home Visit Massage Service. Any massage therapist who provides massage at any hotel or motel shall first notify the owner, manager, or person in charge thereof that such permittee intends to provide massage to a person or persons registered at the hotel or motel and give such owner, manager, or person in charge the name of his/her massage therapist permit.

L. Inspection by Officials. The investigating and enforcing officials of the city, including the county health officials, or their designees, shall have the right to enter the premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.090 Permits nonassignable.
No massage establishment or home visit massage service permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by the permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons; any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be deemed terminated and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit and in each case the permittee shall thereafter be deemed to be the surviving partner(s). If the permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be deemed terminated and void unless the new stockholders are identified within 10 days of transfer and they meet all requirements under this chapter for stockholders. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.100 Change of location or name.
A. A change of location of a massage establishment may be approved by the chief of police, the community development director, building official, finance director and the fire chief or their designated representatives, provided all ordinances and regulations of the city are complied with.

B. No permittee shall operate under any name or conduct any massage establishment or home visit service under any designation not specified in the approved permit.

C. Any application for an expansion of a building or other place of business or a massage establishment shall require compliance with this chapter; no expansion of a nonconforming location shall be permitted. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.110 Massage therapist – Permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of massage or act as a massage therapist unless such person holds a valid massage therapist permit issued by the city. Each massage therapist permit holder shall be issued a photo identification badge which will also serve as a massage therapist permit. The permit holder shall display the massage therapist permit during business hours. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.120 Massage therapist permit application.
A. Each applicant for a massage therapist permit shall make application to the chief of police or his/her designee. Prior to submitting an application, a nonrefundable fee in the sum set forth in the city fee schedule shall be paid to help defray the costs of the investigation required by this chapter. A copy of the cashier’s receipt shall accompany the application.

B. Permit fees required under this section shall be in addition to any license, permit, fee or tax requirements under any other section of this code.

C. The application for permit does not authorize the applicant to provide massage until such permit has been granted.

D. Each applicant for a massage therapist permit shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury:

1. All information required by BMC 5.52.060(D)(3) through (8), (11), (16) and (21), Massage establishment, home visit massage service permit application.

2. The applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a 160-hour resident course of instruction from either:

a. A recognized school as defined in BMC 5.52.020, Definitions, “recognized school of massage”; or

b. An existing school or institution of learning outside the state of California together with a certified transcript of the applicant’s school records showing date of enrollment, hours of instruction and graduation from a course having at least a minimum requirement prescribed by Title 5, Division 21, of the California Administrative Code; wherein the theory, method, profession and work of massage is taught, and a copy of the school’s approval by its State Board of Education.

3. Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to fully investigate the matters as required to be set forth in the application.

4. Two photographs of the applicant to be taken by the city police department designee. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the right of the chief of police or his designee to confirm the height and weight of the applicant, or to take additional photographs.

5. The chief of police or authorized representative may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of establishing identification. Any required fingerprinting fees will be the responsibility of the applicant. Fingerprinting shall be taken at a place designated by the chief.

6. A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state of California stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately preceding the date of application, been examined and found to be free of tuberculosis. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 199.20, and unless otherwise required by state or federal law, nothing in this chapter shall require testing or disclosure as to whether an applicant is infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

7. Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek information and to investigate the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to investigate the background of the applicant.

8. Each applicant shall successfully complete a practical performance examination administered through the city wherein the applicant has been required to demonstrate a basic knowledge of anatomy, physiology, hygiene, and massage, unless applicant can provide proof of certification by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or a certified school of massage therapy.

E. The chief of police or authorized representative shall have up to 60 days after the submission of all required information to complete his/her investigation. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief, or authorized representative, shall grant the permit, with or without conditions, if in the exercise of discretion he finds those matters designated in BMC 5.52.060(D)(3) through (8), (11), (16) and (21), Massage home visit establishment, home visit massage service permit application, have been provided and are true and correct and in the exercise of discretion further finds:

1. The applicant has furnished an acceptable diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school;

2. The applicant has furnished written proof from a recognized school that the minimum number of hours of instruction have been completed;

3. The applicant has passed the test required herein.

F. If the chief of police or authorized representative, following investigation of the applicant, in the exercise of discretion, fails to make the findings in subsection E of this section, the chief, or authorized representative, shall deny said application by dated, written notice.

G. New Massage Therapists – Notification. The holder of the massage establishment or home visit service permit shall notify the chief of police, in writing, of the name and address of each person employed as a massage therapist at such establishment within five days of this person’s being employed. The requirements of this section are in addition to the other provisions of this chapter; and nothing contained herein shall relieve the permittee of the responsibility of ascertaining, prior to employment, that said person has a current unrevoked massage therapist permit. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.130 Renewal of permits – Massage establishment, home visit massage service, massage therapist.
Permittees shall have 30 days from date of expiration to renew their permit. If, upon the thirty-first day an application of renewal has not been received, the permit shall be deemed suspended until such time as the renewal application has been received. If a renewal application and all required information for the renewal is not received within 60 days after expiration, the license shall be deemed expired and no privilege to provide massage shall exist.

Renewals shall be processed and investigated as though they were initial applications, except that the applicant is required to submit only that information which has changed from the last application or renewal. A fingerprint check may be completed upon each renewal. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.140 Application of regulations to existing massage establishments, home visit services, and massage therapists.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses whether the business was established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, except that massage establishments or home visit services legally in business prior to the effective date shall have six months to file for a massage establishment or home visit service permit and to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Massage therapists who have valid business license permits obtained prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have until the expiration of their current business license permit to apply for a massage therapist permit under the terms of this chapter but shall otherwise comply with the operating regulations set forth herein within 90 days. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.150 Prohibited conduct.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.160 Suspension or revocation hearing.
The chief of police or authorized representative may revoke or suspend a massage establishment permit or massage therapist permit if it is found that the permittee does not possess the qualifications for the permit as required by this chapter, has been convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any lesser included offense, has made a material misrepresentation on the permit application or renewal or has violated any mandatory provisions of this chapter, any conditions of the permit, or any of the laws which would have been grounds for denial of the permit. For purposes of this section, permittee shall include the managing responsible officer or employee. Further, the permittee shall be responsible for those acts of its employees which are done in the course and scope of their employment by the permittee.

A hearing shall be scheduled upon not less than 10 calendar days’ notice to the permittee stating the grounds for proposed revocation or suspension. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the address shown on the last application or renewal. If reasonable attempts to otherwise serve are not successful, service may be provided by first class mail.

Notice of the decision shall be given in the same manner as for the hearing. The decision of the chief of police or his/her authorized representative may be appealed by the permittee to the city manager within 15 calendar days of service by filing written notice of appeal with the city manager’s office stating the basis for the appeal and the errors claimed to have occurred. If the permit is suspended or revoked, the permit shall be surrendered.

Service shall be deemed complete when personal service is made, when the certified letter is delivered, or when the decision is mailed by first class mail. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.170 Appeal procedures.
Any interested person may appeal the decision to revoke, suspend, deny or approve a massage establishment or massage therapist permit by filing a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.180 Burden of proof.
Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the permittee/applicant in any hearing or other matter under this chapter. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

5.52.190 Public nuisance.
Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may in the exercise of discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in a manner provided by law. (Ord. 08-04 § 1).

Title 6
ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Chapters:

6.04    General Provisions

6.08    Administration and Enforcement

6.12    Licensing of Dogs

6.14    Miniature Pigs

6.16    Regulation of Dogs

6.20    Animal Shelter and Impoundment

6.24    Public Nuisance

6.28    Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Animals

6.32    Animal Keeping

6.33    Beekeeping

6.36    Feral, Wild and Undomesticated Animals

6.40    Commercial Animal Establishments

6.44    Animal Keeper Permit

6.48    Administrative Hearings

Chapter 6.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

6.04.010    Purpose.

6.04.020    Definitions.

6.04.030    Prohibition of slaughtering.

6.04.040    Disposal of dead animals.

6.04.050    Retention of animal without consent.

6.04.060    Appeal of administrative decisions.

6.04.070    Applicability of state laws.

6.04.080    Penalties.

6.04.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to establish standards for the care, ownership, licensing, treatment and impounding of animals maintained in the city in such a manner as to ensure that such animals will not endanger the health, peace and safety of the residents of this city and that animals are kept in a clean, sanitary condition and not subjected to suffering, cruelty or abuse. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used are defined as follows:

“Altered” means a dog or cat that has been spayed or neutered.

“Animal” means any (1) arthropod or (2) vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, and includes these categories: birds, fish, mammals, amphibians and reptiles.

“Animal control department” or “department” means, collectively, the personnel of the police department charged with implementing and enforcing the provisions of this title.

“Animal control director” (“director”) means the police department patrol division commander who oversees and supervises the animal control function of the city or such person with whom the city has contracted to oversee the city animal shelter, including field animal control operations, and kennel and office operations.

“Animal control officer” means any person appointed by the police chief to assist in implementing and enforcing the provisions of this title. “Animal control officer” includes, without limitation, a code enforcement officer, peace officer, and any other person authorized by the police chief or employed by the city to implement and enforce the provisions of this title.

“Animal shelter” means the place or places designated by the city as a place for the keeping and safe holding of animals impounded pursuant to this title.

“Apiary” includes bees, comb, hives, appliances, or colonies, or wherever bees are kept, located or stored.

“At large” means any animal which is off the premises of its owner, custodian or caretaker and which is not under physical restraint by leash of a size and material appropriate to the size and temperament of the animal and which is held by a person capable of restraining the animal, or is not otherwise physically restrained by some other device or instrument, except that such device or instrument shall not include voice control, eye control or signal control of the animal by any person, device or instrument, except with respect to a canine good citizen certified dog.

“Commercial animal establishment” includes, without limitation, a breeding or boarding kennel or cattery, pet shop, pet grooming parlor, commercial stable, riding academy, pony ride, guard-dog and/or sentry-dog service, animal menagerie, animal shelter, or miscellaneous animal or reptile establishment. For the purpose of this title, guard-dog and/or sentry-dog services located outside the city, but providing service within the city on a regular basis, shall be included within the definition of commercial animal establishment.

“Dog kennel” means any building or premises upon or within which five or more dogs, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained.

“Dog park” or “off-leash area” means the area of a city-owned or controlled park or area designated for off-leash use for dogs by the resolution of the city council.

“Enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, run, cage, compartment or hutch.

“Hearing officer” means any designated representative of the city manager who conducts a hearing under BMC 6.28.110.

“Humane society” means the Benicia Vallejo Humane Society or Friends of Animals or other similar local organizations.

“Impound” or “impounded” means the status of an animal which has been received into the custody of an animal control officer or peace officer duly authorized by the law to receive custody of such animal, whether held in personal custody of the officer, in an animal shelter, or in a vehicle controlled by such officer.

“Miniature pig” or “miniature pot-bellied pig” means a cloven-hoofed animal including, but not limited to, tea cup pigs, micro pigs, Juliana, Vietnamese, Chinese, or Asian pot-bellied pig which is domesticated and which is not a farm pig or hog.

“Operator” means the legal owner or person in actual control of any activities involving animals.

“Owner” means any person who is the legal owner, keeper, harborer, possessor or the custodian of an animal. Ownership is also established by a person registering as the owner on a license or other legal document or by a person claiming ownership and taking possession of an animal.

“Permanently non-fertile dog” means a dog that (1) has not been spayed or neutered, and (2) has been certified by a licensed veterinarian as a dog that cannot reproduce during its remaining life because of age or a permanent health condition.

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, club, organization or other legal entity.

“Secure enclosure” means a fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children or any part, limb or appendage of any child, and which is suitable to confine a potentially dangerous animal or a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper of the animal, or at the direction of the animal control director. A secure enclosure shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping and from preventing an adult or child from coming in contact with the animal.

“Service dog” means any dog trained to aid a physically disabled person, including without limitation a guide dog and a signal dog.

“Substantial physical injury” means a substantial impairment of the physical condition of a person or animal that requires professional medical treatment, including, but not limited to: loss of consciousness, concussion, bone fracture, protracted loss or impairment of function of any bodily member or organ, tissue tears or punctures, disfiguring lacerations, wound requiring multiple sutures, or any injury requiring corrective or cosmetic surgery.

“Unaltered dog” means any dog other than a permanently non-fertile dog that has not been spayed or neutered.

“Wild animal” means any animal which may not be imported, transported or possessed without first obtaining a California Department of Fish and Game permit, as set forth in Title 14 of California Code of Regulations, section 671, or its successor regulations. (Ord. 17-09 § 1; Ord. 17-06 § 1; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.030 Prohibition of slaughtering.
Slaughtering of animals within the city limits is strictly prohibited, unless it takes place in a licensed restaurant for the purpose of food preparation. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.040 Disposal of dead animals.
A. An owner may bury a dead animal or part thereof, within six hours after the death of same, provided the animal is buried on private real property with the knowledge and consent of the property owner and provided the animal is buried in a hole at least three feet deep with at least three feet of soil above said carcass.

B. An owner of a deceased animal may notify the department and request pick up and disposal of said carcass. It shall be the duty of the department to take custody of all dead animals from the owner when requested. A pick-up and disposal fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council may be charged for such service.

C. The department shall be responsible for the disposal of all dead animals whose ownership cannot be established.

D. Whenever the department picks up a deceased animal whose ownership is or may be readily established, the owner shall be notified and a notice shall be posted at the city animal shelter giving such information in an easily visible location. This section shall not apply when the department picks up a deceased animal at the request of the owner. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.050 Retention of animal without consent.
No person shall take possession of any animal found running at large without notifying the director, or his designee, within 12 hours after receiving possession, giving a full description of the animal and the address and phone number of the place where the animal may be found. Such person, upon the request of the director or his designee, shall surrender such animal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.060 Appeal of administrative decisions.
Unless otherwise provided herein, any person aggrieved by any administrative decision made under this title may, upon the payment of a fee to be established by resolution of the city council, appeal the determination to a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.48 BMC. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.070 Applicability of state laws.
The provisions of all applicable state laws and regulations relating to animal health, control and care, shall apply when such provisions are more stringent than the provisions of this title. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.04.080 Penalties.
Except for violations of Chapter 6.28 BMC, any violation of this title shall be an infraction. Each day or part thereof when any violation of this title shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.08
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

6.08.010    Director – Position created.

6.08.020    Authority and immunities.

6.08.030    Duties of director and animal control officials.

6.08.040    Inspections.

6.08.050    Recordkeeping.

6.08.060    Unlawful obstruction.

6.08.010 Director – Position created.
The position of animal control director (“director”) shall be created and shall be under the direction of the police chief or a designee. The director is authorized and directed to perform, in conjunction with and under the supervision of the police chief or designee, the powers and duties set forth in this title. Nothing in this title shall prevent the city from undertaking any or all of the duties of the animal shelter and or any animal control services as defined herein. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.08.020 Authority and immunities.
A. The director and animal control officers shall enforce state and local laws relating to the licensing of dogs and the care, ownership, treatment and impounding of animals and shall have immunity from liability for acts performed in good faith in the course of such duties.

B. The director and animal control officers shall have authority to issue citations for violations of animal control laws. Violators of animal control laws shall be given the opportunity to be released on citation, rather than be taken into custody; however, any person who (1) fails to present his/her driver’s license or other satisfactory evidence of his/her identity or (2) refuses to sign a citation shall be taken into custody by police officers and not by the director or animal control officers who are not police officers.

C. In the performance of their duties, the director and animal control officers who are not police officers shall have the power, authority and immunity of a public officer and employee as set forth in Penal Code Section 836.5 or its successor provisions to make arrests without warrant whenever they have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a public offense in their presence which is a violation of this title, or of any ordinance of the city or penal law of this state relating to the care, ownership, licensing, treatment and impounding of animals. Animal control officers who have not received the Penal Code Section 832 training on arrests shall not have the power to make arrests.

D. The term “arrest” as used in this section shall mean the power to detain violators for a time sufficient to complete the processing of a citation and release pursuant to Section 853.5 and 853.6 of the Penal Code or its successor provisions, but shall not be construed as authority to take any such violators into custody.

E. The director, subject to the approval of the police chief, may promulgate any necessary rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this title.

F. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting the authority of the director or any animal control officer granted or imposed by any other applicable law or regulation. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.08.030 Duties of director and animal control officials.
The director and animal control officers shall be empowered and shall have the duty to follow the provisions of this title and all state laws pertaining to the care, licensing, treatment and impounding of animals maintained in the city. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.08.040 Inspections.
A. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this title, or whenever the director or an animal control officer has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this title or other applicable law, said official is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon an animal control officer by this title or other applicable law, provided that:

1. If such property is occupied, the animal control officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupants and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If such entry is refused, the animal control officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property, including an inspection warrant.

2. If such property is unoccupied, the animal control officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If such entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, the animal control officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property, including an inspection warrant.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the animal control officer has probable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the life or safety of the animal, other animals, or the public, he/she shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property be occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, the animal control officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and purpose of the inspection. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.08.050 Recordkeeping.
In conformance with the open government ordinance, the Public Records Act and the city’s records retention resolution, all records of the department are the records of the police department and shall be maintained by the police department and shall not be removed therefrom except upon written order from the police chief or other duly constituted authority. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.08.060 Unlawful obstruction.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully resist, hinder, molest, delay or obstruct any person authorized to enforce this title, while such person is engaged in the performance of his or her duties. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.12
LICENSING OF DOGS
Sections:

6.12.010    Administration.

6.12.020    License term, conditions and exceptions.

6.12.030    Rabies vaccination – Deferment.

6.12.040    Application.

6.12.050    Fees, discounts, waivers and surcharges.

6.12.060    Renewal – Late fee – Penalty.

6.12.070    Nontransferability and refunds.

6.12.080    Issuance of duplicate tags and licenses.

6.12.090    Unlawful use of tag.

6.12.100    Disposition of fees and fines.

6.12.010 Administration.
A. The finance director or county shall be the issuing authority for dog licenses. Upon payment of the license fee provided in this chapter, and upon presentation of a valid vaccination certificate, as provided in this chapter, the issuing authority shall issue a license certificate stating the year for which such license fee is paid, the date of payment, the name and resident address to whom such license is issued, the name, breed and sex of the dog licensed, and the serial number of the license tag issued. Such certificate shall be delivered to the person paying such license fee, and one copy shall be retained by the issuing authority.

B. The issuing authority shall at the same time issue and deliver to the person paying the license fee a tag of such form and design as the issuing authority shall designate, with the words “Solano County Dog License” and a serial number and the licensing period for which the tag was issued plainly inscribed thereon. The license tag shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness, or other device which shall be at all times worn by such dog. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.020 License term, conditions and exceptions.
A. Except as provided in this chapter, every owner of any dog over the age of four months in the city shall obtain a license for each such dog so owned, cared for, or controlled by such person.

B. All owners of dogs subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter shall obtain one of the following three types of dog licenses:

1. Altered Dog License. An altered dog license shall be obtained for an altered dog as defined by this title.

2. Permanently Non-Fertile Dog License. A permanently non-fertile dog license shall be obtained for a permanently non-fertile dog as defined by this title.

3. Unaltered Dog License. An unaltered dog license shall be obtained for an unaltered dog as defined by this title.

C. An altered dog license and a permanently non-fertile dog license may be purchased for either a one-year, two-year or three-year period. An unaltered dog license may only be purchased for a one-year period.

D. Such license shall be obtained and the fee therefor paid within 30 days after the day in which the dog is four months old, or within 30 days after acquisition of the dog, or within 30 days of moving into the city and annually thereafter prior to the expiration of the license. The license fee shall be as set forth by council resolution.

E. Written proof of neutering or spaying or that the dog permanently cannot reproduce must be provided at the time of the initial licensing for either an altered dog license or a permanently non-fertile dog license, but need not be produced for renewal of such licenses.

F. The license provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:

1. Dogs that are kept, harbored, or maintained by owners who are nonresidents and are staying within the city for 30 days or less, if kept, harbored, or maintained only during such temporary sojourn of their owners;

2. Dogs brought to the city exclusively for the purpose of participating in any dog show or exhibition, and which are actually entered in and kept at such show or exhibition;

3. Dogs under treatment in the custody or control of animal hospitals;

4. Dogs on sale in duly licensed pet shops; and

5. Dogs owned, kept or controlled by any person having a permit to keep and maintain a dog kennel; provided, that such dogs, when removed from such kennel, shall bear an identification tag attached to a collar, harness or other device, which tag shall be of a size and type designated by the issuing authority, and shall set forth the name and address of such kennel. Said tag shall be furnished at the sole expense of the kennel owner.

6. Dogs being fostered as a part of a nonprofit agency’s program. The foster program shall be registered with the department and an individual foster dog shall be fostered in a particular residence for a period of no more than six months.

G. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any person moving into the city who is an owner of a dog possessing a valid, current dog license issued by another incorporated city within the county of Solano shall not be required to apply for a city dog license for a period of six months from the date the owner moved into the city or the date of expiration of the license issued by the other city, whichever is earlier.

H. Upon request of an animal control officer, an owner of a dog for which a license is required shall present to such officer a current, valid certificate of vaccination or license tag for such dog. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.030 Rabies vaccination – Deferment.
A. No dog shall be licensed without presentation of a certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the dog to be licensed has been administered an anti-rabies vaccination within 30 days prior to the issuance of the license, or has received anti-rabies vaccination sufficient to immunize the dog against rabies for the entire licensing period.

B. The vaccination requirement for rabies shall not apply to a dog if a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified at such time rabies vaccine may endanger the dog’s health because of its age, infirmity, debility or other physiological considerations, and said dog is kept in the house or in a fenced yard adequate to confine the animal at all times. A temporary license shall be issued to any dog for whom rabies vaccination deferment is authorized under this part. The temporary license shall be valid only during the period that vaccination would endanger the dog’s health as said period is shown by the veterinarian’s certificate.

C. The vaccination requirement for rabies shall not apply to a dog if a licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified that the dog has been titer tested in the past one year. A license for such dog shall only be valid for one year. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.040 Application.
Application for dog licenses shall be made in writing on forms to be provided by the issuing authority which shall include the following information and documentation for each dog:

A. Name and address of owner;

B. Address where dog is kept;

C. Name, breed, age, sex and color of dog; and

D. A current rabies vaccination certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with BMC 6.12.030. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.050 Fees, discounts, waivers and surcharges.
A. All license fees imposed pursuant to this section shall be in the amounts established by resolution of the city council and in the amount established by the county. Such amounts shall be in compliance with Government Code Section 38792 or its successor provisions.

B. The licensing fee shall be prorated on a quarterly basis for new residents, newly acquired dogs, or puppies at four months of age. Proof of new residency, purchase or adoption date of dog or dog’s age must be presented at the time of licensing to be eligible for the prorated fee. For a dog adopted from the city animal shelter, the first one-year license fee shall be waived or the first two- or three-year license fee shall be reduced by 33 percent. Proof of adoption from the city animal shelter must be presented at the time of licensing to be eligible for the prorated fee.

C. The dog license fee shall be waived for any service dog, if such dog is under the control of and is aiding a blind, hearing impaired, or physically disabled person, or if such dog is owned by or in the custody of a bona fide organization having as its primary purpose the furnishing and training of service dogs.

D. The dog license fee shall be waived for one altered dog kept in a household where the owner of the dog is over the age of 65. A senior status license fee waiver shall not apply for an unaltered dog license.

E. The dog license fee shall be waived for dogs owned and used by a public agency, regardless of reproductive status.

F. A surcharge shall be assessed at the time of licensing of any dog that has been deemed a dangerous dog under Chapter 6.28 BMC. The amount of the surcharge shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.060 Renewal – Late fee – Penalty.
A. Each dog license issued pursuant to this chapter may be renewed. Application for renewal shall be made to the issuing authority not later than 15 days after the expiration date on the license.

B. If application for a license renewal is made more than 15 days after a dog license is required, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the regular license fees, such late fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council or the county. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.070 Nontransferability and refunds.
License tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the dog or the owner leaving the city or the removal of the dog from the city before expiration of the license term. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.080 Issuance of duplicate tags and licenses.
Whenever a dog license tag or license issued for the current year by the issuing authority has been lost, or taken or stolen by parties unknown to the owner of the dog for which the same was issued, such owner may, on the payment of a fee and on making and subscribing to an affidavit of the loss of such tag or license, receive from the issuing authority a duplicate dog license tag for the remaining portion of the term for which the original license was issued. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.090 Unlawful use of tag.
It is unlawful for any person to attach a dog license tag to the collar of any dog except the dog which is described in the application for such license tag. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.12.100 Disposition of fees and fines.
In accordance with Section 30652 of the Food and Agricultural Code or its successor provisions, all fees for the issuance of dog license tags and all fines collected pursuant to Division 14 of the Food and Agricultural Code shall be paid to the county except for any fees or fines imposed by the city and shall be used for the purposes set forth at that section as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.14
MINIATURE PIGS
Sections:

6.14.020    Regulations.

6.14.030    License.

6.14.040    License applications.

6.14.050    License issuance and renewal.

6.14.060    Tags – Attachment to collar.

6.14.070    Exhibition of licenses.

6.14.080    Applicability of chapter.

6.14.020 Regulations.
Miniature pot-bellied pigs are permitted inside the city limits subject to the following conditions:

A. No more than two miniature pot-bellied pigs shall be kept within or upon any parcel of land or dwelling unit within the city limits.

B. Prior permission must be granted by the owner of such land or dwelling unit in which a miniature pot-bellied pig is kept or maintained.

C. Any male miniature pot-bellied pig over four months old must be neutered. Any female miniature pot-bellied pig over four months old must be spayed unless the owner provides a written statement signed by a licensed veterinarian that spaying would endanger the life of the pig.

D. Any person or persons owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any miniature pot-bellied pig shall not cause, permit, or allow the same to be upon any public place or private property, other than the property of the person having charge, care, custody, or control unless such pig is restrained by a substantial leash not exceeding six feet in length and is in the charge, care, custody or physical control of a competent person.

E. Any person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any miniature pot-bellied pig shall be responsible for removing and cleaning up such pig feces on any public or private property, other than the property of the person having charge, custody, or control of such pig.

F. No breeding of miniature pot-bellied pigs is permitted in the city. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.030 License.
A. Effective August 1st of 2017 every person owning or having control, custody, or possession of any miniature pot-bellied pig within the city shall procure from the police chief an annual license for any such pig over four months of age. The fee for such license shall be set by resolution of the city council.

B. Any person failing to procure a miniature pot-bellied pig license each year shall pay, as a penalty for such failure, in addition to the license fee, an additional fee set by resolution of the city council. Such penalty shall not apply to the owner of any pot-bellied pig who is not yet four months of age. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.040 License applications.
A. The application forms for a miniature pot-bellied pig license shall bear the name and address of the owner of the pig, the sex, color, and breed of the pig to be licensed and shall be signed by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent. At the time of the application, written evidence or proof that the miniature pot-bellied pig to be licensed has been spayed or neutered and properly inoculated against rabies and leptospirosis shall be provided.

B. The owner or person harboring, controlling, or having the custody of any licensed miniature pot-bellied pig shall inform the police chief or the person designated by the chief of any change of address within 10 days from the effective date of such change of address. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.050 License issuance and renewal.
A. A miniature pot-bellied pig license and tag shall be issued upon the payment of the fees set out by city council resolution. Licenses shall be renewed annually upon payment of the annual fee.

B. If application for a license renewal is made more than 15 days after the license is required, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the regular license fees, such late fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.060 Tags – Attachment to collar.
A. The owner or person having custody, control, or possession of a miniature pot-bellied pig within the city shall attach the tag to a collar, harness, or device to be permanently worn by such pig for which the tag was issued.

B. Whenever a tag for the then current year has been stolen or lost, the owner or person having custody of the miniature pot-bellied pig may, upon request, and upon the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council, receive a replacement tag for the remaining portion of the then current year. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.070 Exhibition of licenses.
No person shall fail or refuse to show to any animal control officer, police officer or other duly authorized person the license and tag issued hereunder and the miniature pot-bellied pig for which such license and tag have been issued. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

6.14.080 Applicability of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any miniature pot-bellied pig owned by or in the care or charge of a nonresident of the city who is traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning in the city for a period not exceeding 30 days. (Ord. 17-06 § 2).

Chapter 6.16
REGULATION OF DOGS
Sections:

6.16.010    Carrying instrument for removal of dog feces and actual removal of such feces required.

6.16.020    Restraint of dogs.

6.16.030    Dogs prohibited – Exceptions.

6.16.040    Permissive running at large.

6.16.050    Unspayed female dogs prohibited from running at large.

6.16.010 Carrying instrument for removal of dog feces and actual removal of such feces required.
A. Any person having custody of a dog while on public property, including any easements and public parks, and private property not owned by such person shall at all times carry an instrument suitable for removing and disposing of any feces which may be deposited by said dog and shall remove any such feces which may be deposited by such dog while on such property.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs being used by the blind as guide dogs, or service dogs that are assisting disabled persons who are unable to remove such feces. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.16.020 Restraint of dogs.
Except as provided in BMC 6.16.030, no person owning or having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog shall cause or allow, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, to be or run at large in or upon any public place or premises, or in or upon any private place or premises other than those of said owner or keeper except with the consent of the person in charge of said place or premises, unless such dog is securely restrained by a substantial leash, no longer than six feet, and is in charge and control. For the purposes of this section, any dog in or upon any motor vehicle shall be deemed to be on the premises of the operator thereof. (Ord. 17-13 § 1; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.16.030 Dogs prohibited – Exceptions.
A. Except for service dogs, it is unlawful for a person who owns, has an interest in, harbors or has charge care, control, custody or possession of a dog, to permit the dog to be in City Park or on the Alvarez Ninth Street Park beach or in or upon a playground, skate park, in-line skate rink, tennis court, bocce court, basketball court, or a baseball field or bleacher within any other public park.

B. Dogs may be off-leash in the Phenix Dog Park at Benicia Community Park, on the First Street Beach, and on the Promenade Beach if dogs are under voice command of the person responsible for the dog. In all other places, dogs must be securely restrained by a leash no longer than six feet.

C. This section shall not be applicable to dogs while they are enrolled and participating in obedience classes sponsored by the parks and community services department of the city, or to dogs being used by disabled individuals as service animals or at city approved special events. No dangerous dogs are allowed in no leash areas. (Ord. 17-13 § 2; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.16.040 Permissive running at large.
The provisions of this chapter do not prohibit dogs from running at large on the premises of the owner or person having charge of such dog, nor do they prohibit dogs, other than unspayed female dogs during the breeding period, from running at large on any private property with permission of the owner of such property. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.16.050 Unspayed female dogs prohibited from running at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit an unspayed female dog to run at large on any property during the breeding period. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.20
ANIMAL SHELTER AND IMPOUNDMENT
Sections:

6.20.010    Animal shelter established.

6.20.020    Impoundment authority.

6.20.030    Care of impounded animals.

6.20.040    Use of animals for experimental purposes or medical research.

6.20.050    Transporting of impounded animals.

6.20.060    Unauthorized removal of animals from shelter.

6.20.070    Fees established.

6.20.080    Fine imposed for impounded unaltered dogs and cats.

6.20.090    Identification of animals – Notice to owners – Returning animals to known owners.

6.20.100    Voluntary surrender – Fees.

6.20.110    Redemption by owner – Abandonment.

6.20.120    Holding period.

6.20.130    Placement of unredeemed animals.

6.20.140    Adoption by approved organizations.

6.20.150    Sterilization required.

6.20.160    Disposal.

6.20.170    Diseased or injured animals.

6.20.010 Animal shelter established.
There shall be provided a suitable enclosure or place for the purpose of keeping and safely holding animals impounded, which shall be authorized as the city animal shelter; provided, that one or more suitable enclosures or places may be provided for the purpose of keeping and safely holding animals impounded, which places shall be designated as branches of the city animal shelter. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.020 Impoundment authority.
The director may take up, impound and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in this title found running at large, staked, tied or being herded or pastured in any street, road, lane, alley, court, square, park or other place belonging to or under control of the city, or upon any private property in the city, contrary to the provisions of this title; or where said animal is engaged in an activity or existing in any condition prohibited by this title; or where said animal is, or will be, without proper care due to injury, illness, death, incarceration, or other involuntary absence of the owner or person responsible for the care of such animal; or where said animal is to be quarantined. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.030 Care of impounded animals.
The director or his designee shall safely keep all animals impounded at the city animal shelter and shall furnish the same with a sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water, and shall give the same ordinary attention as may appear to be reasonably required for the welfare of such animals. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.040 Use of animals for experimental purposes or medical research.
It is unlawful for any person providing animal control or animal shelter services within the city to give, use, sell or give to be sold, animals for diagnostic or experimental purposes or medical research. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.050 Transporting of impounded animals.
All animals taken into custody shall be humanely transported in specifically designed ventilated and properly maintained vehicles. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.060 Unauthorized removal of animals from shelter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any impounded animal from the animal shelter without the consent of the director or designee. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.070 Fees established.
A. Fees for impounding animals shall be established by resolution of the city council and the county.

B. Fees for adoption of impounded animals shall be established by resolution of the city council and the county.

C. Fees for boarding or keeping impounded animals, which shall be charged in addition to the impounding fees referenced above, shall be established by resolution of the city council and the county. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.080 Fine imposed for impounded unaltered dogs and cats.
A. Pursuant to California Food and Agriculture Code Section 30804.7 or its successor provisions, the owner of any impounded unaltered dog shall be subject to a fine in the amount established by resolution of the city council.

B. Pursuant to California Food and Agriculture Code Section 31751.7 or its successor provisions, the owner of any impounded unaltered cat shall be subject to a fine in the amount established by resolution of the city council.

C. Fines levied pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other fees and penalties imposed pursuant to this title. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.090 Identification of animals – Notice to owners – Returning animals to known owners.
A. It shall be the duty of the department to attempt to identify any impounded, found or turned-in animal via registration check, identification tags, microchip, lost reports and diligent search for any tattoo marks. When a tattoo or microchip is found, the tattoo or microchip registry shall be notified and additional reasonable time provided for such registry to locate the owner prior to the animal being placed for sale or adoption or euthanized.

B. The animal control director shall, immediately upon impoundment of dogs or other animals, make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of such dogs or other animals impounded, and further, in the case of a licensed dog, or cats wearing a license, inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals.

C. When any animal is seized and its ownership is known to the department, such animal need not be impounded, but any authorized animal control officer may, at his or her own discretion, return such animal to its owner and issue a citation to the owner to appear in court to answer to charges of violations of this title. If the owner’s telephone number is known or can be readily assessed, the owner shall be contacted by telephone; otherwise, the owner shall be contacted by regular mail to the owner’s last known address. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.100 Voluntary surrender – Fees.
A. Upon request, an owner may surrender his/her animal to the department for placement for adoption.

B. Any owner relinquishing a dog shall comply with the provisions of Food and Agricultural Code Section 31108.5 or its successor provisions, by presenting sufficient identification to establish his or her ownership of the dog and by signing a statement that he or she is the lawful owner of the dog. Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the department by the owner shall immediately thereafter become the property of the city. It shall be understood that no guarantee of placement will be made, and humane disposal will be at the discretion of the department.

C. Any owner of an animal who voluntarily surrenders an animal to the department shall be subject to a fee for each animal over the age of four months. Litters of unweaned animals or animals less than four months of age shall be considered as one animal.

D. The surrender of an animal by an owner to the department, subsequent to impoundment for a violation of this title or any provisions of state law, shall not relieve the owner of the obligation to pay such charges as set forth in this section, prior to such surrender, plus accumulated boarding charges, veterinary charges or any other charges, related to the impounding and keeping of the animal.

E. Upon relinquishment, any animal may be made available for immediate euthanasia if it has a history of vicious behavior documented by the department or any other agency charged with enforcing state and local animal laws. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.110 Redemption by owner – Abandonment.
A. The owner of any impounded animal shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the lawful disposition thereof, upon payment to the animal control director of the costs and charges which shall be established by resolution of the county or city for the impounding and keeping of such animals; provided, however, that if the animal is one which is subject to the licensing provisions of this title, the licensing requirements must be satisfied before the animal is released.

B. If the impounded animal is not currently vaccinated against rabies as required, and the owner has not previously been cited for failure to license the animal or the animal has not been previously impounded within the preceding 30 calendar days, the animal may be released to the owner upon payment of all fees required (including the license fee and penalty fee, if applicable) on condition that the owner shall:

1. Have the animal vaccinated for rabies in accordance with this title within 14 calendar days; and

2. Exhibit a valid certificate of such vaccination to the director within 14 calendar days, at which time the license will be issued.

C. Animals may be vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian designated by the director prior to redemption and the cost of the vaccination and any other costs accrued accomplishing the vaccination, including additional impoundment fees, must be satisfied before the animal is released. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.120 Holding period.
A. All impounded dogs or cats found wearing a license tag or any other form of positive identification shall be kept in the animal shelter or other authorized place of impoundment for a period of not less than six business days following the day of impoundment unless redeemed within such period.

B. All impounded dogs and cats not wearing a license tag or other form of positive identification shall be kept in the animal shelter or other authorized place of impoundment for a period of not less than six business days following the day of impoundment unless redeemed within such period.

C. Any impounded animal which is of a type referred to in Section 17001.5 of the Food and Agriculture Code shall be kept in the animal shelter for at least six business days following the date of impoundment unless it is redeemed within that period. If the animal is a bovine animal and is not redeemed, it shall be turned over to the State Bureau of Livestock Identification for disposition by that office, pursuant to the requirement of the California Food and Agriculture Code.

D. Any animal impounded of the type referred to in Section 17065 of the Food and Agriculture Code shall be kept in the animal shelter or other authorized place of impoundment for at least 14 calendar days.

E. Any other impounded animal shall be kept in the animal shelter for at least six business days following the day of impoundment unless it is redeemed within such period.

F. Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the director by the owner shall not be deemed to be impounded and need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time.

G. Any feral animal, except feral cats, need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.130 Placement of unredeemed animals.
A. Dogs.

1. Unless an unlicensed dog or a dog not wearing traceable identification has been redeemed within six working days from the day following the impoundment it may be sold by the animal control director for an amount determined and set by the city or county; provided, that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any dog until the purchaser has paid to the animal control director the license fee prescribed for such dog. The animal control director shall accept the application for license and the license fee, but shall not deliver the license until proof of current rabies vaccination has been provided. If any unlicensed dog or dog not wearing traceable identification impounded by the animal control director shall not have been redeemed within such six-working-day period, it may be destroyed by the animal control director in an humane manner.

2. Unless licensed dogs or dogs wearing traceable identification have been redeemed within six working days from the day following the impoundment, such dogs may be sold by the animal control director for an amount determined and set by ordinance of the city council. The animal control director shall notify the owner of such animal, by mail, within 24 hours of impoundment. If any licensed dog or dog wearing traceable identification which has been impounded by the animal control director has not been redeemed within the six-day period, it may be destroyed by the animal control director in a humane manner.

B. Cats.

1. Unless an unlicensed cat or a cat not wearing traceable identification has been redeemed within six working days from the day following the impoundment, it may be sold by the animal control director for an amount determined and set by the city or county. If any cat impounded by the animal control director shall not have been redeemed within such six-working-day period, it may be destroyed by the animal control director in a humane manner.

2. A licensed cat or cat wearing traceable identification shall be processed in the same manner as provided for licensed dogs in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

C. Other animals shall be processed in the same manner as provided for unlicensed dogs in subsection (A)(1) of this section, unless otherwise provided for by state statute.

D. It shall be the duty of the animal control director, and the director is authorized and empowered, to forthwith dispose of any animal lawfully impounded which is, by reason of injury, disease, or other cause, unfit for further use or is dangerous to keep impounded. The animal control director may immediately destroy surrendered animals in a humane manner.

E. At the discretion of the animal control director, an unredeemed or surrendered animal may be kept for a reasonable period of time after the expiration of the redemption period for the purpose of selling or adoption. Normally, the sale of the animal should be to the person offering to pay the prescribed amount as determined and set by resolution of the city or county; however, the animal control director may refuse to sell or adopt to a particular purchaser if the director has reason to believe the sale would not be in the best interest of the animal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.140 Adoption by approved organizations.
Under special provisions to be adopted by the director, subject to the approval of the police chief, specific breed clubs and humane organizations approved by the director shall have the option of adopting available animals from the city animal shelter for purposes of placement. Adoption fees to be paid by such approved organizations shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.150 Sterilization required.
A. In accordance with Section 30503 of the Food and Agriculture Code or its successor provisions, the department shall not sell or give away to a new owner any dog that has not been spayed or neutered, unless otherwise provided by law.

B. In accordance with Section 31751.3 of the Food and Agriculture Code or its successor provisions, the department shall not sell or give away to a new owner any cat that has not been spayed or neutered, unless otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.160 Disposal.
In the event any impounded dog or cat or any other animal cannot be suitably placed in a new home within the holding period designated in BMC 6.20.120, the director shall euthanize such animal and dispose of the carcass. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.20.170 Diseased or injured animals.
A. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the director may, without waiting for the requisite holding period to elapse, cause any impounded animal to be euthanized without delay under the following circumstances:

1. When the director reasonably determines in good faith that such animal is unfit for further use by reason of its having been injured, having become infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, having become incurably crippled or having become infirm on account of advanced age; and/or

2. When a licensed veterinarian determines in good faith that such animal is suffering extreme pain due to disease or injury, and there is no reasonable probability that the animal will recover from its disease or injury.

B. The department may destroy any animal found at large without transporting it first to the animal shelter or a veterinarian where the animal is too severely injured to move or where it would be more humane to destroy the animal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.24
PUBLIC NUISANCE
Sections:

6.24.010    Animal nuisances.

6.24.020    Written petitions – Investigation.

6.24.030    Notice to owner to abate – Failure to abate.

6.24.040    Temporary impoundment of animal.

6.24.050    Grounds for determination of nuisance.

6.24.060    Public nuisance declared – Reimbursement of costs.

6.24.070    Disposition of public nuisance.

6.24.010 Animal nuisances.
A. The keeping or maintaining possession on any lot in the city of an animal shall be deemed a public nuisance if the animal has committed any one or more of the following acts:

1. Barks, cries or other noises which are so loud and/or so frequent and/or continued over so long a period of time as to disturb the peace and quiet of nearby property or which would cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area;

2. Inflicts unprovoked damage to real or personal property of a person other than the owner, which damage occurs off the property of the owner. Domestic animals are personal property for the purposes of this chapter;

3. Chases or attacks pedestrians, skateboards, Segways, vehicles, bicycles, ridden horses, or domestic animals while off the property of its owner; and/or

4. By its bodily waste, odor or other unsanitary condition causes annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the area.

B. Such a public nuisance may be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. These procedures are in addition to any other remedies which may be available under the law. (Ord. 17-09 § 2; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.020 Written petitions – Investigation.
A. The director or a designee shall investigate either of the following:

1. A written petition in which it is asserted by three or more persons having separate residences or regularly employed in a neighborhood that an animal is a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter; or

2. A written petition in which it is asserted by one or more residents in a neighborhood that an animal is a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, and:

a. Such resident(s) can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that the resident(s) has made a good faith effort to obtain the signatures of other residents in the neighborhood or can demonstrate that it is not possible to obtain such other signatures, as in the case where there are less than three occupied residences in the neighborhood, and

b. Such resident(s) has provided to the satisfaction of the animal control officer adequate and competent evidence in support of the claim that the subject animal is a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter.

B. Petitions shall be signed by and bear the name, address and telephone number of each complainant, shall state the place or places where the nuisance exists, shall describe the animal(s) and the conduct which constitutes the nuisance, and shall give the name and address of the animal’s owner, if known to complainants. Petitions shall be public records and open to public inspection.

C. Whenever a valid petition has been filed with the department pursuant to this section, the director or a designee shall determine whether the petition appears to set forth a valid complaint of a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.030 Notice to owner to abate – Failure to abate.
A. If the director or designee determines that a petition filed pursuant to BMC 6.24.020 appears to be valid, he/she shall serve a notice of nuisance upon the owner of the subject animal which shall inform the owner of the following:

1. That a petition has been received;

2. The nature of complaints stated in the petition;

3. That such nuisance must be abated within the time specified, which shall be reasonable considering the circumstances. Typically, 48 hours for abatement of non-life threatening conditions is reasonable; and

4. That if a dog is noted to have acted under BMC 6.24.010(A)(3), the owner and dog are required to be certified under the American Kennel Club Canine Good Citizen program.

A copy of the provisions of this chapter shall also be provided to the owner with the notice of nuisance.

B. If the owner fails to abate the public nuisance within the specified time, the director or a designee may refer the matter to a hearing officer for a hearing conducted by a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.48 BMC. (Ord. 17-09 § 3; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.040 Temporary impoundment of animal.
A. The director or designee shall have the power to temporarily impound the subject animal pending the outcome of an administrative hearing conducted pursuant to BMC 6.24.030 if:

1. After making a good faith effort, he/she is unable to contact the animal’s owner and determines, at the time of inspection, that the offending noise, condition or behavior of the animal cannot be immediately abated and the peace and comfort of the neighborhood restored;

2. Determines, at the time of inspection, that the offending noise, condition or behavior of the animal cannot be immediately abated and the peace and comfort of the neighborhood restored; or

3. Determines that the public nuisance has not been abated within the time specified in the notice of nuisance.

B. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for all costs of impounding the animal, including but not limited to daily impoundment fees and any costs incurred in providing care and maintenance of the animal.

C. In lieu of impounding an animal, the animal control officer may permit the animal to be confined by the owner at the owner’s expense in a director-approved veterinary facility, or in the case of a dog, in a director-approved veterinary facility or director-approved dog kennel. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.050 Grounds for determination of nuisance.
In making a determination that an animal is or is not a public nuisance, the hearing officer shall consider the following evidence:

A. All petitions filed pursuant to BMC 6.24.020;

B. The testimony of persons residing or working in the area of the place where the animal is kept;

C. The testimony of any investigating animal control officer and any other department or city employee having contact with the animal or its owner;

D. Visual or auditory recordings of the animal or of the place where the animal is kept;

E. Any previous complaints, abatement orders, citations, or convictions regarding maintenance of a public nuisance by the owner by reason of an animal’s offending noise, condition or behavior;

F. The nature and extent of the animal’s offending noise, condition or behavior;

G. The manner in which the animal had been maintained by its owner;

H. The presence or absence of any provocation for the offending noise, condition or behavior;

I. Whether the offending noise, condition or behavior can be eliminated by effectively training or retraining the animal; and

J. Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner to preserve the comfort, peace or quiet of the neighborhood if the animal is permitted to remain in the city. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.060 Public nuisance declared – Reimbursement of costs.
The owner of any animal declared by a hearing officer to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred in verifying compliance and enforcing provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.24.070 Disposition of public nuisance.
A. The hearing officer may order the owner of any animal declared to be a public nuisance to remove the animal from the city by a date certain if the owner:

1. Fails to abate the public nuisance within the time period specified by the hearing officer;

2. Fails to reimburse the costs of abating the public nuisance; or

3. Permits, suffers, or allows the public nuisance to occur again.

B. If the owner fails to remove the animal from the city by such date, the department may impound the animal and not permit the reclaiming or redemption of the animal by the owner unless adequate arrangements acceptable to the director have been made by the owner to ensure abatement of the public nuisance. Such arrangements shall be agreed to in writing between the owner and the director prior to and as a condition of release of the animal to its owner. If such agreement is not made and executed within 30 days from the date of impoundment, then the animal may be considered abandoned and may be handled in the same manner as any other unclaimed stray animal.

C. If the written agreement referred to in subsection (B) of this section is made and is subsequently breached by the owner, the director may immediately impound the animal and not permit the reclaiming or redemption of the animal by the owner unless the owner can make adequate, written assurances acceptable to the director that the owner shall commit no further violation of the agreement. If such further assurances are not made and executed within 30 days from the date of impoundment, then the animal may be considered abandoned and may be handled in the same manner as any other unclaimed stray animal.

D. Any person failing to comply with the hearing officer’s order to abate a public nuisance shall be prohibited from keeping or harboring within the city an animal of the type, species, group or family to which the order applies (including the animal initially causing the nuisance) for a period of three years from the date of such noncompliance; provided, however, that any person prohibited from keeping or harboring an animal pursuant to this section shall be entitled to appeal to a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.48 BMC. The scope of any such appeal hearing shall be limited to a determination regarding whether a failure to comply with a hearing officer’s order has occurred. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.28
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Sections:

6.28.010    Definitions.

6.28.020    Prohibitions regarding dangerous animals.

6.28.030    Inspection.

6.28.040    Dangerous animals at large.

6.28.050    Temporary impoundment or confinement.

6.28.060    Hearing procedures.

6.28.070    Disposition of potentially dangerous or dangerous animals.

6.28.080    Sale or transfer restrictions.

6.28.090    Enforcement and penalties.

6.28.100    Exemptions.

6.28.110    Removal of designation.

6.28.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used are defined as follows:

“Abused animal” means any animal which is:

1. Mistreated, beaten, tormented, or teased; or

2. Deprived of water, food, or shelter; or

3. Kept under unsanitary conditions; or

4. Abandoned; or

5. Trained for fighting other animals.

“Dangerous animal”:

1. “Dangerous animal” means any animal that:

a. Has been designated a potentially dangerous animal and thereafter exhibits any of the behaviors listed in the definition of potentially dangerous animal; or

b. Inflicts serious injury or kills a human being; or

c. Engages in, or is found to have been trained to engage in, exhibitions of fighting; or

d. Inflicts serious injury or kills livestock off the property of the owner of the attacking animal; or

e. Inflicts serious injury or kills any domestic animal.

2. An animal shall not be considered a dangerous animal if the person or domestic animal that it attacked, threatened, or menaced:

a. Provoked, tormented, teased, or abused the animal into the alleged behavior; or

b. Committed a willful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or keeper in control of the animal; or

c. Threatened or committed an unprovoked assault or battery against the owner or keeper in control of the animal.

“Enclosure” means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to humanely confine an animal with adequate exercise area, and posted with an appropriate warning sign, in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper.

“Hearing officer” means any designated representative of the city manager who conducts a hearing under BMC 6.28.060.

“Impounded” means taken into custody of the animal shelter.

“Person” means a natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, firm, partnership or trust.

“Potentially dangerous animal”:

1. “Potentially dangerous animal” means any animal that:

a. On two separate occasions within a 36-month period engages in any unprovoked behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury; or

b. Bites a person causing a minor injury not resulting in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requiring multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery; or

c. Seriously bites, inflicts injury upon, or otherwise causes injury to any domestic animal; or

d. Chases or attacks pedestrians, skateboards, Segways, vehicles, bicycles, ridden horses, or domestic animals while off the property of its owner; or

e. Engages in any behavior that constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person or domestic animal or poses an immediate threat to public safety.

2. An animal shall not be considered a potentially dangerous animal if the person or domestic animal that it attacked, threatened, or menaced:

a. Provoked, tormented, teased or abused the animal into the alleged behavior; or

b. Committed a willful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or keeper in control of the animal; or

c. Threatened or committed an unprovoked assault or battery against the owner or keeper in control of the animal.

“Serious injury” means an injury which results in any muscle tear or disfiguring laceration or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. (Ord. 17-09 § 4; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.020 Prohibitions regarding dangerous animals.
It shall be unlawful for an owner or person having possession, custody, charge or control of an animal that the owner or person having possession knew or should have known was dangerous to permit said animal to be found outside of a house or fully enclosed space, unless that animal is muzzled and on a substantial leash or similar restraint of appropriate length and under the control of a responsible person eighteen years of age or older who is physically capable of restraining the animal when the animal is not contained in a locked, secure enclosure or as otherwise restrained by lawful order of the director or a hearing officer. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.030 Inspection.
A. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this section, or whenever any police officer or animal control officer has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building, upon any premises, or in any vehicle any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law, the officer is authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time to inspect it and to perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this code or other applicable law; provided, that:

1. If the property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant, briefly describe the basis for the probable cause, and request entry. If entry is refused, the officer shall have recourse to every legal remedy, including an inspection warrant, to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.

2. If the property is unoccupied, the officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property and present proper credentials to the occupant, briefly describe the basis for the probable cause, and request entry. If entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, the officer shall have recourse to every legal remedy, including an inspection warrant, to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.

3. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the officer has probable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall have the right immediately to enter and inspect the property, and may use any reasonable means required to enter and inspect, whether or not the property is occupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained; provided, that if the property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant, briefly describe the basis for the probable cause, and demand entry.

B. No person shall interfere with, hinder, fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made upon him or her, to permit the officer to make any inspection under subsection (A)(3) of this section. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 17-09 § 5; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.040 Dangerous animals at large.
A. A person who owns or keeps an animal and who allows, permits or causes the animal to be at large in or upon a public street, sidewalk, park, or other public property, or in or upon the premises or private property of another person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the animal bites, attacks, or causes injury to any human being or other animal.

B. Any person convicted under this section shall not own or keep the type of animal which caused the bite, attack, or injury for a three-year period after the date of conviction. Neither the department nor the county shall issue or renew any license to the convicted person for that type of animal during that three-year period. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.050 Temporary impoundment or confinement.
A. If animal control officers or police officers have probable cause to believe any animal has attacked, bitten, or injured any human being or other domestic animal, the officers shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound the animal until:

1. Any court proceeding or animal license revocation proceeding arising from the attack, bite, or injury; or

2. A hearing under this chapter.

B. In lieu of impounding, if the department determines that it is not contrary to public safety (i.e., has not killed or caused serious injury to any person or animal), the department may permit the animal to be confined at the owner’s or keeper’s expense in a kennel or veterinary facility approved by the department or at the owner’s or keeper’s residence; provided, that:

1. The animal is not removed from the kennel, veterinary facility, or residence without the prior written approval of the department; and

2. The animal shall be available for observation and inspection by an animal control officer or a police officer or their authorized representatives. The department shall specify to the owner or keeper the exact way the animal is to be restrained while awaiting the hearing.

3. The animal may be photographed for identification purposes.

C. If there is no reasonable method available to determine ownership of the animal, the animal shall be considered a stray in accordance with the Food and Agriculture Code.

D. Failure to surrender on demand the animal to an animal control officer for impoundment shall be a misdemeanor.

E. If an animal impounded under this section is declared to be potentially dangerous or dangerous, it may be returned to the owner or keeper upon satisfaction of any conditions the hearing officer places on the animal’s release unless the hearing officer orders the animal to be destroyed. If an animal impounded under this section is not declared to be potentially dangerous or dangerous, it shall be returned to the owner or keeper as soon as is practicable after receipt of the hearing officer’s notice of determination.

F. Within 48 hours of any impoundment, the department shall serve the owner or keeper with a notice of impoundment. The notice shall contain a description of the animal, a brief description of the facts and circumstances leading to the impoundment, and the charge or charges being filed. The notice shall be personally served or served by first-class or certified mail and shall be posted on the owner or keeper’s property.

G. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be responsible for the costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the animal if the animal is later ruled to be potentially dangerous or dangerous. (Ord. 17-09 § 6; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.060 Hearing procedures.
A. If a police officer or animal control officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that an animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous or that the owner or keeper of an animal has violated any conditions previously imposed by a hearing officer in relation to a declaration that the animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous, an independent hearing officer for the city shall serve as a hearing officer to conduct a hearing to determine whether the animal is a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal or whether the owner or keeper has violated any conditions. Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public which serves as the evidentiary basis for the police officer or animal control officer to find probable cause shall be sworn to and verified by the complainant and shall be submitted as evidence in any such hearing.

B. If the owner or keeper does not contest the charges alleged and agrees to all of the recommendations of the police officer or animal control officer, the owner or keeper may waive the right to a hearing. In such a case the owner or keeper of the animal must present evidence to the city that they have paid all damages associated with the incident giving rise to the police officer or animal control officer’s determination, or have made arrangements to do so. The owner or keeper of the animal shall sign an agreement with the city in a form to be approved by the city attorney which sets forth all the terms and conditions regarding continued ownership of the animal and complete compliance with the provisions of this title.

C. In the event an animal has been impounded or confined pending a hearing, the hearing shall be conducted within 30 calendar days of the impoundment or confinement. Failure to hold the hearing within 30 calendar days shall result in an automatic dismissal of the charges; provided, however, that evidence of the underlying acts or behavior of the animal may be used in a subsequent proceeding.

D. The hearing shall be held not less than five business days nor more than 10 business days from the service of the notice of the hearing unless agreed to by the owner or keeper and the city. The department shall serve the owner or keeper of the animal and any victims with a notice containing a description of the animal, a brief statement of the charges and the facts and circumstances supporting the charges, and the date, time, and place of the hearing. The notice shall be accompanied by a copy of this chapter. Service shall be by first-class mail, certified mail, or personal service.

E. The hearing shall be open to the public. The hearing officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence, including incident reports, statements or affidavits of witnesses, authorize or limit the use and scope of discovery, and may set the time to produce records or witnesses. Reference shall be made to the city’s Code of Conduct to promote civility. The formal rules of evidence and procedure shall not apply to the proceedings. Any relevant evidence may be admitted, in the hearing officer’s discretion, if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely upon in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of whether such evidence would be admissible over objection in a judicial proceeding. Evidence is relevant if it has a tendency in reason to prove or disprove a material fact that is in dispute. The city shall have the burden of proof, by a preponderance of the evidence in demonstrating that the animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous.

F. After a hearing, the hearing officer may declare any animal to be or not to be potentially dangerous or dangerous and determine the appropriate disposition of the animal.

G. In making a determination that an animal is or is not potentially dangerous or dangerous, evidence of the following shall be considered if available:

1. Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting, or causing injury to a human being or other domestic animal or livestock;

2. The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved;

3. The place where the bite, attack, or injury occurred;

4. The absence or presence of any provocation for the bite, attack, or injury;

5. The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;

6. Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attacking or there exists other evidence of such training;

7. Whether the animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or domestic animals;

8. Whether the animal can be effectively trained or retrained to change its temperament or behavior;

9. The manner in which the animal has been maintained by its owner or keeper;

10. Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the animal;

11. Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or keeper, or the department, to protect the public safety in the future if the animal is permitted to remain in the city.

H. Within 10 calendar days after the hearing, the owner or keeper of the animal and any victims shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued by the hearing officer, either personally or by prepaid, first-class mail. The notice of determination shall include the following information:

1. A determination of whether or not the animal is potentially dangerous or dangerous;

2. A brief summary of facts supporting the determination;

3. An order to destroy the animal, release the animal with conditions, or release the animal without conditions;

4. Advisement of appeal rights.

I. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless the determination is contested in accordance with Food and Agriculture Section 31622. If any party to the hearing contests the hearing officer’s determination, he or she may, within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision by filing an action in the superior court of Solano County and serving the city manager with a notice of appeal. (Ord. 17-09 § 7; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.070 Disposition of potentially dangerous or dangerous animals.
A. If the hearing officer finds that an animal is so dangerous that it would constitute an unreasonable danger to human beings, domestic animals, or livestock even with reasonable conditions upon release, the hearing officer may order the animal to be destroyed. This remedy is in addition to all other remedies and shall not limit or restrict the right of any person, including the city attorney, to commence a proceeding under California Civil Code Section 3342.5, or its successor, to have the animal destroyed.

B. If the hearing officer finds that the animal is dangerous, the hearing officer shall require the owner or keeper of the animal, as a condition of the release of the animal from confinement or impoundment, to comply with all of the following conditions. If the hearing officer finds that the animal is potentially dangerous, the hearing officer shall require the owner or keeper of the animal, as a condition of the release of the animal from confinement or impoundment to comply with conditions 1 through 3 below and may require compliance with any or all of conditions 4 through 12.

Conditions:

1. Immediately register the animal with the department. The fee for a permit to keep one potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be determined by resolution of the city council for a 12-month term, and the fee for each additional potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The permit expires at the end of each term and is renewable. The permit is nontransferable.

2. The owner or keeper of the animal may not be a minor.

3. The owner or keeper of the animal shall comply with all relevant state laws and ordinances.

4. Keep the animal securely confined at the location specified in the permit except as noted below.

a. Indoors on the owner or keeper’s premises. No potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the animal to escape. No dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from leaving the premises.

b. On the owner or keeper’s premises in a locked enclosure approved by the department in its sole and absolute discretion. The structure must have secure sides and top composed of nine-gauge galvanized steel affixed to a concrete foundation. It must be locked with a key or a combination lock when holding animals. It must be of sufficient size to provide the animal adequate exercise room. The structure must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and it must comply with all building and zoning regulations.

c. If the owner or keeper rents or leases the premises from another, the owner or keeper shall disclose to the property owner that the owner or keeper has a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal that will reside at the property. The disclosure shall be made prior to entering into the rental or lease agreement and at the time of any renewal.

d. Humanely confined in a vehicle so that it can neither escape nor inflict injury on passersby.

5. Keep the animal securely muzzled, leashed, and under the control of a person 18 years or older, and who is physically capable of restraining the animal, when it is not confined in a secure pen or secure indoors. Dangerous dogs may not leave the premises of their owner or keeper except for veterinary care, when being sold or given away, or to comply with any provision of law or order of a police officer or animal control officer.

6. Spay or neuter the animal by a licensed veterinarian and present proof to the animal control officer.

7. Provide and maintain financial responsibility for injuries to the public by either:

a. Obtaining and showing proof of liability insurance in an amount considered acceptable under the circumstances by the hearing officer. Proof of liability insurance shall be from an insurer licensed to practice in the state of California, in a single incident amount of not less than $100,000 for each animal, for injury to or death of any person or persons, loss or damage to any property caused by or resulting from any act of such animal. Liability insurance shall not be canceled unless the owner or keeper ceases to own or keep the animal prior to the expiration of that insurance. The insurance shall clearly state that the insurance cannot be canceled, suspended, reduced, or allowed to expire unless 30 calendar days’ written notice is first given to the department. Proof of liability insurance shall be provided annually to the city attorney for approval.

b. Obtaining a surety bond issued by a surety company authorized to conduct business in the state of California in a form acceptable to the city attorney in the sum of at least $300,000 per animal payable to any person injured by the animal. The amount of the bond shall be established by the hearing officer considering the circumstances.

8. Immediately inform the local postmaster, utility company meter readers, and anyone else who lawfully and regularly comes onto the property of the animal’s status as a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal and to inform the department in writing prior to moving the animal to any new location within or outside the city or if the animal dies.

9. Display in a prominent place on the property a sign easily readable by the public, using the words “Beware of Dangerous Animal” in letters at least three inches high.

10. All dangerous dogs shall receive a microchip and permanently wear a “Dangerous Dog” tag. The owner or keeper of the dog shall pay for the microchip and tag. The department shall maintain on file the assigned microchip and tag numbers. The owner or keeper shall immediately notify the department if the tag is lost or stolen and shall pay for a replacement. Failure to report the lost or stolen tag or to replace it shall constitute a misdemeanor.

11. Pay the reasonable costs for the hearing incurred by the city and its officials, not to exceed $1,000.

12. Take any other reasonable steps to prevent injuries to the public, domestic animals, livestock, or property.

In addition, if the hearing officer orders the animal released with conditions, the owner or keeper of the animal shall have 30 calendar days from the receipt of the written disposition to complete any conditions imposed by the hearing officer and to demonstrate such compliance to the department. The hearing officer may grant a written extension of time for compliance not to exceed an additional 30 calendar days. The owner or keeper of the animal must, within 30 calendar days from the receipt of the written disposition, provide the department with a minimum of two color photographs of the animal that clearly show its color and size.

C. If the hearing officer determines that the animal is neither potentially dangerous nor dangerous, the animal shall be returned to the owner as soon as is practicable after receipt of the hearing officer’s notice of determination. If the animal is unlicensed, the owner or keeper shall be cited for failure to obtain a license. (Ord. 17-09 § 8; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.080 Sale or transfer restrictions.
A. No person shall sell or transfer a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal to any person within the city, unless the recipient permanently resides with the owner or keeper or the owner or keeper has received prior written approval of the director.

B. The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall not sell or transfer the animal to any person outside the city or otherwise remove the animal from the city without the prior written approval of the director.

C. No person shall bring into the city any animal designated or registered as a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal in any other jurisdiction within the United States without the prior written approval of the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.090 Enforcement and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper not to comply with the conditions imposed by a hearing officer or any other requirements imposed by this chapter. If a failure to comply occurs, the animal shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment by the department. The department may additionally order the removal of the animal from the city or seek its destruction if necessary. No animal may be destroyed under this section until 10 calendar days after the owner or keeper has been served with written notice from the hearing officer that the animal will be destroyed. The destruction order shall be stayed if within the 10 calendar days the owner or keeper:

1. Demonstrates to the satisfaction of the hearing officer compliance with the conditions imposed and this chapter; or

2. Files a petition to stay destruction of the animal in the Superior Court of Solano County and serves an endorsed filed copy of the petition on the city manager.

If the owner or keeper of the animal does not take the action described in subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section, the hearing officer may, without further notice, order the animal to be destroyed. The destruction order notice shall be served either personally or by pre-paid first class mail on the owner or keeper and a copy posted on the property.

B. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the Superior Court of Solano County, be fined not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000. The fine shall be paid to the department for the purpose of defraying the cost of implementing this chapter. The court may also impose a jail term not to exceed 30 calendar days.

C. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited from owning or keeping within the county the same type of animal (i.e., dog or cat) for three years from the date of conviction.

D. The provisions of this article may be enforced by the department or by any law enforcement agency, fire department, or other authorized representative of the city.

E. The costs of abating a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal declared to be a public nuisance may be recovered from the owner or keeper as provided by state law.

F. The penalties and remedies in this article are not exclusive but cumulative with all other remedies at law or equity. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.100 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

A. Any dog assisting a police officer or deputy sheriff engaged in law enforcement duties; or

B. Any guide dog for the blind or physically disabled while performing its services; or

C. Any animal shelter owned, operated, or maintained by the department. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.28.110 Removal of designation.
The owner or keeper of a dangerous animal may petition the city manager or designee for a hearing to remove the potentially dangerous or dangerous determination if, for a period of three years following that determination, the animal has not been involved in any incidents of the type which led to the determination. A hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of receipt of the written petition. Within 10 calendar days after the hearing, the owner or keeper of the animal shall be notified in writing of the hearing officer’s determination. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.32
ANIMAL KEEPING
Sections:

6.32.010    Proper care of animals.

6.32.020    Compliance with zoning requirements.

6.32.030    Keeping household animals.

6.32.040    Keeping birds, fowl and rabbits.

6.32.050    Keeping pigs and livestock.

6.32.060    Repealed.

6.32.070    Animal offspring.

6.32.080    Animal keeper permit required for additional animals.

6.32.090    Prohibited animals.

6.32.100    Animals not classified.

6.32.110    Sales or gifts of animals.

6.32.120    Animal in unattended vehicle.

6.32.130    Rabies suppression, control and quarantine.

6.32.010 Proper care of animals.
A. Any person who harbors any animal within the city shall at all times supply the same with sufficient amounts of food and water or other liquid generally accepted as standard for the age and type of the animal.

B. Any person who harbors any animal within the city shall at all times supply the same with appropriate housing which is safe, sanitary and generally accepted as standard for the age and type of the animal, and shall remove excreta and manure therefrom every day, or as often as is necessary so as not to become a nuisance to any person in the neighborhood. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.020 Compliance with zoning requirements.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause to be kept or maintained any animal, unless the keeping of such is permitted in the particular district as provided in the city’s zoning ordinance. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.030 Keeping household animals.
A. For single-family detached residences in a residential district, a maximum of three dogs, four cats and other similar household animals are permitted, where the total number of such animals in one place of residence shall not exceed 10.

B. For multifamily residences, a maximum of one dog, two cats and other similar household animals are permitted, where the total number of animals in one place of residence shall not exceed five.

C. Household animals being fostered as a part of a nonprofit agency’s program shall not be included for the purposes of determining the number of household animals. The foster program shall be registered with the department and an individual foster animal shall be fostered in a particular residence for a period of no more than six months. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.040 Keeping birds, fowl and rabbits.
A. It is unlawful to keep birds, fowl and rabbits in the city, except:

1. In single-family detached residences in a residential district, a maximum combination of 20 birds or rabbits per legal lot are permitted, provided all of them are kept at least 20 feet from any neighboring house built or used for human habitation. In no case shall more than 10 chickens or other fowl be permitted.

2. For multifamily residences, a maximum total combination of six birds, fowl or rabbits per legal lot is permitted; provided, that all of them are kept at least 20 feet from any neighboring house built or used for human habitation.

B. Roosters or other fowl which constitute a nuisance by their loud cries are not allowed in any zone.

C. No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having charge, control, or custody of any rabbit, bird, and/or fowl shall permit, allow, or suffer any animal to run or fly at large to go upon the premises of any person in the city.

D. Birds, fowl and rabbits being fostered as a part of a nonprofit agency’s program shall not be included for the purposes of determining the number of household animals. The foster program shall be registered with the department and an individual foster animal shall be fostered in a particular residence for a period of no more than six months. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.050 Keeping pigs and livestock.
A. It is unlawful to keep any pig, hog, sheep, ox, horse, bull, steer, cow, burro, jack, jenny, mule, goat, or similar animal in the city except that such animals may be kept in an O-S district subject to the provisions of BMC 17.70.300.

B. No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having charge, control, or custody of any pig, hog, sheep, ox, horse, bull, steer, bull, cow, horse, burro, jack, jenny, mule, goat, or similar animal shall:

1. Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked, or tied, in any street, lane, alley, park or other public place, except the city may allow goats on public property, or on private property with a permit from the city, for weed reduction or abatement; or

2. Tie, stake, pasture, or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the city without the consent of the property owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit such animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property; or

3. Permit any such animal to be or remain during the night time secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing the animal in a pen, corral, barn or other such sufficient enclosure. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.060 Bee keeping.
Repealed by Ord. 15-04. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.070 Animal offspring.
The offspring of animals shall not be counted toward the minimum allowed number until they are four months old. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.080 Animal keeper permit required for additional animals.
Every person owning or having custody of animals in excess of the number permitted by BMC 6.32.030 and 6.32.040 shall procure an animal keeper permit from the director as set forth at Chapter 6.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.090 Prohibited animals.
The director may prohibit those animals which are permitted by this chapter if findings are made that the keeping of such animals creates an unsanitary condition or other public nuisance. The director’s determination to prohibit any animal permitted by this chapter may be appealed to a hearing officer at an administrative hearing conducted pursuant to Chapter 6.48 BMC. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.100 Animals not classified.
Any animal not specifically classified within this chapter shall be classified by the director based upon a determination as to the probable negative impact of the animal upon the health, safety and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.110 Sales or gifts of animals.
A. No person under the age of 18 shall place any dog, cat, puppy or kitten on public display for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, barter or give away upon any street, sidewalk, parking lot, shopping center walkway or other public place, and no transfer of any such animal shall be made in any such place to any person under the age of 18.

B. No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl upon any street, sidewalk, parking lot, shopping center walkway or other public place, and no transfer of any such animal shall be made in any such place to any person. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.120 Animal in unattended vehicle.
A. It is unlawful for any person to leave an animal in an unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which may adversely affect the animal’s health or welfare.

B. Animal control officers are authorized to remove and take into custody and impound any animal found in an unattended vehicle who appears to be suffering the effects of exposure to extreme temperatures and to place all such animals taken into custody in the city animal shelter if the owner cannot be, upon initial contact, identified and contacted. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.32.130 Rabies suppression, control and quarantine.
A. If it shall appear to the director that any animal has rabies, the director may destroy such animal forthwith pursuant to this chapter, or may hold such animal for further examination or observation for such time as the director may determine to be appropriate.

B. Whenever any animal has been bitten by an animal which has rabies or which exhibits any symptoms of rabies, or which is suspected of having or having been exposed to rabies, the owner or the person having custody of such bitten animal shall immediately notify the director, and shall immediately confine the animal within a secure enclosure and maintain that confinement until it is established that such animal does not have rabies. The director shall have the power to quarantine such animal, or impound it at the owner’s expense if the owner or person having custody of such animal shall fail, refuse, or is unable, in the opinion of the director, to adequately confine such animal immediately, or in the event the owner of such animal is not readily accessible.

C. Whenever it is shown that any animal has bitten any person, the owner shall, upon the order of the director, quarantine such animal and keep it confined at the owner’s expense for a minimum period of 10 days for dogs and cats and 14 days for all other animals, and shall allow the director to inspect and examine such animal at any time during such period of quarantine. Animals quarantined pursuant to this subsection shall not be removed from the premises upon which such animal is quarantined without permission of the director. The director is authorized to impound any animal at the owner’s expense in the event the owner or person having custody of such animal fails or refuses or is unable to so confine such animal. Animals shall remain quarantined until notice is given by the director that such quarantine is terminated.

D. The director may, in her or his discretion, post an appropriate sign on any premises where an animal is quarantined, to warn the public of such quarantine. It is unlawful for any person to remove such a sign without the permission of the director.

E. Whenever the director determines that an epidemic of rabies or any animal disease which threatens the public health or safety exists, or is threatened, he or she shall have the authority to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to prevent the spread of the disease, including but not limited to the declaration of quarantine against any or all animals in any area of the city, for a period of not more than 120 days. An additional or extended quarantine period may be declared by the city council if such period shall be deemed necessary by the director for the protection and preservation of the public health, peace and safety. Any quarantine declared pursuant to this subsection, other than as restricted in this chapter, shall be upon such conditions as the director may determine. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.33
BEEKEEPING
Sections:

6.33.010    Permit required.

6.33.020    Application.

6.33.030    Standards.

6.33.040    Permit fee.

6.33.050    Right of entry for enforcement.

6.33.060    Notice of noncompliance.

6.33.070    Revocation of permit.

6.33.090    Public nuisance and abatement.

6.33.100    Nontransferability.

6.33.010 Permit required.
A. No person shall keep, maintain or allow any hive of bees on any lot or parcel of land within any zoning district within the city without first obtaining a beekeeping permit in accordance with this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, beekeeping shall not be permitted at any apartment complex, mobile home park, condominium or other common interest development not consisting of single-family homes.

B. Persons maintaining apiaries as of the effective date of this chapter shall, within 180 days of such date, either: (1) apply for and obtain approval of a beekeeping permit from the city; or (2) remove such apiaries from the city.

C. The director shall issue a beekeeping permit for the keeping of bees as specified in such permit and this chapter when the director determines that such use meets the standards set forth in this chapter. Such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not run with the land. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.020 Application.
Applications for beekeeping permit required under this chapter shall be initiated by submitting the following materials to the director:

A. A completed application form signed by an owner and, if applicable, any lawful tenant of the property, lot or parcel of land for which the application is submitted, and shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council; and

B. A map showing the location of the proposed apiary(ies) on the parcel. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.030 Standards.
An applicant for a beekeeping permit shall declare under penalty of perjury that the apiary(ies) for which a beekeeping permit is sought shall, at all times, comply with the requirements of such permit and this chapter. The criteria set forth below shall be conditions of approval of any beekeeping permit issued hereunder, whether or not such criteria are specified or referred to in such permit. Failure to adhere to such standards or other conditions of approval set forth in the beekeeping permit or this chapter shall be a violation of such permit and this chapter.

A. No more than the maximum number of colonies of bees as shown in Table 1 shall be maintained on any property, lot or parcel of land.

Table 1. Maximum Number of Bee Colonies in Relation to Lot Size 

Lot/Acreage

Number of Colonies

Up to 1/4 acre

(1/4 acre = 10,890 sq. ft.)

3 colonies

More than 1/4 acre, less than 1/2 acre

(1/2 acre = 21,780)

5 colonies

More than 1/2 acre, less than 1 acre

(1 acre= 43,560 sq. ft.)

7 colonies

1 acre or more

10 colonies per acre maximum

B. All apiaries shall be located in the rear yard and shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the rear and side property lines.

C. The permittee shall also register the apiaries with the Solano County agriculture commissioner as required by Food and Agriculture Code Section 29040.

D. It shall be the duty of the permittee owning, controlling or maintaining an apiary to maintain bees in a condition that will reasonably prevent swarming and aggressive behavior.

E. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to provide adequate water for the bees to prevent bees from seeking water in neighborhood swimming pools, birdbaths, ponds or other community bodies of water.

F. Apiaries shall consist of moveable comb hives in sound and useable condition. Failure to properly maintain or to abandon apiaries shall be cause for revocation of the permit, abatement or other enforcement proceedings.

G. Apiaries shall be situated behind screening that is six feet in height and that such screening, barriers, fencing and establishment of flyways be designed to direct the flight paths of bees away from neighbors and the public. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.040 Permit fee.
The fee for a beekeeper permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city before a permit is issued. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.050 Right of entry for enforcement.
City enforcement officers shall be empowered to enter upon any premises where honey bees are kept, or upon which there is reason to believe that bees are kept, in order to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter, in accordance with BMC 6.08.040. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.060 Notice of noncompliance.
The director may issue a notice of noncompliance to the holder of a beekeeping permit should such holder:

A. Fail to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, the provisions of this chapter, or any state or local law, rule, ordinance or regulation pertaining to the keeping of bees; or

B. Such notice shall direct the holder to comply with the permit, this chapter, or such law, rule, ordinance or regulation or to abate the nuisance within a reasonable period of time. Such notice of noncompliance shall be in writing and shall be given or delivered by personal service, United States mail, or other reliable means of service to the permit holder at the address shown in the permit or such other address as the holder may, from time to time, provide in writing to the director. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.070 Revocation of permit.
A. Upon reaching the determination that a specific violation of this chapter and/or applicable statute, rule, code, regulation or permit condition warrants suspension, modification or revocation of a beekeeper permit, the director or his or her designee shall prepare and serve a written notice of action recommendation upon the subject permittee.

B. The notice of action recommendation should include all of the following information:

1. The name and business address of the subject permittee;

2. A description of the code section(s) violated and/or the actions or conditions which warrant suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit;

3. The action proposed (i.e., suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license);

4. A description of any prior action taken by the director or the department to gain compliance with regards to the subject violation(s);

5. A description of the procedures involved in taking the proposed action, including the permittee’s right to attend an administrative hearing on the proposed action; and

6. The name, title and telephone number of the director.

C. The director or his or her designee shall cause a copy of the notice of action recommendation to be provided to the subject permittee by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee personally or by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee via certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to permittee at the address shown on the permit.

D. Proof of service of the notice of action recommendation shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and retained by the director or his or her designee.

E. As soon as practicable after service of the notice of action recommendation, the director or his or her designee shall submit a copy of the notice of action recommendation to the city clerk, who, as soon as practicable after receiving said notice, shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing to consider suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license. Such date shall be not less than 10 calendar days and not more than 30 calendar days from the date the notice was submitted to the city clerk.

F. A hearing on the notice of action recommendation shall thereafter be noticed and conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth at Chapter 1.44 BMC.

G. The director or his or her designee shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the notice of action recommendation and a staff report, which should include a description of the violations and any actions taken by the subject permittee subsequent to the service of the notice, a record of conversations or correspondence between the director, the department and the permittee concerning the violations and/or the notice of action recommendation.

H. If a beekeeper permit is revoked for cause, the director shall not accept a new application by the same person for the same activity at the same location less than one year after such denial or revocation. On revocation of a permit, no part of the fee is refundable. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.090 Public nuisance and abatement.
The provisions of this chapter shall not authorize the keeping of honey bees in a manner constituting a public nuisance as defined in BMC 1.08.040. The city shall retain the right to abate any common law nuisance, or any nuisance as defined under California Civil Code Sections 3479 through 3480 and BMC 8.04.010 et seq. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

6.33.100 Nontransferability.
A permit issued hereunder may not be transferred or assigned. (Ord. 15-04 § 2).

Chapter 6.36
FERAL, WILD AND UNDOMESTICATED ANIMALS
Sections:

6.36.010    Keeping wild animals prohibited.

6.36.020    Prohibited feeding of certain wildlife.

6.36.030    Traps.

6.36.040    Wildlife protected.

6.36.050    Feral cats.

6.36.060    Repealed.

6.36.010 Keeping wild animals prohibited.
No person shall keep or maintain any wild animal within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.36.020 Prohibited feeding of certain wildlife.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or in any manner provide food for non-domesticated mammalian predators such as coyotes (Canis latrans). This section shall also include a ban on feeding or providing food to feral cats, raccoons, foxes, skunks, opossums, and squirrels.

B. Exceptions.

1. An owner in legal possession of a wild or nondomesticated animal that is kept under a valid permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter; and

2. When a person provides food and water to a trapped, injured or unweaned wild or nondomesticated animal during the time the department is notified and the animal has been picked up. (Ord. 09-09 § 1; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.36.030 Traps.
A. No person shall set or use any spring steel trap, No. 1 or larger, in the city. This section shall not prohibit the use of gopher traps.

B. It is unlawful to willfully or recklessly disturb, move, obstruct, or damage any humane trap placed and set by the department or any official, employee or representative of the city. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.36.040 Wildlife protected.
A. State and federal law provide protection to wildlife, especially endangered or threatened species, and authorize the prosecution when a listed species has been “taken” according to those laws.

B. Except for trappers licensed by the state or federal government, no person shall hunt, shoot, kill, or molest any species of wildlife or molest or damage the nest or eggs of any wildlife within the city, except any poisonous reptile or insect. A federal trapper is required for trapping possum or skunk.

C. In the event that the city council determines that a species of wildlife has become so numerous in any particular location or area as to constitute a public nuisance or a particular wild animal is a menace to any person’s health, safety or property, the city council may order the species or animal involved either destroyed or otherwise controlled. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.36.050 Feral cats.
The director, in order to encourage the reduction of the feral cat population in the city, may:

A. Trap any feral cat in a humane manner;

B. Have the cat surgically sterilized, ear-tipped, and vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian;

C. Release the cat to animal shelter or local humane society for adoption or other disposition in accordance with law, or to a colony caretaker who will maintain the cat as part of a managed colony of feral cats; and

D. Impound feral cats in violation of this chapter and dispose of the cats in accordance with this title. (Ord. 09-09 § 2; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.36.060 Colony caretaker responsibilities.
Repealed by Ord. 09-09. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.40
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:

6.40.010    Mandatory permitting of commercial animal establishments.

6.40.020    Application.

6.40.030    Investigation.

6.40.040    Notice of action.

6.40.050    Commercial animal establishment fee.

6.40.060    Numerical limitation.

6.40.070    Regulations relating to animal establishments.

6.40.080    Permit nontransferable.

6.40.090    Expiration and renewal of permit.

6.40.100    Revocation of permit.

6.40.110    Display of permit.

6.40.120    Emergency information.

6.40.130    Kennel dogs exempt from individual license tag requirements – Identification tag required.

6.40.010 Mandatory permitting of commercial animal establishments.
A. No person shall conduct or operate within the city any commercial animal establishment or operate as an animal dealer without first obtaining a commercial animal establishment permit from the director issued pursuant to this chapter.

B. Any person desiring to conduct or operate within the city any commercial animal establishment or operate as an animal dealer shall first make application to the city’s community development department for a written determination that the proposed animal establishment is in compliance with the applicable provision of the then-current zoning ordinance of the city. Where an establishment is sought to be operated upon leased or rented premises, a letter of consent from the owner of the premises shall be submitted to the community development department at the time the application for a written determination is submitted.

C. Within 30 days of the issuance of a written compliance determination from the city’s community development department, any person desiring to conduct or operate within the city a commercial animal establishment shall make application to the director for a commercial animal establishment permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.020 Application.
Each application for a commercial animal establishment permit shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the director or a designee. The application form shall contain such information as may reasonably be required by the director for the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to the current home telephone number of the caretaker of the subject establishment, and another current telephone number for emergency use or messages when such caretaker is absent from the subject establishment. At the time of filing of the application for a commercial animal establishment permit, the applicant shall provide a copy of the community development department’s written compliance determination. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.030 Investigation.
A. Prior to the issuance of a commercial animal establishment permit, the director, or his or her designee, shall conduct an inspection of the intended business location and facilities and prepare a report for inclusion with the application for an original permit or a renewal. A permit shall be issued to the applicant if the director or designee finds that:

1. The keeping of animals, or the conduct of operation of the business for which the permit is requested, at the place set forth in the application will not violate any law or ordinance of the city, or any law of the state;

2. The keeping of animals, or the conduct or operation of the business for which the permit is requested, will not endanger the health, peace or safety of the community;

3. The premises and establishment where animals are to be kept satisfy the conditions set forth at BMC 6.40.070, and animals will not be subject to suffering, cruelty or abuse; and

4. The applicant has not had a similar permit revoked within one year prior to the application.

B. The director may impose such conditions in granting a permit as he or she may deem necessary to protect the public and may limit the term of such permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.040 Notice of action.
The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action of the director in either granting or denying the permit and, if the application has been denied, the notice shall advise the applicant of his or her right to appeal the determination to a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.48 BMC. Service of the notice may be made by personal service or by registered mail. If service is made by mail, it shall be deemed complete upon deposit in the United States mail directed to the applicant at his or her latest address shown on the application. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.050 Commercial animal establishment fee.
A. The fee for a commercial animal establishment permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city before a permit is issued.

B. Nonprofit corporations formed pursuant to the provisions of the California Corporations Code for the prevention of cruelty to animals, and which have furnished proof of such incorporation to the director, shall not be required to pay a fee for an animal establishment permit. However, all other provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any such nonprofit corporation. Each corporation claiming to be exempt from fees pursuant to this subsection shall, before issuance of any permit, agree in writing to indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees and agents harmless from all liability arising out of the exercise of the permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.060 Numerical limitation.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the director upon application for issuance or renewal of a commercial animal establishment permit may limit the number of animals which are to be kept or maintained on the permitted premises. A numerical limitation may also be imposed by the community development director when a land use approval is required for operation of the subject establishment.

B. At any time that there are more animals than a commercial animal establishment permit allows, the operator of any commercial animal establishment shall obtain a new permit which allows the keeping of the greater number of animals. The former permit shall be canceled and a credit for the canceled permit fee shall be allowed on the new permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.070 Regulations relating to animal establishments.
A. Every person who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for which a permit is required shall comply with each of the following conditions:

1. Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals. In the case of animals kept outdoors, sufficient shade shall be provided to prevent overheating or discomfort from sun exposure. Animals kept outdoors shall also be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during inclement weather.

2. All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition with sufficient light provided to permit routine observation of animals and proper cleaning of the facilities.

3. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.

4. Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of animals.

5. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and animals from the public.

6. Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required according to the physical needs of the animals.

7. All animal rooms, cages and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein.

8. All dog runs shall be of concrete or other impervious material and provided with adequate drainage into an approved sewage disposal installation.

9. All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination and treatment if so ordered by the director.

10. Adequate and effective vector control shall be established and maintained at all times.

11. Every violation of applicable regulations shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the director.

12. Facilities shall be subject to unannounced inspections during regular business hours to ensure compliance with the above regulations and any permit conditions.

B. Failure of an applicant for a permit to comply with any one of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any permit, whether original or renewal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.080 Permit nontransferable.
A. A commercial animal establishment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable.

B. The permit shall become void if the holder thereof changes the location of his or her place of business or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise disposes of such business or his or her interest therein for a period of 30 days or more. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.090 Expiration and renewal of permit.
A. Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which the permit is issued.

B. A commercial animal establishment permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed within 30 days after the expiration thereof. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.100 Revocation of permit.
A. Upon reaching the determination that a specific violation of this chapter and/or applicable statute, rule, code, regulation or permit condition warrants suspension, modification or revocation of a commercial animal establishment permit, the director or his or her designee shall prepare and serve a written notice of action recommendation upon the subject permittee.

B. The notice of action recommendation should include all of the following information:

1. The name and business address of the subject permittee;

2. A description of the code section(s) violated and/or the actions or conditions which warrant suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit;

3. The action proposed (i.e., suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license);

4. A description of any prior action taken by the director or the department to gain compliance with regards to the subject violation(s);

5. A description of the procedures involved in taking the proposed action, including the permittee’s right to attend an administrative hearing on the proposed action; and

6. The name, title and telephone number of the director.

C. The director or his or her designee shall cause a copy of the notice of action recommendation to be provided to the subject permittee by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee personally or by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee via certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to permittee at the address shown on the permit.

D. Proof of service of the notice of action recommendation shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and retained by the director or his or her designee.

E. As soon as practicable after service of the notice of action recommendation, the director or his or her designee shall submit a copy of the notice of action recommendation to the city clerk who, as soon as practicable after receiving said notice, shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing to consider suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license. Such date shall be not less than 10 calendar days and not more than 30 calendar days from the date the notice was submitted to the city clerk.

F. A hearing on the notice of action recommendation shall thereafter be noticed and conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth at Chapter 6.48 BMC.

G. The director or his or her designee shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the notice of action recommendation and a staff report, which should include a description of the violations and any actions taken by the subject permittee subsequent to the service of the notice, a record of conversations or correspondence between the director, the department and the permittee concerning the violations and/or the notice of action recommendation.

H. If a commercial animal establishment permit is revoked for cause, the director shall not accept a new application by the same person for the same activity at the same location less than one year after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant affirmatively shows and the director finds, by inspection and/or investigation, that the grounds upon which the first application was denied or the permit was revoked no longer exist. On revocation of a permit, no part of the fee is refundable.

I. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, prior to the holding of the administrative hearing, the director may, for good cause, revoke, suspend or modify any commercial animal establishment permit for a period not to exceed 30 days in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public or the animals held on the subject premises. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.110 Display of permit.
All commercial animal establishment permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the permitted premises. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.120 Emergency information.
Each commercial animal establishment shall have posted, in such a place as to be legible from the exterior of the building, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons to be notified in case of emergency. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.40.130 Kennel dogs exempt from individual license tag requirements – Identification tag required.
A. Where a commercial animal establishment permit has been issued to a dog kennel and is in effect, the dogs contained in such dog kennel shall be exempt from the requirements of individual license tags as provided by BMC 6.12.020.

B. Any dog exempt from the requirements of an individual license tag shall wear an identification tag that shall be securely affixed to a collar, harness, or other device which shall be at all times worn by such dog. The identification tag shall identify the name, address and telephone number of the kennel operator. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Chapter 6.44
ANIMAL KEEPER PERMIT
Sections:

6.44.010    Animal keeper permit required.

6.44.020    Animal keeper application.

6.44.030    Investigation.

6.44.040    Notice of action.

6.44.050    Animal keeper permit fee.

6.44.060    Numerical limitation.

6.44.070    Regulations relating to keeping animals.

6.44.080    Expiration and renewal of permit.

6.44.090    Permit nontransferable.

6.44.100    Revocation of permit.

6.44.110    Appeals to the city council.

6.44.010 Animal keeper permit required.
To allow the placement of animals in temporary foster homes or to allow small hobby businesses involving animals, any person owning or having custody of animals in excess of the number permitted by BMC 6.32.030 and 6.32.040 of this title may make application to the director for an animal keeper permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.020 Animal keeper application.
Each application for an animal keeper’s permit shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the director or a designee. The application form shall contain such information as may reasonably be required by the director for the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to the address and home telephone number of the applicant and the number and general description of all animals for which the permit is sought. The applicant shall also obtain a written statement from a licensed veterinarian, director of humane society type organizations or other nongovernmental certified animal expert to assist the director in making the findings listed in BMC 6.44.030. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.030 Investigation.
A. Prior to the issuance of an animal keeper permit, the director, or his or her designee, shall conduct an inspection of the applicant’s premises where the permitted animals are intended to be kept and prepare a report for inclusion with the application for an original permit or a renewal. In addition and to allow neighbors to voice their concerns, the applicant shall provide the mailing labels and the city shall send notices to property owners within 300 feet of the proposed premises.

B. A permit shall be issued to the applicant if the director or designee finds that:

1. The keeping of animals, or the conduct of operation of the business for which the permit is requested, at the place set forth in the application will not violate any law or ordinance of the city, or any law of the state;

2. The keeping of animals, or the conduct or operation of the business for which the permit is requested, will not endanger the health, peace or safety of the community;

3. The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the number and type of animals for which the permit is requested without harm to the animals or material detriment to the use, enjoyment, or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site;

4. The premises and establishment where animals are to be kept satisfy the conditions set forth at BMC 6.40.070, and animals will not be subject to suffering, cruelty or abuse; and

5. The applicant has not had a similar permit revoked within one year prior to the application.

C. The director may impose such conditions in granting a permit as he or she may deem necessary to protect the public and may limit the term of such permit. (Ord. 09-10 § 1; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.040 Notice of action.
The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action of the director in either granting or denying the permit and, if the application has been denied, the notice shall advise the applicant of his or her right to appeal the determination to a hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.48 BMC. Service of the notice may be made by personal service or by registered mail. If service is made by mail, it shall be deemed complete upon deposit in the United States mail directed to the applicant at his or her latest address shown on the application. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.050 Animal keeper permit fee.
The fee for an animal keeper permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city before a permit is issued. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.060 Numerical limitation.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the director, upon application for issuance or renewal of an animal keeper permit, may limit the number of animals which are to be kept or maintained on the permitted premises.

B. At any time that there are more animals than an animal keeper permit allows, the permittee shall obtain a new permit which allows the keeping of the greater number of animals. The former permit shall be canceled and a credit for the canceled permit fee shall be allowed on the new permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.070 Regulations relating to keeping animals.
A. Every person to whom an animal keeper permit is issued shall comply with each of the following conditions:

1. Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals. In the case of animals kept outdoors, sufficient shade shall be provided to prevent overheating or discomfort from sun exposure. Animals kept outdoors shall also be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during inclement weather.

2. All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition with sufficient light provided to permit routine observation of animals and proper cleaning of the facilities.

3. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require.

4. Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the escape of animals.

5. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and animals from the public.

6. Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required according to the physical needs of the animals.

7. All animal rooms, cages and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing for animals kept therein.

8. All animals shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian for examination and treatment if so ordered by the director.

9. Adequate and effective vector control shall be established and maintained at all times.

10. Every violation of applicable regulations shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the director.

B. Failure of an applicant for a permit to comply with any one of the foregoing conditions shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any permit, whether original or renewal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.080 Expiration and renewal of permit.
A. An animal keeper permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which the permit is issued.

B. An animal keeper permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed within 30 days after the expiration thereof. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.090 Permit nontransferable.
An animal keeper permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.100 Revocation of permit.
A. Upon reaching the determination that a specific violation of this chapter and/or applicable statute, rule, code, regulation or permit condition warrants suspension, modification or revocation of an animal keeper permit, the director or his or her designee shall prepare and serve a written notice of action recommendation upon the subject permittee.

B. The notice of action recommendation should include all of the following information:

1. The name and business address of the subject permittee;

2. A description of the code section(s) violated and/or the actions or conditions which warrant suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit;

3. The action proposed (i.e., suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license);

4. A description of any prior action taken by the director or the department to gain compliance with regards to the subject violation(s);

5. A description of the procedures involved in taking the proposed action, including the permittee’s right to attend an administrative hearing on the proposed action; and

6. The name, title and telephone number of the director.

C. The director or his or her designee shall cause a copy of the notice of action recommendation to be provided to the subject permittee by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee personally or by causing a copy of the notice to be delivered to the permittee via certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to permittee at the address shown on the permit.

D. Proof of service of the notice of action recommendation shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the notice and retained by the director or his or her designee.

E. As soon as practicable after service of the notice of action recommendation, the director or his or her designee shall submit a copy of the notice of action recommendation to the city clerk, who, as soon as practicable after receiving said notice, shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing to consider suspension, modification or revocation of the subject permit or license. Such date shall be not less than 10 calendar days and not more than 30 calendar days from the date the notice was submitted to the city clerk.

F. A hearing on the notice of action recommendation shall thereafter be noticed and conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth at Chapter 1.44 BMC.

G. The director or his or her designee shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of the notice of action recommendation and a staff report, which should include a description of the violations and any actions taken by the subject permittee subsequent to the service of the notice, a record of conversations or correspondence between the director, the department and the permittee concerning the violations and/or the notice of action recommendation. The director shall obtain a written statement from a licensed veterinarian, director of humane society type organizations or other nongovernmental certified animal expert regarding compliance and/or alleged violations of this chapter

H. If an animal keeper permit is revoked for cause, the director shall not accept a new application by the same person for the same activity at the same location less than one year after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant affirmatively shows and the director finds, by inspection and/or investigation, that the grounds upon which the first application was denied or the permit was revoked no longer exist. On revocation of a permit, no part of the fee is refundable.

I. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, prior to the holding of the administrative hearing, the director may, for good cause, revoke, suspend or modify any animal keeper permit for a period not to exceed 30 days in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public or the animals held on the subject premises. (Ord. 09-10 § 2; Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.44.110 Appeals to the city council.
Any interested person may appeal a decision made by the director regarding an animal keeper permit to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 09-10 § 3).

Chapter 6.48
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
Sections:

6.48.010    Purpose.

6.48.020    Duties of administrative hearing officer.

6.48.030    Limitations on authority of hearing officer.

6.48.040    Request for hearing and hearing officer.

6.48.050    Scheduling of administrative appeals hearing – Notice of administrative appeals hearing.

6.48.060    Service of notice of administrative appeals hearing.

6.48.070    Proof of service of hearing notice.

6.48.080    Report and recommendation.

6.48.090    Admissibility of evidence.

6.48.100    Failure to attend administrative appeals hearing.

6.48.110    Rights of parties at appeals hearing.

6.48.120    Decision of the hearing officer.

6.48.130    Duty to prepare and serve decision and compliance order.

6.48.140    Time in which to serve decision and compliance order.

6.48.150    Content of decision and compliance order.

6.48.160    Service of decision and compliance order.

6.48.170    Effective date.

6.48.180    Failure to comply with decision and compliance order.

6.48.010 Purpose.
A. Unless otherwise provided by this title, any appeal filed by person aggrieved by an administrative decision made pursuant to this title shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any administrative hearing of the city concerning animals which is required to be held by state law shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.020 Duties of administrative hearing officer.
The administrative hearing officer (“hearing officer”) shall conduct all administrative appeal hearings of any timely and properly filed appeal from any administrative decision made under this title. The hearing officer shall review all evidence, documents, and written testimony and hear all oral testimony submitted by the parties at or before the scheduled administrative appeals hearing and render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.030 Limitations on authority of hearing officer.
The hearing officer’s authority to hear and consider appeals shall be limited to passing on only those appeals pertaining to matters within his or her subject matter jurisdiction. The hearing officer shall consider at the hearing on the appeal only those matters or issues which were specifically raised by the appellant in his or her appeal and which are relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to waive any requirements of the municipal code, zoning ordinance and/or any applicable statutes, rules, codes or regulations. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.040 Request for hearing and hearing officer.
A. Within 10 business days of a decision, an affected party may appeal the decision by filing a written appeal specifying the reasons for the appeal and paying the appeal fee established by council resolution.

B. Within three business days after the director has determined that a timely and complete appeal has been filed, the director shall request appointment of a hearing officer in accordance with city policy. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.050 Scheduling of administrative appeals hearing – Notice of administrative appeals hearing.
As soon as practicable, but allowing sufficient time for providing notice of the hearing as provided by this title, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal and shall instruct the director of the same. The director or his or her designee shall prepare a notice of administrative appeals hearing (“hearing notice”), which shall be in substantially the same form as follows:

You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the administrative hearing officer at _________________ on the ____ day of ______________, ________, at the hour of ______upon the ___________________ served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by an attorney. You may present any relevant evidence at the hearing and you will be given a full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you.

(Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.060 Service of notice of administrative appeals hearing.
The director shall cause a copy of the hearing notice to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of said notice to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy of said notice to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.070 Proof of service of hearing notice.
Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the date and manner in which service was made. The declaration shall be affixed to a copy of the hearing notice and retained by the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.080 Report and recommendation.
The director or his or her designee shall prepare an administrative hearing packet for the hearing officer to review prior to the hearing. The packet shall include a copy of all department documents pertaining to the subject violations, a staff report and any evidence of the violation(s). (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.090 Admissibility of evidence.
At the appeals hearing, the hearing officer shall hear any evidence offered either in support of appellant’s claim or in support of the administrative decision which is the subject of the appeal, provided such evidence is relevant to the issues of the hearing. The hearing officer has the authority to determine the relevance of any evidence to the hearing. The hearing officer also has the authority to exclude unduly repetitious and cumulative evidence, regardless of its relevancy. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.100 Failure to attend administrative appeals hearing.
If appellant fails to attend the scheduled appeals hearing, the hearing will proceed without appellant and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her rights to be orally heard at the appeals hearing. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.110 Rights of parties at appeals hearing.
Each party appearing at the hearing shall have the following rights:

A. To call and examine witnesses;

B. To introduce documentary and physical evidence;

C. To cross-examine opposing witnesses;

D. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify;

E. To rebut evidence; and

F. To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.120 Decision of the hearing officer.
A. Following an appeal, the hearing officer may decide to uphold the administrative decision or overturn such decision, in whole or in part. In the event the hearing officer determines to overturn the decision in whole, the appellant shall not be required to pay any administrative fines imposed as a result of said administrative decision.

B. Following an appeal, the hearing officer may impose upon appellant such conditions for the keeping of animals as are permitted by state or local law. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.130 Duty to prepare and serve decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall prepare and serve a written notice of decision and compliance order (“decision and compliance order”) upon the appellant and the director following the appeals hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and not appealable. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.140 Time in which to serve decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall serve the decision and compliance order on each appellant within 30 calendar days from the date the hearing is deemed closed. The hearing officer shall also provide or cause to be provided a copy of the decision and compliance order to the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.150 Content of decision and compliance order.
The decision and compliance order for a notice and order shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered, findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, the effective date of the decision, and a compliance order which shall specifically describe the actions which shall be required to be taken to remedy the violations indicated in the decision and compliance order and shall require the actions to be completed within a specified time period and by a specified deadline. The decision and compliance order shall further require the recipient of the notice and order to pay all applicable administrative fines no later than 10 days from the date of issuance of the notice of decision and compliance order. The amount of the fine for which the recipient shall be responsible shall be as set forth in the notice and order. Payment of the administrative fine shall be ordered to be made to the department unless otherwise directed by the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.160 Service of decision and compliance order.
The hearing officer shall cause a copy of the decision and compliance order to be provided to each appellant either by causing a copy of said decision and compliance order to be delivered to each appellant personally or by causing a copy to be delivered by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and addressed to each appellant at the address shown on the appeal. A copy of the decision and compliance order shall also be provided to the director. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.170 Effective date.
The effective date of the hearing officer’s decision and compliance order shall be as stated therein. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

6.48.180 Failure to comply with decision and compliance order.
It shall be unlawful to fail, neglect or refuse to obey a final decision and compliance order. (Ord. 07-72 § 4).

Title 7
(Reserved)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.04    Property Maintenance – Nuisance Abatement

8.06    Neighborhood Nuisance Code

8.08    Weeds and Rubbish

8.16    Houseboats

8.20    Noise Regulations

8.24    Refuse Matter Disposal

8.28    Fire Prevention and Life Safety Code

8.32    Repair of Mechanical Equipment

8.34    Collection of Recyclables

8.36    Denial of Permits or Approvals If Property Already Violates Code

8.38    Graffiti Control

8.42    Repealed

8.46    Foreclosed Properties

8.50    Maintenance and Registration of Neglected, Vacant and Foreclosed Properties

8.54    Administrative Hearings

Chapter 8.04
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE – NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Sections:

8.04.010    Findings and purpose.

8.04.020    Definitions.

8.04.030    Unlawful public nuisances – Defined.

8.04.040    Nuisance – Unsafe, substandard and dangerous building.

8.04.050    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.04.060    Nonexclusive remedies.

8.04.070    Emergency summary abatement.

8.04.080    Determination of nuisance – Notice of violation.

8.04.090    Notice and order to abate or show cause.

8.04.100    Request for hearing.

8.04.110    Request for hardship waiver of appeal fee.

8.04.120    Administrative show cause hearing.

8.04.130    Decision of the hearing officer.

8.04.140    Abatement by owner.

8.04.150    Abatement by city.

8.04.160    Administrative charges.

8.04.170    Abatement costs.

8.04.180    Collection of unpaid costs.

8.04.190    City council confirmation hearing.

8.04.200    Nuisance abatement lien.

8.04.210    Special assessment against property.

8.04.220    Satisfaction of lien.

8.04.230    Limitation on filing judicial action.

8.04.240    Alternative means of enforcement.

8.04.250    Treble damages.

8.04.260    No duty on city to enforce.

Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 1-401 – 1-413.

8.04.010 Findings and purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter are to promote the health, safety, economic, aesthetic and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to protect neighborhoods against property-related nuisances, blight and deterioration by establishing requirements for all buildings, whether residential or nonresidential, or structures of whatever kind, and establishing requirements for the maintenance of all land, whether improved or vacant.

The city of Benicia has a history and reputation for well-kept properties. Property values and the general welfare of the community are founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of private properties. When owners and occupants of properties within the city permit conditions to exist which are below the minimum conditions required by this chapter, it is injurious and detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of residents of the city and contributes substantially and increasingly to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and commercial areas. The abatement of continued violations impacts city personnel and resources, requires resources over and above the level of enforcement services normally provided, and constitutes a public nuisance, the costs of which should be paid by the responsible property owners.

This chapter establishes procedures to abate any and all public nuisances which are violations of this code, or which the city has declared to be injurious to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the citizens. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

“Backyard” means that portion of property between the back of the primary residential structure and the rear property line.

“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property.

“City” means the city of Benicia.

“City manager” means the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative.

“Costs or expenses to abate the nuisance” means the actual cost of abatement plus all administrative expenses, including direct and indirect personnel costs; costs incurred in documenting the nuisance; the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation and dissemination of notices, specifications, and contracts and in inspecting the work; the costs of printing and mailing the required notices; and the costs of imposing a lien, if a lien becomes necessary.

“Enforcement officer” means any individual employed by the city with primary enforcement authority for this chapter, or his or her duly authorized representative, or any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce a provision of this code.

“Front yard” means that portion of property between the abutting frontal street and the primary building or residential structure.

“Hearing officer” means the individual appointed by the city manager under this chapter to hear all timely appeals described in this chapter. The hearing officer can have no pecuniary interest in the outcome of the hearing, or interest in or bias regarding the case. If the appointee is a city employee, the appointee cannot work in the department that is enforcing the code violations, nor can any decision as the hearing officer be made subject to the employee’s performance evaluation in his/her regular job.

“Junk” means any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material, including but not limited to those composed in whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, plastic or other synthetic substance, fiber, glass, plaster, plaster of Paris, rubber, terra cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, wood, wood chips, tree trimmings or cuttings, metal, sand, organic matter or other substance.

“Junkyard” means any property on which any junk is abandoned, bailed, bartered, bought, brought, bundled, deposited, disassembled, disposed of, exchanged, handled, kept, stored or transported, regardless of whether or not such activity is done for profit.

“Owner” and “property owner,” as used herein, and unless otherwise required by the context, shall be deemed to include any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to and including any person identified as owning property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

“Person,” as used in this chapter, means any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or other organization, however formed, including heirs in possession, executors, administrators, or assigns.

“Property” or “premises” means any lot or parcel of land, including any alley, sidewalk or parkway abutting such lot or parcel of land, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be.

“Public nuisance” means anything which is, or is likely to become, injurious to health or safety, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, street or highway. All conditions enumerated in BMC 8.04.030 are public nuisances by definition and declaration, and said enumerated conditions shall in no way be construed to be exclusive or exhaustive.

“Side yard” means that portion of property between the side of the building or residential structure and the property line.

“Vehicle” references the current definition of same contained at Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, and means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. Vehicles do not include wheelchairs. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.030 Unlawful public nuisances – Defined.
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property in the city to maintain, or allow or permit others to maintain, such property in any of the following conditions:

A. The exterior accumulation of vegetation, weeds, dirt, litter, rubbish or debris on the property which is visible from a public street, sidewalk, alleyway, right-of-way or neighboring property. This includes, but is not limited to:

1. Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping, dead, debris laden, weed infested or overgrown vegetation, such as trees, shrubs, hedges, grass and ground covers, or vegetation dying as a result of physical damage, disease, insect infestation or lack of water or any other vegetation;

2. Vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin and other nuisances or causing detriment to neighboring properties, or out of conformity with neighboring community standards to such an extent as to result in appreciable diminution of property values;

3. Vegetation growing on the roof or compromising the integrity of any structure, except for rooftop gardens designed and constructed to withstand structural load;

4. The removal or failure to maintain in good condition any landscaping required as a condition of any permit or development approval or included in the project plans or application without city approval. “Good condition” means that plant material is alive, irrigated, and otherwise cared for to ensure survival.

The provision as to dead or dying vegetation due to lack of water shall not be enforced during a drought year, as determined by the city. For purposes of this subsection, a lawn area shall be deemed overgrown if 50 percent or more of its area exceeds four inches in height (not including decorative grasses). (See also Chapter 8.08 BMC, Weeds and Rubbish).

B. The accumulation or storage of junk, trash or debris, including but not limited to tires, broken, abandoned or discarded furniture, sinks, toilets, cabinets or other household fixtures, equipment or parts thereof, rubbish, garbage, goods and furnishings, shopping carts, packing boxes, lumber, salvage materials or other materials, accumulations of grease, oil, or petroleum-based products of any kind, animal feces, or other debris and litter, which constitutes a fire hazard or safety hazard and/or is stored or accumulated in such a manner as to constitute visual blight which is visible from the public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, alley, or adjoining property. This includes the dumping, spillage or storage of solids or liquids which may negatively impact the visual or olfactory nature of the area.

C. Buildings, fences or other structures, the exterior walls or windows of which are visible from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, which are cracked, broken, leaning, fallen, decayed, deteriorated or defaced, including but not limited to unpainted or untreated exterior wood surfaces (other than natural decay-resistant wood) on any building (or any portion thereof), or structure in which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or insect infestation, including failure to provide adequate weather protection to structures or buildings, including, but not limited to, cracked, peeling, warped, rotted, or severely damaged paint, stucco or other exterior covering.

D. Failure to maintain property, building structure, required fence, driveways, sidewalks or parking areas so that it becomes defective, unsightly, or in such condition of dilapidation or disrepair that it causes or accelerates the deterioration of the property or causes the depreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties, or is otherwise materially detrimental to adjacent properties.

E. Building or other structures which are abandoned, partially destroyed, partially constructed or allowed to remain unreasonably in a state of partial construction or neglect.

F. Vacant or abandoned buildings or structures with doorways, windows or other openings left open, unlocked, unsecured or otherwise easily accessible to trespassers, vagrants, vandals or other persons not authorized to enter.

G. Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions, or contributing to neighborhood blight, or resulting in unsecured property inviting trespassers and malicious mischief.

H. Storage or maintenance of packing boxes, storage containers, lumber, pallets, metal storage bins or containers, trash, dirt and other junk deposited or stored for unreasonable periods either inside or outside buildings, visible from the street or nearby property, which constitute visual blight, health and safety issues, are offensive to the senses, or are detrimental to nearby property values.

I. Where visible from a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, the exterior storage or maintenance of unregistered, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, automotive engines, parts, or machinery of any type or description, unless specifically authorized by city license or permit; building materials or merchandise unless specifically authorized by an active use, building or other city permit; construction equipment or garbage bins except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit or other city permit are in progress on the subject or adjoining property. (See also Chapter 10.44 BMC, Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles.)

J. The parking or storage of any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, camper shell, motor home or other mobile equipment, whether or not motorized, or portions thereof, including accumulation or storage of vehicle parts or other mechanical parts and components of a vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or motor home, on property used or zoned for residential purposes, on any front lawn, front yard, side yard or rear yard, where visible from the public right-of-way; provided, however, that such parking or storage of a legally registered and operable vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or motor home shall be allowed on required parking spaces or paved driveways leading directly from approved and permitted curb cuts to required garages, carports or other required off-street parking spaces, if such vehicle, boat, trailer, camper or motor home is located totally within private property and does not extend or block any public right-of-way or interfere with a line of sight from a public right-of-way to the extent that it creates a safety hazard. It shall also be prohibited, and a public nuisance, to park any vehicle on any privately owned property if such vehicle would be prohibited from parking on such property pursuant to BMC 10.16.080 and 10.16.160.

K. Use of property in a residential district for the purpose of performing auto repair for profit. Auto repair including work on any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, motor home or other mobile or mechanical equipment, whether or not motorized, may be allowed only in accordance with the provisions of BMC 8.32.030. In no instance shall more than two permits be issued and active at any one time for any property located in a residentially zoned district. All such auto repair shall only be allowed on or in the approved driveway, garage, carport or other required off-street parking space.

L. Land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, that causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties.

M. Once commenced, the failure by private property owners to complete, within a reasonable period of time, exterior physical improvements, visible from the public right-of-way, such as streets, curbs, gutters and other improvements whether or not intended to be dedicated to the city.

N. Obstruction or encroachment upon any public property including, but not limited to, any public street, sidewalk, highway, right-of-way, park or building, without a valid permit. Such obstructions or encroachments include, but are not limited to, overgrown trees and shrubs; building materials; merchandise or other personal property; and buildings or portions of buildings or structures protruding onto public property.

O. Maintain property in a manner which causes a hazard to the public by obscuring visibility of an intersection.

P. An attractive nuisance dangerous to children including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken or neglected equipment; machinery; a refrigerator, freezer or other appliance; or hazardous pool, pond or excavation.

Q. Maintain a building, structure, any artificial alteration of property, any activity or any water that supports the development, attraction or harborage of vectors, or that facilitates the introduction or spread of vectors, or that is a breeding place for vectors. The presence of vectors in their developmental stages on the property is prima facie evidence that the property is a public nuisance. “Vector” means any animal capable of transmitting human disease or capable of producing human discomfort or injury, including, but not limited to, mosquitoes, flies, mites, ticks, other arthropods, rodents and other vertebrates.

R. Causing, maintaining or permitting graffiti as defined in BMC 8.38.020: (1) to remain on exterior walls or facades of buildings, fences, walls, or other structures of whatever nature; or (2) to remain upon the exterior of motor vehicles, vans or trucks which are parked on public streets or driveways or are otherwise visible to the public. (See also Chapter 8.38 BMC, Graffiti Control.)

S. Storage of hazardous materials in such a manner as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties.

T. The existence of any property condition which is unlawful or declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to any other provision in this code. This subsection shall be construed to place an affirmative duty on property owners and occupants to maintain their property in conformity with all applicable codes. The city shall have the power to require property owners and occupants to bring their property into compliance with applicable codes, regardless of whether the building is occupied.

U. Discharge of any materials other than storm water to the city storm sewer system in violation of Chapter 13.50 BMC.

V. Garbage cans and recycling containers stored in front yards and visible from public streets, other than as permitted by this code.

W. Heavy commercial vehicles, construction equipment, or machinery of any type or description parked or stored without a permit on property where it is readily visible to the general public, except during excavation, construction or demolition operations pursuant to an active building permit in progress on the subject property or on adjoining property.

X. Improper maintenance of signs or sign structures, or signs on property relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on property more than 60 days after business uses or products sold cease, or signs in violation of this code. This does not include historic signs approved by the city.

Y. The use, in any residential zoning district or residential planned development district of the city, of barbed wire, concertina wire, razor-cut wire or other such similar fencing material, unless specifically approved by the city.

Z. Throwing or depositing any materials into any creek or channel unless authorized by COB, Army Corps and/or DFW.

AA. Any fence which is in a condition of dilapidation or disrepair, including, but not limited to, fences with broken slats and sharp edges, or which severely lean or list more than 15 degrees from perpendicular or are in danger of collapse due to the elements, pest infestation, dry rot, or other damage.

BB. A public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code Section 3479 or 3480.

CC. Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance, or any condition existing on property which constitutes visual blight, or is a health or safety hazard to the community or neighboring properties.

DD. Any violation of the Benicia zoning ordinance or any state or county law violation enforced by the city. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.040 Nuisance – Unsafe, substandard and dangerous building.
A building or structure which has one or more of the following conditions is deemed to be a public nuisance and an unsafe, substandard and dangerous building, if the conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property, or safety of the public or occupants is endangered as determined by the city building official and/or their designee:

A. Inadequate sanitation;

B. Structural hazard;

C. Hazardous electrical wiring;

D. Hazardous plumbing;

E. Hazardous mechanical equipment;

F. Faulty weather protection;

G. Fire hazard;

H. Use of faulty construction materials;

I. Hazardous or unsanitary premises;

J. Inadequate exits;

K. Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment;

L. Improper occupancy;

M. Any other violation of the most current adopted building codes;

N. Any other violation which is set forth in the most current edition of any of the following code sections:

1. California Building Code Section 116, Unsafe buildings or structures.

2. California Health and Safety Code Section 17920.3, Substandard buildings.

3. Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Section 302, Dangerous Building. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.050 Declaration of public nuisance.
All property found to be maintained in violation of any one or more of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition and/or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.060 Nonexclusive remedies.
The procedures in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other ordinances or abating public nuisances by all other remedies, including by issuing administrative citations in Chapter 1.10 BMC, or other administrative, civil or criminal proceedings, or in any other manner provided by law. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as limiting, prejudicing, or adversely affecting the city’s ability to concurrently or consecutively use any of those proceedings as the city may deem are appropriate, efficient, effective, and/or practical. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.070 Emergency summary abatement.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, whenever it is determined that a public nuisance is so imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that such condition must be immediately corrected or isolated, the enforcement officer may institute the following procedures:

A. Notice. To the extent possible, the enforcement officer (or other city official) shall attempt to make contact with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of the property. In the event contact is made, the enforcement officer shall notify them of the danger involved and require that such condition be immediately removed, repaired or isolated to prevent harm to any person or property.

B. Abatement. In the event the enforcement officer is unable to make contact, or if the appropriate persons after notification by the city do not take action as specified by the city within 72 hours, or a lesser period if deemed necessary, then the enforcement officer may, with the approval of the city manager, take all steps deemed necessary to remove or isolate the dangerous condition or conditions with the use of city forces or a contractor retained pursuant to the provisions of this code.

C. Costs. The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized account of the costs incurred by the city in removing or isolating such condition or conditions. Such costs may be recovered to the same extent and in the same manner that abatement costs are recovered as set forth in this chapter pursuant to Government Code Sections 38773 and 38773.1. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.080 Determination of nuisance – Notice of violation.
A. Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter determines that a violation of a provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to cause the owner and any responsible party to be notified of the existence of such condition on the premises and shall direct such parties to abate the nuisance.

B. The notice of violation shall contain the following information:

1. The names and addresses of the owner and responsible parties, if any, in violation of this chapter, and the street address, legal description or other description of the premises where the violation is present;

2. A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a nuisance and the specific code section(s) which have been violated and the actions needed to abate the violations;

3. A reasonable time limit to correct the violation(s) not less than 10 calendar days or more than 20 calendar days after the date of the notice, based on the type, severity and number of previous violations on the same property, unless the enforcement officer determines there are circumstances of hardship that warrant additional time for abatement;

4. A statement explaining the consequences and range of penalties for not abating the violation within the time specified in the preliminary notice, including but not limited to the imposition of administrative charges, incurring city abatement costs, issuance of administrative citations, and/or other legal remedies available to the city; and

5. The name and phone number of a contact person at the city should the recipient desire to explain why the premises should not be declared a public nuisance and why penalties should not be assessed.

C. A copy of the notice of violation provided for in this section shall be served by personal delivery or by mail to the owner at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of Solano County on the date the notice is prepared and upon any responsible party at their known address, including the occupant of the premises, if any. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the United States mail. If the owner is not known, the notice may be posted on the property.

D. In no event does this chapter or its requirements limit the right of the enforcement officer or other city officials to issue informal written or oral notices of code violations to persons specifying shorter compliance periods when appropriate or when abatement by city forces is not the contemplated remedy. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.090 Notice and order to abate or show cause.
A. Determination. Whenever the enforcement officer determines that property within the city is being maintained as a public nuisance, and the notice of violation has not resulted in abatement, the enforcement officer shall give a written final notice to the owner by serving a “notice and order to abate or show cause.”

B. Contents of Notice. The notice and order to abate or show cause (“notice to abate”) shall include the following:

1. The names and addresses of the owner and responsible parties, if any, in violation of this chapter and the street address, legal description or other description of the premises where the violation is present;

2. A statement specifying the condition(s) which constitute a nuisance and the specific code section(s) which have been violated and the actions needed to abate the violations;

3. A statement directing the owner to abate the nuisance and establishing the length of time permitted for voluntary abatement of the nuisance, which shall be at least 10 days unless the owner makes other arrangements with the approval of the enforcement officer;

4. The amount of the administrative charge owed the city pursuant to BMC 8.04.160 and the time limit not to exceed 30 days to pay the charge, and the consequences of not paying the administrative charge within the time specified in the notice;

5. A statement that if the owner does not voluntarily abate the nuisance or request a hearing within the specified time period, the city will enter the property and abate the nuisance, and the cost of abatement will become a charge against the owner and a lien or assessment against the property, if unpaid;

6. A statement that the owner may, within 10 days of date of the notice and order to abate, file a written request with the city clerk for an administrative hearing to show cause why the condition should not be abated by the city and why administrative charges and other abatement costs should not be charged against the owner;

7. The amount of the appeal fee as established by city council resolution and procedure for requesting an appeal fee hardship waiver pursuant to BMC 8.04.110;

8. A statement that failure to seek a hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter and will waive all rights to maintain an action to set aside or modify the enforcement officer’s notice, order and action.

C. Manner of Giving Notice. The notice and order to abate shall be given to the owner in person or by regular, first class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner’s address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the enforcement officer. Notice is deemed complete at the time notice is personally delivered or deposited in the mail. If the notice is not personally served, in addition to mailed notice, the enforcement officer shall post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in Solano County pursuant to Government Code Section 6062. The 10-day period in which to file an appeal shall be extended by the length of time it takes to publish the notice and order to abate pursuant to this section.

D. The failure of a person to receive notice shall not affect the validity of proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.100 Request for hearing.
The request for a hearing shall be filed with the city clerk within 10 days of the date of the notice and order to abate and must contain the following:

A. The name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers of each person appealing the notice and order to abate.

B. A statement of the reason(s) why notice and order to abate is being contested and to show cause why the city should not abate the violations.

C. The date and signature of the owner and/or other persons appealing the notice and order to abate.

D. The appeal fee or hardship waiver form and supporting documentation. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.110 Request for hardship waiver of appeal fee.
Any owner who requests a hearing to appeal a notice and order to abate and is financially unable to pay the appeal fee may file a request for a hardship waiver as follows:

A. The request for waiver shall be made on a form obtained from the city clerk and must be submitted to the city clerk with all supporting documentation within 10 days of the date of the notice and order to abate. Documents suitable for consideration may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns, and all schedules for the preceding tax year; financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for the 12 months preceding submittal of the waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the responsible person’s finance hardship. The city manager or designee may grant a reasonable extension to the owner to supply supporting documentation. The city may, at a time chosen in its sole discretion and after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy or discard the documents submitted for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the responsible person.

B. The city manager or designee shall issue a written decision sent by first class mail specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the waiver within 10 days of the receipt of the request. The decision of the finance director shall be final.

C. If the city manager or designee determines a waiver is not warranted, the owner shall remit the appeal fee within 10 days of the date of the written determination. If the city clerk does not receive the appeal fee within this time period, the request for hearing shall not be accepted and shall constitute a failure of the property owner to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.120 Administrative show cause hearing.
A. A written request for hearing and appeal fee or hardship waiver must be received by the city clerk within 10 days of the date of the notice and order to abate, except where there has been a delay in the service as set forth in BMC 8.04.090(C).

B. If a timely request for a hearing is received, the appointed hearing officer shall set a time and date for hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing in writing of the time, date, and place. The hearing may be continued once to a reasonable time upon the request of the owner, with the approval of the hearing officer, and by the city for good cause.

C. The city and owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence concerning the violation(s) and proposed rehabilitation, repair and/or demolition of the subject property and timeline for abatement in the notice and order to abate. The owner may represent themselves or be represented by any person of their choice. Although formal rules of evidence and discovery will not apply to the appeal hearing, each party shall have the following rights among others:

1. To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the condition of the premises constituting a nuisance.

2. To introduce documentary and physical evidence.

3. To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.

4. To impeach any witness, regardless of which party first called that witness to testify.

5. To rebut the evidence against him or her.

6. If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, an interpreter may be utilized, at the party’s own expense, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had and shall not have any involvement in the proceeding, unless the hearing officer finds that circumstances warrant an exception to this rule.

7. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded by a tape recorder.

8. Either party may provide a certified shorthand or stenographic reporter to maintain a written record of the proceedings at the party’s own expense. (When required, preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as presently written or hereinafter amended.)

D. The city shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of the code exists. The notice and order to abate and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents to the extent that the enforcement officer drafting the notice and order or any additional reports need not be the representative for the city presenting the city’s evidence.

E. The hearing officer may continue the hearing to request additional information from the city’s representative and/or the owner, or to conduct an inspection of the building and/or property involved in the hearing prior to concluding the hearing and issuing a written decision.

F. The hearing officer may inspect the building and/or property involved in the hearing prior to or during the hearing; provided, that the owner consents to the inspection, is given notice of the date and time of the inspection, and is permitted to be present during the inspection. The hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing the material facts observed and conclusions drawn from the inspection. The city representative and owner shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer. If the building, structure and/or property can be inspected from areas in which the general public has access, or with permission of other persons authorized to provide access to the building and/or property, then notice to and consent of the owner is not required.

G. Failure of the owner to appear at the hearing after notice of the hearing has been served shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. It shall also be deemed an admission by owner of the existence of the nuisance conditions charged. In the event of a failure to appear, the hearing officer may order that the nuisance conditions be abated by the city. There shall be no right to appeal such order. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.130 Decision of the hearing officer.
A. Within 10 business days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold, modify, or deny the violations in the notice and order to abate. The written decision shall state the reasons for the decision, including the factual findings and conclusions made by the administrative hearing officer.

1. If the hearing officer determines that the notice and order to abate should be upheld, the decision shall include an order to correct the violations within 10 days of mailing the decision or within such time as the administrative hearing officer deems reasonable.

2. If the hearing officer determines the notice and order to abate should be modified in terms of methods of abatement and/or time limit for compliance, then the written decision shall include the modified action to correct the violation and/or the date by which correction must be completed. Except under rare, extenuating circumstances, the date of completion should not exceed 60 days from the date the decision is issued.

3. The written determination shall further state that if the nuisance is not abated within the time provided, the nuisance shall be abated by the city at the parties’ expense and the expenses may be made a lien or special assessment against the property.

4. If the administrative hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which is likely to recur after the abatement, the hearing officer’s decision may direct the owner to take adequate precautions for a period of time not to exceed 12 months so that the nuisance will not recur.

5. The written decision shall contain a statement of the right to seek judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision by filing a petition within 90 days with a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.

B. The recipient of the notice and order to abate shall be served a copy of the administrative hearing officer’s written decision in the manner set forth in BMC 8.04.080(C). Copies of the decision shall be sent to the owner (and any other responsible persons), the enforcement officer and the city clerk.

C. The hearing officer’s decision is final for the city of Benicia. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.140 Abatement by owner.
The owner or responsible party may, at his or her own expense:

A. Abate the nuisance in the time and manner presented in the notice of violation, the notice and order to abate, or written determination of the hearing officer, whichever is applicable; or

B. Prior to the scheduled hearing, abate a declared nuisance in accordance with the provisions of the notice and order to abate; provided, that all necessary permits are first obtained.

If an enforcement officer determines that the nuisance has been properly abated, or that the owner is actively pursuing permits to correct the violation, then proceedings pursuant to this chapter may be terminated; provided, however, that the city may, in its discretion, proceed with recovery of such abatement costs, including incidental expenses, incurred by the city for administration, code enforcement or abatement by the city, as it may have incurred prior to abatement by the owner. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner or other responsible party of the obligation of obtaining any required permit to do any work incidental to such abatement. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.150 Abatement by city.
A. If the nuisance is not completely abated within the time prescribed by the notice and order to abate, or by the date established in the hearing officer’s written decision if a hearing is held, the city manager or designee may proceed to abate the nuisance by city personnel or private contractor. No abatement may proceed without first being approved by the city attorney.

B. The city manager or designee is expressly authorized to contract with or retain persons, contractors or franchisees to provide services necessary to effectuate any abatement action pursued under this chapter. The city personnel and/or private contractor may enter upon the property with either the owner’s consent or a warrant from the court to enter the property, if legally required and after receiving prior approval from the city attorney.

C. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city whenever such person is engaged in the work of abatement, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work, as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.160 Administrative charges.
If a violation is not abated within the time limit specified in the notice of violation and a notice and order to abate are issued, then the notice and order to abate shall include a charge to recover the administrative costs for the issuance of the notice and order to abate and other city activities related to the abatement of the violation. The amount of the charge shall be established by city council resolution based on an analysis of direct and indirect personnel costs (including attorney fees), costs of documenting the violation and the actual costs of preparing, printing and mailing the notice and order to abate. The administrative charge shall become due and payable 30 days from the effective date of the notice and order to abate. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.170 Abatement costs.
A. If a violation is abated by the city pursuant to this chapter, the enforcement officer shall keep an accounting of the costs incurred, including all time spent by city and contract personnel in addressing and abating the nuisance, incidental expenses of such abatement, and attorney fees if the city elects, at the initiation of the abatement proceedings, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. Upon conclusion of such abatement, the enforcement officer shall submit an itemized statement of costs to the city clerk.

B. Abatement costs shall begin to run from the date of the notice and order to abate, except in cases of summary abatement, in which case costs of abatement shall begin to run from the date the enforcement officer became aware of the nuisance requiring summary abatement.

C. Time spent by city personnel shall, in addition to an employee’s hourly rate of pay, include the city’s customary overhead expenses for provision of all benefits for that employee as well as the use of office space. Time spent by contract personnel shall be charged at actual cost to the city.

D. The term “incidental expenses,” as used in this section, includes, but is not limited to, costs incurred in documenting the nuisance, the actual expenses of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications, and contracts, inspection of the abatement work, and costs of printing and mailings required by this chapter. “Attorney fees” shall include fees and expenses of outside counsel and time spent by the city attorney and his or her staff, calculated like other city personnel as long as it does not include contested abatement proceedings involving third party attorneys.

E. The city may seek reasonable attorney fees incurred for an abatement action and related proceedings in those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. If the city elects to seek recovery of its own attorney fees, attorney fees may be recovered by the prevailing party in said action or proceeding. Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5(b), an award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party shall not exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

F. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17951, property owners and/or tenants shall be required to pay to the city reasonable fees as adopted by city council resolution to defray the following costs of code enforcement:

1. For inspections made at any dwelling unit in order to investigate a complaint of a violation of a building, housing, health or safety code;

2. For inspections of a dwelling unit to ensure the correction of a noticed code violation; and

3. For copies of reports and records relating to any code enforcement activity regarding any dwelling unit.

G. The enforcement officer shall send a statement of the costs to the owner or responsible persons receiving the notice and order to abate with a deadline of 30 days in which to pay the costs or make other arrangements for payment with the city. The owner and/or responsible persons receiving the notice and order to abate are liable to the city for all costs incurred in abating the nuisance and it shall constitute a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by the owner and/or responsible parties and may be collected pursuant to the procedures in this chapter. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.180 Collection of unpaid costs.
A. Cumulative Remedies. At its discretion, the city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the recovery of abatement costs and/or administrative charges owed to the city. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total of administrative and abatement charges have been recovered. Any property owner who fails to pay any abatement costs or administrative charges owed to the city shall be liable in any action brought by the city for costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount. The city’s collection costs may include, but are not limited to, those for personnel, materials, overhead, attorneys’ fees and any other city expenditure required to collect unpaid abatement costs or administrative charges.

B. Liens. In the event the amount of any administrative costs and the total costs for abating a nuisance are not paid in full within 30 days of the date of invoice from the city and no other payment arrangements have been made and approved, the city may elect to place a nuisance lien against the real property on which the violation occurred, or the city may elect to levy a special assessment lien against the property on which the violation occurred. Any administrative or recording costs charged by the county shall also become a debt of the owner. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.190 City council confirmation hearing.
A. The enforcement officer shall present the cost report and a resolution for a nuisance abatement lien or special assessment to the city council for approval.

B. At least 10 days before the council meeting at which the cost report and resolution of lien or special assessment are considered, the enforcement officer shall mail the owner a copy of the report and proposed resolution, together with a notice of the time and place of the council meeting at which the report will be considered, and advising the owner that he or she may appear and protest any cost item contained in the report. The report and notice shall also be posted conspicuously on the property. Failure to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.

C. At the time fixed for hearing on the report of expenses, the city council shall consider the report and protests or objections raised by the person liable to be assessed for the cost of abatement. The council may revise, correct or modify the report as it considers just.

D. The city council hearing is limited to the amount of costs and shall not include the validity of the abatement which is determined by the procedures set forth in BMC 8.04.080 and 8.04.090.

E. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a resolution accepting the cost report (with any modifications) which shall become a personal debt of the person liable for the costs of abatement. The city council shall also require, by resolution, that the costs be a nuisance abatement lien or special assessment upon the subject property as provided for in BMC 8.04.200 and 8.04.210. Any administrative or recording costs charged by the county shall also become a debt of the owner. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.200 Nuisance abatement lien.
A. The nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the name and address of the city (on whose behalf the lien is imposed), the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. The lien shall also state that the lien accrues interest at the legal rate of interest.

B. The city clerk shall serve a copy of the resolution and the nuisance abatement lien on the owner in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1(b) and Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10 by having it personally served, or, if the owner of record cannot be found after diligent search, by posting a copy in a conspicuous place on the property for a period of 10 days and publishing it in a newspaper of general circulation in the county pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

C. The city clerk shall record a certified copy of the resolution and nuisance abatement lien in the Solano County recorder’s office. From the date of recording, the lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.

D. Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the judgment remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.

E. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

F. A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for money judgment. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.210 Special assessment against property.
A. The notice of special assessment shall specify the amount of the assessment, the name and address of the city (on whose behalf the assessment is imposed), the date of the abatement order and city council resolution making the cost of abatement a special assessment, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the assessment is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel and the fact that owner has failed to pay city the cost of the abatement.

B. The notice of special assessment shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5(c). The notice shall be given at the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments.

C. The notice of special assessment shall be filed with the Solano County recorder. Upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of assessment lien, a copy of the lien may be turned over to the county auditor, who shall then enter the amount of the lien on the assessment rolls as a special assessment. Thereafter, the amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided by California Government Code Section 38773.5 and as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.220 Satisfaction of lien.
If the nuisance abatement lien or special assessment is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, the city shall record a notice of satisfaction of lien in the county recorder’s office or provide the property owner with a notice of satisfaction so they may record the notice with the county recorder’s office. The notice shall include all of the information set forth in BMC 8.04.200(A) or 8.04.210(A). Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.230 Limitation on filing judicial action.
Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6, any action appealing the city’s final decision and order shall be commenced within 90 calendar days of the date the decision becomes final. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.240 Alternative means of enforcement.
A. Nothing in this chapter prevents the city council from authorizing the commencement of any other available civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state or federal law.

B. Any person violating or causing the violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided for in BMC 1.08.010 in addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, in the code, or under applicable law.

C. The citing officer is authorized and directed to issue criminal citations to persons maintaining or permitting the maintenance of nuisance as declared in this chapter or in any other ordinance adopted by the city council.

D. It is a misdemeanor to refuse to sign a citation prepared by a citing officer for the city that acknowledges receipt of a copy and includes a promise to appear at a hearing authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.250 Treble damages.
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that determines an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Government Code Section 38773.7. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

8.04.260 No duty on city to enforce.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a duty on the city to enforce the prohibitions in this chapter against any or all properties which may violate this chapter. This chapter may be enforced, in the city’s prosecutorial discretion, only as resources permit. (Ord. 18-17 § 2).

Chapter 8.06
NEIGHBORHOOD NUISANCE CODE
Sections:

8.06.010  Title.

8.06.020  Findings.

8.06.030  Purpose.

8.06.040  Application.

8.06.050  Responsibility for proper property management.

8.06.060  Authority.

8.06.070  Penalty for violations – Enforcement.

8.06.080  Generally.

8.06.090  Citation and order – Issued.

8.06.100  Citation and order content – Service – Fee.

8.06.110  Chief of police’s review – Notice of administrative penalty.

8.06.120  Right to a hearing.

8.06.130  Requests for hearing.

8.06.140  Hearing notice.

8.06.150  Hearings – Generally.

8.06.160  Record of oral evidence at hearing.

8.06.170  Continuances.

8.06.180  Oaths.

8.06.190  Evidence rules.

8.06.200  Rights of parties.

8.06.210  Official notice.

8.06.220  Inspection of premises.

8.06.230  Decision of the hearing officer.

8.06.240  Enforcement of hearing officer orders.

8.06.250  Procedures for collection of administrative penalty.

8.06.260  Use of fees and penalties.

8.06.010 Title.
Chapter 8.06 BMC is hereby added to this title, to read as follows: "Chapter 8.06 Neighborhood Nuisance Code." (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.020 Findings.
The city council finds as follows:

A. Just as the physical conditions of properties within the city of Benicia can constitute public and private nuisances, so too the behavior of persons on properties within the city can constitute public and private nuisances. Examples of behavior which can constitute nuisances include large and noisy gatherings, noisy activities during late-night hours, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises, and the coming and going of persons with the intent to purchase controlled substances.

B. It is as important for the public health, safety and welfare for interested residents or the city to be able to abate nuisance-creating behaviors as it is to abate nuisance-creating physical conditions.

C. The owners of properties within the city are responsible to monitor their properties and to take appropriate action if a nuisance exists thereon, whether the nuisance be created by existing physical conditions or by nuisance-creating behaviors. Such nuisances can be avoided with adequate property management. If a property owner does not fulfill his or her responsibilities, it is necessary for the safety, health and welfare of neighborhoods and the city as a whole that interested persons or the city be able to undertake abatement action. Nuisance-creating physical conditions can be abated pursuant to this title. A comparable abatement remedy for nuisance-creating behaviors is needed.

D. Neighborhood health and safety must be protected in a way which does not promote housing discrimination or promote evictions based on prejudice, unfounded fears, or personal animosities.

E. Nothing in this chapter exempts property owners from strict compliance with state housing law on evictions, retaliatory or discriminatory conduct, or privacy. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.030 Purpose.
A. The purpose of this chapter is:

1. To set forth and enforce minimum standards relating to the management of all real properties to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; and

2. To put in place a remedy which will permit aggrieved persons or the city to take effective, efficient judicial or administrative action against property owners who permit nuisance-creating behaviors to occur on their properties on a continuing basis, in order to compel such owners to abate the nuisance-creating behaviors.

B. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be supplementary and complementary to all of the other provisions of the municipal code and state law and all remedies set forth herein shall be cumulative to other remedies which may be available under the municipal code or state law. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.040 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply generally to all property throughout the city of Benicia wherein any of the nuisances hereinafter specified are found to exist; provided however, that any condition which would constitute a violation of this chapter, but which is duly authorized under any city, state or federal law, shall not be deemed to violate this chapter.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to activities which constitute a bona fide exercise of constitutional rights. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.050 Responsibility for proper property management.
A. Every owner of real property within the city is required to manage the property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter and the owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding the property.

B. Every occupant, lessee or holder of any possessory interest in real property is required to behave on the property, and supervise any guests on the property, in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.060 Authority.
The chief of police, or designee, shall administer the provisions of this chapter.

Hearings or appeals of the police chief’s orders shall be heard by a hearing officer appointed by the city council. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.070 Penalty for violations – Enforcement.
A. The administrative enforcement described in BMC 8.06.090 et seq. notwithstanding, the city attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties in an amount not to exceed $20,000 against any owner who violates this chapter.

B. Any person affected by a public nuisance described in this chapter may bring a civil action for injunctive relief and damages against any owner who violates this chapter.

C. In any civil action brought pursuant to this chapter, the court may award reasonable attorney’s fees and costs to the prevailing party. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.080 Generally.
It is hereby declared a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation, whether owner, lessee, sublessor, sublessee or occupant of any premises, in this city to permit those premises to be used in such a manner that any one or more of the activities described in the following subsections are found to occur repeatedly thereon:

A. The illegal sale of controlled substances and other illegal drugs and substances which creates a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Sections 3479 and 3480.

B. The illegal use of controlled substances and other illegal drugs and substances which creates a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Sections 3479 and 3480.

C. The frequent gathering, or coming and going, of people who have an intent to purchase or use controlled substances on the premises.

D. The occurrence of prostitution or unlawful activities of a criminal street gang as defined in California Penal Code Section 186.22.

E. The making or continuing, or causing to be made and continued, of any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. The standards set forth in BMC 8.20.200 shall be used in determining whether a violation of this subsection exists.

F. The firing of gunshots or brandishing of weapons as defined by California Penal Code Section 12020.

G. The occurrence of criminal activity which threatens the life, health, safety or welfare of the residents, neighbors or the public. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.090 Citation and order – Issued.
A. Whenever the chief of police has inspected or caused to be inspected any premises and has found and determined that the premises are in violation of this chapter, the chief of police may issue a citation and order to abate the nuisance as provided herein. Before a citation and order is issued, the chief of police shall write to the owner to request that the owner voluntarily cooperate with the city to abate the nuisance and encourage the owner to participate in a mediation program designed to foster cooperation between property owners, interested persons, and the city.

B. No citation and order shall be issued hereunder if the owner is making good faith efforts to abate the nuisance. Indicia of good faith may include prompt responses to city communications and requests, active professional property management, and taking steps to repair physical conditions which contribute to the nuisance.

C. 1. Whenever the chief of police notifies an owner or manager of rental residential property orally or in writing of a nuisance alleged to be caused by a specific tenant or the tenants of a specific unit, the chief of police shall concurrently give written notice thereof to the specific tenant(s) or unit. Notice to the tenant(s) or unit need not be given when the chief of police determines that doing so would endanger persons or compromise an ongoing police investigation.

2. Whenever the chief of police notices an owner or manager of rental residential property orally or in writing that a nuisance exists at their property, the chief of police shall issue a written notice to the tenant(s) of the property. The notice shall generally describe the nuisance and the city’s remedies under this code. The notice shall also state that tenants may contact the chief of police to provide or receive information about their building.

3. Whenever the chief of police issues a citation and order to abate a nuisance at a rental residential property, the chief of police shall issue a written notice to the tenants of the cited property.

4. The chief of police shall establish procedures for providing all tenants with notice of subsequent proceedings and actions pursuant to this chapter.

D. The city attorney shall review and approve each citation and order before it is issued. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.100 Citation and order content – Service – Fee.
A. The citation and order shall contain:

1. The street address and such other description as is required to identify the premises.

2. A statement specifying with particularity the behaviors which constitute the nuisance, including, when applicable, addresses and unit numbers of the person or persons allegedly causing the nuisance, and reasonable actions which the chief of police orders the record owner to take to abate the nuisance.

3. A statement advising the owner to abate the nuisance within 30 calendar days of mailing of the citation and order, or such longer time as the chief of police may order. An extension of time to abate the nuisance shall be granted if the owner is making good faith efforts to abate the nuisance and those efforts are delayed due to judicial proceedings relating to the property.

4. A statement advising the owner that he or she has the right to request a hearing to contest the citation and order.

5. A statement advising the owner that an administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed $5,000 shall be imposed upon the owner and made a lien on the property involved if the nuisance is not abated, as required by the citation and order, and no written request for hearing is filed within 30 days of receipt of the citation notice.

6. A statement advising the owner that an owner may not retaliate against any tenant because the city has instituted proceedings under this chapter.

7. A statement that in responding to the citation and order, the owner should comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations relating to evictions and prohibitions against discrimination.

8. A statement that the owner may participate in a mediation program designed to foster cooperation between property owners, and other interested persons, including the city, if the chief of police determines that mediation might facilitate abatement of the nuisance.

B. The citation and order shall be served in the manner prescribed by BMC 8.06.140(B) and (C).

C. A fee shall be imposed on the owner of any property for which a citation and order is issued pursuant to this section. The fee shall be calculated to recover the total city cost of inspections and enforcement and shall be set by resolution of the city council. An additional fee, which shall be set by resolution of the city council, shall be imposed on the owner of the property at the conclusion of any matter in which a citation and order has been issued. This termination fee shall be calculated to recover the cost of closing the file, redoing, or placing liens, and other associated administrative costs. The fees shall be due and owing regardless of whether the public nuisance is eliminated in response to the citation and order. No fees shall be due and owing if an appeal is filed and the appeal is sustained. All fees shall be a personal obligation of the owner and a lien upon the property and are due and payable within 30 days of citation issuance and order of closing of the file, respectively; provided, that if an appeal is filed, the fees shall be due and payable upon a final decision on the appeal. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.110 Chief of police’s review – Notice of administrative penalty.
A. After the time for abatement set forth in the citation and order has expired, the chief of police shall determine whether the owner has taken the action ordered by the chief of police and whether the nuisance has been abated. If the chief of police determines that the owner has complied with the order and that the nuisance has been abated, the owner and any occupants other than the owner shall be notified in writing of such determination and the administrative action shall be suspended. If the chief of police suspends the administrative action, he/she may continue to monitor the property and activity associated with it. If the chief of police determines that the nuisance activity reoccurs and/or the owner has failed to comply with the previously issued citation and order within 18 months of suspension of the case, the chief of police may impose an administrative penalty as provided in this section.

B. If the chief of police determines that the nuisance has not been abated or that the owner has failed to comply with the chief of police’s order, or that the nuisance actually has reoccurred, the chief of police may impose an administrative penalty of not more than $5,000 upon the owner. In addition, the chief of police may issue another citation and order to the owner pursuant to BMC 8.06.090 for the existence of any nuisance which has not been abated, or which has reoccurred.

C. If the chief of police imposes an administrative penalty upon the owner, the chief of police shall issue a notice of such penalty to the record owner of the premises, and to any occupants of the premises who are not the owner. The notice shall specify the amount of the administrative penalty, advise the owner of his or her right to request a hearing to contest the administrative penalty, and state that if no hearing request is received within 30 calendar days, the administrative penalty will become final and be made a lien upon the property involved.

D. The notice of administrative penalty shall be served in the manner prescribed by BMC 8.06.140(B) and (C). (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.120 Right to a hearing.
The property owner has the right to request a hearing to contest any citation and order issued or any administrative penalty imposed by the chief of police. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.130 Requests for hearing.
A. All requests for hearing shall be made to the chief of police.

B. A request for hearing to contest a citation and order or an administrative penalty shall be made in writing within 30 calendar days after mailing of the citation and order or notice of administrative penalty.

C. If a request for hearing is not filed within the time period set forth in subsection (B) of this section, the citation or administrative penalty shall be deemed a final order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.140 Hearing notice.
A. Upon the owner’s request for a hearing, the chief of police shall issue a hearing notice. The notice shall contain:

1. A copy of the citation and order;

2. A copy of the notice of administrative penalty, where applicable;

3. An order to the owner to appear before a hearing officer at a stated time, but in no event less than 20 calendar days after mailing of the hearing notice;

4. A list of the actions which the chief of police intends to ask the hearing officer to order the owner to take if the matter is not resolved before hearing. Nothing shall prevent the hearing officer from ordering other actions not listed in the hearing notice, but the owner shall have the right to ask for a supplemental hearing on such other actions as set forth in BMC 8.06.230;

5. A statement that all interested persons may attend and testify at the hearing.

B. The hearing notice, and any amended or supplemental notice, shall be served either by personal delivery or by mailing a copy by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, upon the record owner at the owner’s address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of Solano County, or as known to the chief of police. At the discretion of the chief of police, copies of the notice may also be mailed to the owner by first class mail or mailed to any holder of an interest in the property or a mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien or encumbrance of record.

In lieu of personally serving the owner or service by certified mail, service of the notice and any amended or supplemental notice may be made as follows:

1. In the event that the owner refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. In lieu of personal delivery of a copy of the notice, a notice or any amended or supplemental notice may be served by leaving a copy during usual office hours in his/her office with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy of the notice to the owner at the address where the copy of the notice was left. Or, a notice or any amended or supplemental notice may be served by leaving a copy at the owner’s dwelling, usual place of abode, or usual place of business in the presence of a competent member of the household or a person apparently in charge of his/her office or place of business, at least 18 years of age, and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy of the notice to the owner at the address where the copy was left.

2. In the event the owner refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager, or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set forth in subsection (B)(1) of this section upon the property manager or rental agency.

3. If the owner lives out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail.

4. If the owner of the property cannot be located after a diligent search, service may be made by publication in a Benicia newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to the owner.

C. Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be certified by written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made.

D. Failure to effect service on any person specified herein shall not invalidate proceedings against any person who is properly served. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.150 Hearings – Generally.
At the time set for hearing the hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of city staff, the owner, any tenants, and other persons respecting the nuisance-creating behaviors on the premises and the steps necessary to abate the nuisance, or the imposition of an administrative penalty. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.160 Record of oral evidence at hearing.
A. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded by a tape recorder. Either party may provide a certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings at the party’s own expense.

B. Preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as presently written or hereinafter amended. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.170 Continuances.
The hearing officer may grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.180 Oaths.
The hearing officer shall administer the oath or affirmation to all persons giving testimony. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.190 Evidence rules.
Government Code of the State of California, Section 11513, subsections (a), (b) and (c), as presently written or hereinafter amended, shall apply to hearings under this chapter. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.200 Rights of parties.
A. The parties and anyone who participates in a hearing under this chapter may be represented by an attorney or other person of the party’s choice at their own expense.

B. If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, the party may provide an interpreter, at the party’s own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.210 Official notice.
In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which may appear in any of the official records of the city or any of its departments. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.220 Inspection of premises.
The hearing officer may inspect the exterior of the premises involved in the hearing prior to, during or after the hearing, provided that:

A. Consent is granted by a person with the lawful right to grant consent or an inspection warrant is obtained;

B. Reasonable notice of such inspection shall be given to the owner before the inspection is made;

C. The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection;

D. The hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn thereafter; and

E. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the record. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.230 Decision of the hearing officer.
If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that behaviors occurring on the premises constitute a public nuisance and that the owner of the premises has not taken adequate steps to abate the nuisance as prescribed by the chief of police, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision declaring the premises a public nuisance. The hearing officer may affirm, reject or modify any administrative penalty imposed on the owner by the chief of police based upon the severity of the nuisance-creating behaviors on the premises and the owner’s efforts, or lack thereof, to remedy the problem. The administrative penalty may be adjusted if the hearing officer finds that imposition of the penalty would work a substantial undue economic hardship on the owner or tenants. The hearing officer may order the owner to take such action it deems appropriate to abate the nuisance. The actions ordered shall be reasonable and may include, but shall not be limited to:

A. Provision of additional exterior lighting;

B. The posting of security personnel on the premises;

C. Installation of appropriate fencing;

D. Posting of signs on the premises, and provisions in rental applications and agreements, which state that illegal use of controlled substances and other nuisance-creating behaviors on the premises shall be grounds for eviction;

E. Hiring of a competent property management firm to manage the property;

F. Hiring of a competent resident manager who has experience, education, and training in rental property management;

G. Posting a sign on the premises setting forth the name, address and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the owner or of a local property manager who is authorized to make decisions relating to management of the property;

H. Obtaining education and training in rental property management;

I. Such other reasonable actions as may be deemed appropriate by the hearing officer.

The hearing officer shall not have the authority to order that the owner evict a tenant or any other person from the premises.

If the hearing officer orders the owner to take specified actions to abate the nuisance, the chief of police shall review the owner’s compliance with the hearing officer’s order pursuant to BMC 8.06.110.

The decision shall inform the owner that if the nuisance is not abated within the time specified and the owner has not complied with all orders of the hearing officer, an administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed $5,000 may be imposed upon the owner and made a lien on the property involved.

If the decision orders the owner to take any actions which were not listed in the hearing notice, the decision shall specifically designate those actions, and if the owner objects to those actions as unnecessary or infeasible, the owner may request a supplemental hearing before the hearing officer on the subject of the appropriateness of those actions only, by filing a written request with the chief of police within 15 calendar days after the decision is mailed to the owner. A request for supplemental hearing shall not stay the hearing officer’s order to take actions which were listed in the hearing notice.

The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. The decision shall inform the owner that the time for judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

The decision shall be posted on the premises and served upon the owner by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall be sent by first class mail to any occupants other than the owner, any holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record, the owner or holder of any lease of record, and the holder of any other state or legal interest of record in the premises. Failure to serve the decision on any person specified herein shall not invalidate proceedings against any person who is properly served. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.240 Enforcement of hearing officer orders.
After any order of the hearing officer made pursuant to this chapter shall have become final, no owner to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. The city attorney may commence appropriate judicial action against any owner who fails to abate a nuisance pursuant to the order of the hearing officer. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.250 Procedures for collection of administrative penalty.
The administrative penalty shall be due and payable within 30 days after the decision of the chief of police becomes final or within 30 days after the hearing officer’s decision is issued. If the penalty is not timely paid, the city council may thereupon order that the penalty be specially assessed against the property involved. If the city council orders that the penalty be specially assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment and thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment.

The city council may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, the date on which the penalty was imposed by the hearing officer, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of the penalty.

No owner shall pass on to tenants penalties incurred pursuant to this chapter. Costs of capital improvements and security and safety enhancements may be passed on. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

8.06.260 Use of fees and penalties.
All fees and penalties received by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be used exclusively for administration and enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 98-5 N.S.).

Chapter 8.08
WEEDS AND RUBBISH1
Sections:

8.08.010    Nuisance declared – Abatement.

8.08.020    Date for removal.

8.08.030    Notice – Required.

8.08.040    Notice – Contents.

8.08.050    Appeal from notice.

8.08.060    Removal by city required.

8.08.070    Cost of removal by city.

8.08.080    Record of work performed by city.

8.08.090    Appeal from determination of cost.

8.08.100    Lien for costs.

8.08.110    Collection of city costs.

8.08.120    Remedies cumulative.

8.08.010 Nuisance declared – Abatement.
All weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street or alley within the city and bearing seeds of wingy or downy nature for which, because of having attained such a large growth and being dry, shall have become a fire menace, or which are or are likely to become a fire menace or are otherwise noxious or dangerous, shall constitute a public nuisance, which nuisance shall be abated as provided in this chapter. Every property owner shall remove or destroy such weeds and/or debris on his/her property, on all sides of his/her property, including those sides next to, adjoining, or having commonality with public property, and on the abutting half of the street in front of, and alleys behind, if any, such property. (Ord. 18-13 § 1; Ord. 93-9 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.020 Date for removal.
This council by resolution shall establish how removal must be accomplished and the methods and materials to be used. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.030 Notice – Required.
It is declared to be the duty of the fire marshal to notify any person failing to comply with the provisions of BMC 8.08.010 by written notice served in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.040 Notice – Contents.
Notice required by this chapter shall be given by posting or certified mailing of a notice in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that Benicia Municipal Code Sections require you as the owner(s) of the real property identified as parcel # ________________ to remove the seasonal and recurrent brush, grass, berry vines, trash, weeds, dead or dying trees, and other accumulations that hinder cleaning of properties or interfere with fire fighting operations, which are considered a public nuisance, and which are existing on your property; on all sides of your property, including those sides next to, adjoining, or having commonality with public property; or, the abutting half of the street in front of and alleys, if any, behind such property.

Specifically, the following work must be completed by ______________ or the Fire Marshal will perform the work and charge the cost (plus an administrative fee) to you as a property owner. The total charge is estimated to be $________________. On or about August ________, the Fire Marshal will have in his/her office, available for public review, a report and assessment on abatement of weeds for your property. If the bill is not paid, the charge will become a lien against the property and collected at the same time and manner that other property taxes are collected.

You may appeal this order to the Fire Chief by filing a written statement of appeal with the City Clerk of the City of Benicia within ten (10) days after this notice is posted on your property or from the date you receive the mailed notice, whichever is later.

POSTED ON: _______________ (DATE)

NO. _____________    _____________

Fire Marshal

(Ord. 18-13 § 2; Ord. 93-9 N.S. § 2, 1993; Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.050 Appeal from notice.
Within 10 business days from the time of posting of the notice required pursuant to BMC 8.08.040, or within 10 business days from the date of the service of certified mail, whichever is later, the owner of, or any person interested in, the property, land, or lot affected by such notice may appeal to the fire chief, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC, from the requirements thereof. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. The fire chief shall hold a meeting with the person appealing and the fire chief shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. The decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 07-36 § 1; Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.060 Removal by city required.
Unless within the time specified in the notice provided for in BMC 8.08.040, or in case of appeal to the fire chief, within 10 days from the date of the determination thereof (unless the appeal is sustained), the weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or trash, as the case may be, are removed from said property, land or lot, as directed by said notice, or by the fire chief on appeal, the fire chief shall thereupon remove or cause the same to be removed. If upon appeal the requirements of the original notice are modified, the fire chief in removing or causing to be removed such weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or trash shall be governed by the determination of the fire chief so made. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.070 Cost of removal by city.
Any expense which the city incurs as a result of having weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or trash, as the case may be, removed, shall be charged to the property owner, and in addition to the actual expense incurred there shall be charged to said owner an overhead charge of 10 percent of the removal costs with a minimum charge of $40.00, each occurrence, per parcel, to defray the costs of inspection and mailing of notices. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.080 Record of work performed by city.
A. The fire marshal shall keep, or cause to be kept, in his/her office a permanent record book showing the description of each piece of property or lot from which weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or trash are removed under the provisions of this chapter; the name of the owner thereof, if known; the date of posting of notice herein provided for, the date of certified mail service, and in case of appeal, the date of the determination of the fire chief; the expenses incurred in the removal of such weeds, grass, brush, rubbish or trash; and overhead charge of 10 percent of the removal fee with a minimum of $40.00, each occurrence, per parcel.

B. On or about August 1st of each year, the city clerk shall post on the bulletin board near the entrance door to City Hall and publish in a newspaper of general circulation two times (once each week in consecutive weeks), a notice in substantially the following form:

NOTICE OF HEARING ON APPEAL OF ASSESSMENTS

NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ___________________, 20____, the Fire Marshal of the City of Benicia has filed in his office a report and assessment on abatement of weeds and/or debris within said City. The list of properties is set out below or attached hereto.

NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ________________, 20_____, at the hour of ____ o’clock p.m., in the Council Chambers of said City Hall, the City Council of said City will consider the appeal filed by any persons having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained therein. Any appeal must be filed with the City Clerk by August 10 in order to be considered by the Council. Said appeal must be in writing and state the reasons for the appeal.

DATED:     _______________, 20____

    City Clerk of the City of Benicia

(Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.090 Appeal from determination of cost.
A. At any time prior to the tenth day of August next occurring, any person affected or aggrieved by any action or determination of the fire chief concerning costs incurred under this chapter may appeal said action by filing notice thereof in writing to the city clerk.

B. At the next regular meeting of the council after the tenth day of August, it shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal on the matter of costs and its determination thereupon shall be final and conclusive and the fire chief shall carry out any directions of the council made upon appeal and shall cause appropriate directions and entries to be made in his/her record book to conform therewith. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.100 Lien for costs.
At the expiration of the time for appeal provided for in BMC 8.08.080 or upon the determination of the council upon appeal and on compliance with the requirements of any determination so made, such amounts so expended and charges therewith shall become a lien against the respective property and the fire chief shall deliver to the finance director an abstract of the entries in the record books herein provided to be kept by him/her for said costs, showing the property affected and the amount charged against the same. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.110 Collection of city costs.
The city finance director shall thereupon note the amounts of each such charge on the assessment books of the city after the amount of taxes assessed against the respective lots to the county auditor. Thereafter the amount of each such charge shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as city taxes, and if not so paid, the same penalties shall be added as are now or may hereafter be added to delinquent taxes, and thereafter the property upon which it is a lien shall be sold and be subject to redemption in the same manner as property, land or lot, the charge against which has been paid prior to the delivery to the city finance director of said abstract, but in such case an appropriate entry shall be made in said record book by said fire marshal showing that such charge has been paid. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

8.08.120 Remedies cumulative.
The remedies provided herein are cumulative to all other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 88-5 N.S. § 1, 1988).

1
    For statutory provisions on abatement of hazardous weeds generally, see Health and Safety Code § 14875 et seq.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 208-C M.C. and 87-19 N.S.


Chapter 8.16
HOUSEBOATS
Sections:

8.16.010  Moving into city – Prohibited.

8.16.020  Declaration of danger.

8.16.030  Repealed.

8.16.010 Moving into city – Prohibited.
It is unlawful for a person owning, possessing, or having under its control a houseboat, barge, ark, scow, or other floating structure designed, constructed, or used for human occupation which floats over or attaches to any submerged or partially submerged lands, to move any such structure or cause it to be moved into the city. (Prior code § 7-401).

8.16.020 Declaration of danger.
The city council finds that all such structures are a detriment and threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Prior code § 7-402).

8.16.030 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Prior code § 7-403).

Chapter 8.20
NOISE REGULATIONS1
Sections:

8.20.010    Declaration of policy.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Sound-amplifying equipment – Purpose of provisions.

8.20.040    Repealed.

8.20.050    Repealed.

8.20.060    Repealed.

8.20.070    Repealed.

8.20.080    Sound-amplifying equipment – Use regulations.

8.20.090    Radios, television sets and similar devices.

8.20.100    Hawkers and peddlers.

8.20.110    Repealed.

8.20.120    Noise sensitive land uses.

8.20.130    Repealed.

8.20.140    Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning.

8.20.150    Construction of buildings and projects.

8.20.160    Vehicle repairs.

8.20.170    Motor-driven vehicles.

8.20.180    Sound level measurement criteria.

8.20.190    Maximum allowable sound level.

8.20.200    Excessive noise prohibited.

8.20.210    Petition for temporary relief from regulations.

8.20.220    Repealed.

8.20.230    Violations.

8.20.010 Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. At certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and in the public interests shall be systematically proscribed. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-101).

8.20.020 Definitions.
“A-weighted” or “A-weighting” means the sound pressure level in decibels that reflects the response of the human ear by reducing the values of sound at low and high frequencies generally not perceived by human hearing.

“Ambient noise” means the existing background noise level characteristic of an environment. For the purpose of this chapter, ambient noise level is the level obtained when the A-weighted sound level is averaged over a period of 15 minutes without inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the location and time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made.

“Commercial purpose” means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment.

“Decibel” means a unit of measurement that indicates the relative amplitude of a sound. The zero on the decibel scale is based on the lowest sound level that the healthy, unimpaired human ear can detect. Sound levels in decibels are calculated on a logarithmic basis. An increase of 10 decibels represents a tenfold increase in acoustic energy, while 20 decibels is 100 times more intense, 30 decibels is 1,000 times more intense, etc.

“Designated enforcement officer” means a city official empowered by the city manager to enforce the municipal code, including provisions of this chapter.

“Emergency work” means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

“Frequency” of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the hertz and shall be specified.

“Hertz” means the complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period.

“Leq” means the equivalent energy noise level, which is the average acoustic energy content of noise for a stated period of time; thus, the Leq of a time-varying noise and that of a steady noise are the same if they deliver the same acoustic energy to the ear during exposure. For evaluating community impacts, this rating scale does not vary regardless of whether the noise occurs during the day or the night.

“Motor vehicles” includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, mini-bikes, and go-carts.

“Noise” means sound judged to be unpleasant, loud or disruptive to hearing, as confirmed by a designated enforcement officer. From a physics standpoint, noise is indistinguishable from sound, as both are vibrations through a medium, such as air or water. For the purposes of this chapter, noise levels will be described in decibels.

Noise Level. See “Sound level.”

“Noise sensitive land uses” includes residences, transient lodging, hospitals, nursing homes, theaters, auditoriums, churches, schools, and libraries.

“Noncommercial purpose” means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. “Noncommercial purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes.

“Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity public or private in nature.

“Residential” means property within a residential zone district.

“Sound-amplifying equipment” means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. “Sound-amplifying equipment” shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. “Sound-amplifying equipment,” as used in this chapter, shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.

“Sound level” or “noise level,” in decibels (dB), is the sound measured with the “A” weighting and slow response as measured by a sound level meter.

“Sound level meter” means an instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels that satisfies the pertinent requirements in American Standard Specifications for sound level meters S1.4-1971 or the most recent revision thereof. (Ord. 18-15 § 1).

8.20.030 Sound-amplifying equipment – Purpose of provisions.
The council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that the use of sound-amplifying equipment is protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to reasonably regulate corrective constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-501).

8.20.040 Sound-amplifying equipment – Registration – Required.
Repealed by Ord. 18-15. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-502).

8.20.050 Sound-amplifying equipment – Registration – Statement filing and approval.
Repealed by Ord. 18-15. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-503).

8.20.060 Sound-amplifying equipment – Registration – Fee.
Repealed by Ord. 18-15. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-505).

8.20.070 Sound-amplifying equipment – Appeal from disapproval.
Repealed by Ord. 18-15. (Ord. 07-37 § 1; Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-504).

8.20.080 Sound-amplifying equipment – Use regulations.
The use of sound-amplifying equipment for commercial purposes and noncommercial purposes shall be subject to the following regulations:

A. The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both.

B. The operation of sound-amplifying equipment shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday unless otherwise authorized by a use permit, and 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.

C. Sound levels emanating from sound-amplifying equipment shall not exceed the following maximum allowable sound levels:

Maximum Amplified Sound Levels (dB)
Requires Temporary Use Permit or Use Permit

Noise Zone

9 a.m. – 8 p.m.2

8 p.m. – 9:30 p.m.1,2

Residential Neighborhoods

75

70

Area Within One Block of First Street

75

70

Commercial (all) and First Street

80

75 Mon – Thurs

80 Fri – Sat

Industrial

N/A

N/A

1    Temporary use permit or use permit required.

2    No amplified sound after 6:00 p.m. Sundays.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated within 200 feet of churches, schools, hospitals, or city or county buildings unless specifically authorized by the city manager or their designee or by permit issued pursuant to BMC Title 17 or the downtown mixed use master plan (DMUMP).

E. In any event, the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility. (Ord. 18-15 § 6; Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-506).

8.20.090 Radios, television sets and similar devices.
A. Use Restricted. It is unlawful for any person within any residential neighborhood of the city to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. (Ord. 18-15 § 7; Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-201).

8.20.100 Hawkers and peddlers.
It is unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public entertainment events. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-202).

8.20.110 Drums – Use restricted.
Repealed by Ord. 18-15. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-203).

8.20.120 Noise sensitive land uses.
A. New noise sources shall not encroach upon existing noise sensitive land uses. New development with new stationary noise sources shall be located, designed and constructed to meet the noise standards in the table below with regard to daily or weekly operating conditions.

B. New noise sensitive land uses, including outdoor living spaces, shall be located, designed and constructed to meet the noise standards in the following table.

C. City signals and warning devices are exempt from these standards.

Noise Level Performance Standards1 for Noise Sensitive Land Uses

 

Exterior (Leq dBA)2,3

Interior (Leq dBA)2,3

Land Use

7 a.m. – 10 p.m.

10 p.m. – 7 a.m.

7 a.m. – 10 p.m.

10 p.m. – 7 a.m.

Residential

55

50

40

35

Transient Lodging

55

50

40

35

Hospitals

-

-

40

35

Nursing Homes

55

50

40

35

Theaters, Auditoriums

-

-

35

35

Churches

55

50

40

40

Schools

55

50

45

45

Libraries

55

50

45

45

1    The noise level performance standards shall be applied to a typical hour of operation. When a peak hour of operation is expected to occur consistently during daily or weekly operations, the standards shall also be applied to those operations.

2    Noise levels shall be lowered by five dB for tonal noises (humming, high-pitched tones, speech, music, or recurring impulsive noises). This lowering of the standard does not apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial caretaker dwellings.

3    For noise sources that occur on an infrequent basis and are considered to be safety equipment (such as flaring or pressure relief valves), a maximum noise level of 75 dB is acceptable, as measured from the receiver’s property line.

(Ord. 18-15 § 9).

8.20.130 Animals and fowl.
Repealed by Ord. 07-72. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-205).

8.20.140 Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the maximum allowable noise level in BMC 8.20.190 by more than three decibels. (Ord. 18-15 § 10).

8.20.150 Construction of buildings and projects.
It is unlawful for any person within:

A. A residential zone;

B. A district within the downtown mixed use master plan; or

C. A radius of 500 feet from a residential zone or downtown mixed use district;

to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any heavy construction equipment (e.g., pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist) prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, or prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays, or anytime on Sundays, in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance unless beforehand a permit therefor has been duly obtained from the city manager or their designee. Grading permits issued pursuant to Chapter 15.28 BMC shall be subject to these provisions for work within 500 feet of a residential zone or downtown mixed use district. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work as defined in BMC 8.20.020. (Ord. 18-15 § 11).

8.20.160 Vehicle repairs.
It is unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-401).

8.20.170 Motor-driven vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven vehicle within the city in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance; provided, however, any such vehicle which is operated upon any public highway, street, or right-of-way shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-402).

8.20.180 Sound level measurement criteria.
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighting. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-103).

8.20.190 Maximum allowable sound level.
A. The maximum allowable noise levels by noise zone shall apply as follows, except as expressly permitted otherwise:

Maximum Allowed Sound Levels (dB)

By Time of Day and Geographic Area and Land Use

Noise Zone

7 a.m. – 8 p.m.

8 p.m. – 10 p.m.

10 p.m. – 7 a.m.

Residential Neighborhoods

60

55

50

Area Within One Block of First Street

60

55

55

Commercial (all) and First Street

65

60

60

Industrial

75

75

75

(Ord. 18-15 § 12).

8.20.200 Excessive noise prohibited.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

B. The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

1. The level of the noise;

2. The intensity of the noise;

3. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

4. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

5. The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

6. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

7. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

8. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

9. The time of day or night the noise occurs;

10. The duration of the noise;

11. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

12. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-601).

8.20.210 Petition for temporary relief from regulations.
A. Temporary relief from the noise regulations specified in this chapter may be granted through any of the procedures identified below. The noise regulations of this chapter shall not be exceeded until such time as the applicable permit of the city has been issued.

1. Approval of a special event permit in accordance with adopted city procedures.

2. Approval of a petition for temporary relief for any use or event that does not qualify for a special event permit or a use permit under BMC Title 17 or the downtown mixed use master plan. A petition for temporary relief may be requested of the city council. Any such request shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk, accompanied by a fee set by the city council. The city council shall hear such petition at the next available city council meeting after the filing of said request, allowing reasonable time to evaluate the request and prepare a staff report. Upon hearing all the evidence, the city council may grant temporary relief from the provisions of this chapter upon such terms and conditions as the council may see fit if the council finds that the temporary relief does not endanger the health, welfare or safety of the residents of the city. The duration of the relief will be established by the city council at the time of granting the petition for temporary relief; however, temporary relief shall not substitute for a land use permit granted under BMC Title 17 and shall not be approved for an ongoing use of unlimited or seasonal duration. The decision of the city council shall be final.

B. Relief shall not be granted for any of the procedural requirements as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 18-15 § 13).

8.20.220 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 77-2 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 12-105).

8.20.230 Violations.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the designated enforcement officer unless otherwise expressly provided herein.

B. Upon receipt of a complaint, the designated enforcement officer may investigate and assess whether the alleged noise levels exceed the noise standards set forth in this chapter.

1. The designated enforcement officer shall measure the noise level at the receiving use property line. The microphone shall be located four to five feet above the ground and 10 feet or more from the nearest reflective surface, where possible. However, in cases where another elevation is appropriate as determined by the designated enforcement officer, the latter may be utilized.

C. A violation may be determined in either of the following manners:

1. Prima Facie Violation. Any noise level exceeding the maximum allowable noise level for the noise zone of a receiving property at the property line of the receiving property, or of a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment, by more than three decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. If the noise measurement is to be taken at a shared property line between two different noise zones, the maximum allowable noise level standard for the lowest allowed noise level will apply.

2. Unreasonable Noise Level. A noise level deemed unreasonable by the designated enforcement officer.

D. If the designated enforcement officer has reason to believe that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the designated enforcement officer may cause written notice to be served upon the property owner and the alleged violator, if known. Such notice shall be issued in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.06 BMC (Neighborhood Nuisance Code).

E. Additional Remedy. As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 18-15 § 14).

1
    For statutory provisions on noise control, see Health and Safety Code § 46000 et seq.


Chapter 8.24
REFUSE MATTER DISPOSAL1
Sections:

8.24.010    Definitions.

8.24.020    Collection – Provision.

8.24.030    Collection – Contract – City to enter.

8.24.040    Collection – Contract – Exclusive.

8.24.050    Collection – Contract – Use of contractor’s services required.

8.24.060    Collection – Contract – Bonds and insurance.

8.24.070    Collection – Contract – Termination – Grounds.

8.24.080    Collection – Contract – Termination – Hearing.

8.24.090    Collection – Hauling requirements.

8.24.100    Collection – Frequency.

8.24.110    Property maintenance.

8.24.130    Container – Use required.

8.24.140    Container – Refuse.

8.24.150    Green waste – Bundles.

8.24.160    Container – Area to be kept clean.

8.24.170    Container – Location.

8.24.180    Container – Inspection.

8.24.190    Storage prohibited.

8.24.200    Removal of hazardous materials.

8.24.210    Rates and charges – Classification of services.

8.24.220    Rates and charges – Designated.

8.24.230    Basic commercial rate.

8.24.240    Hearing upon complaint of unreasonable charges.

8.24.250    Prohibited disposal methods.

8.24.260    Ownership of refuse, green waste, and recyclables.

8.24.010 Definitions.
A. In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1. “Contractor” means an agent or employee of the city, or a person with whom the city contracts to collect and dispose of refuse, recyclables, and/or green waste produced in the city.

2. “Department of public health” means the department of public health of the county.

3. “Green waste” means and includes organic material from trees, shrubs, grass and similar vegetation. Green waste may also be designated as recyclables by the city.

4. “Hazardous wastes” means that waste defined in Public Resources Code Section 40141.

5. “Person” means an individual, firm, association, public or private corporation, or public agency.

6. “Place” means public or private land, building, site, public or private drainage ditch, or public or private road in the city.

7. “Recyclables” means all items designated by the city to be collected within designated recycling collection containers during residential curbside recycling programs, including, but not limited to, glass, plastic, aluminum cans and newspapers; and all items designated by the city as commercial and industrial recyclables, including wood, sawdust, glass, cardboard, aluminum, plastic and paper. Appropriate hazardous waste collected during collection programs may also be recycled when appropriate.

8. “Refinery industrial waste” means combustible and noncombustible material resulting from the construction, modification and operation of a petroleum refinery which is rejected by the owner as useless or offensive and which would not normally be disposed of by a municipal garbage removal and disposal system. Examples of refinery industrial waste include oily silt and dirt in sour and brackish water, flocculent chemical sludges, activated sludge, oily flocculent chemical sludge, oil silt, very finely divided catalyst and coke plus chunks of coke, bottom settlements and water from storage tanks, tars, oils, gasoline additive residues, spent catalyst, impure byproducts, and debris from construction and demolition. Refinery industrial waste does not include garbage from food services and waste paper from office operations.

9. “Refuse” means all matter and materials rejected by owners or producers as offensive or useless which, by its presence or accumulation, may injuriously affect the health, comfort or safety of the community by increasing the probability of disease or hazard by fire. This includes solid waste as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40191. “Refuse” includes all kitchen and table food waste and animal or vegetative waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of foodstuffs. “Refuse” also includes nonputrescible combustible and noncombustible waste such as ashes, paper, cardboard, metal cans, wood, glass, cloth, crockery, plastics, rubber byproducts and green waste. “Refuse” does not include waste items defined as “recyclables.” Hazardous wastes are not acceptable for routine residential collection.

B. The city council may add or delete substances to be included or excluded from the definitions and contained in subsections (A)(3), (A)(7), (A)(8) and (A)(9) of this section. All additions or deletions are deemed included within the terms and conditions of any existing collection or disposal contract with the city without further action by the council. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.020 Collection – Provision.
The city may provide for the collection and disposal of refuse, recyclables, and/or green waste accumulated inside the city by granting to a qualified person the privilege of doing so. The privilege granted by the city may be either exclusive or nonexclusive, and may relate to all or a portion of the area within the city and may relate to all of such substances or to any one or more of said substances. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.030 Collection – Contract – City to enter.
The city council may, with or without having invited bids therefor, enter into a contract with any responsible person for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse accumulated within the city. The term of said contract, rates of collection and other provisions of said contract shall be as provided by this chapter and by resolution of the city council. Where such a contract has been entered into and has been satisfactorily performed by the contractor, the city council, without inviting bids or proposals therefor and without giving notice of its intention to do so, may, either prior to or after the expiration of such contract, extend or renew the same for such a period and on such terms and conditions as the city council shall provide by resolution. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.040 Collection – Contract – Exclusive.
The city council may enter into an exclusive contract, subject to the exceptions set forth in this chapter, with a person for the collection and removal of refuse, recyclables, and/or green waste from within the city. If an exclusive contract is entered into, it is unlawful for any person other than the authorized contractor designated by the city, or an agent or employee thereof, to collect or convey through the streets, alleys or other public thoroughfares of the city any refuse, recyclables, or green waste, or collect or dispose of the same except as provided in BMC 8.24.050, and except as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.050 Collection – Contract – Use of contractor’s services required.
A. If the city has an exclusive contract, it is mandatory for every person in the city to take the service provided by the contractor, except that any resident may dispose of refuse produced on his own premises only if he complies with the following:

1. He files an affidavit with the city manager setting forth an alternate means of disposal;

2. The department of public health approves the proposed method of disposal;

3. The city manager issues a permit authorizing the alternate method of disposal.

The city manager may impose any terms and conditions to the exercise of the privilege granted by the permit which are necessary to protect public health, prevent public and private nuisances, and prevent litter and to keep public and private property clean and sanitary.

B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a petroleum refinery may dispose of its own equipment or through special contract for disposal with a person other than the contractor. The exclusive contract which the city may have with the contractor does not apply to refinery industrial waste when the refinery elects to dispose of it through a special contract with another person.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the contractor shall not have the exclusive right to collect, haul, transport or dispose of the following types of solid waste or green waste:

1. Green waste when removed and transported by the gardening service performing the gardening;

2. Rubbish generated by construction and demolition which is accumulated as the result of new construction, structure demolition or modification, when:

a. The building or demolition/modification contractor owns and operates the hauling equipment necessary to remove and haul the demolished construction and modification rubbish generated; or

b. The construction and demolition rubbish generated is hauled by a vehicle or trailer commonly known as an “end dump,” which vehicle or trailer must have a nondetachable debris container with an open top and cannot be capable of loading itself and the drive remains with the vehicle while it is being loaded; provided further, that the equivalent services or equipment are not available from the contractor;

3. A building or demolition/modification contractor may not subcontract for construction and demolition rubbish hauling services except as is set forth in subsection (C)(2)(b) of this section; or

4. Solid waste or green waste which must be removed only as incidental to the infrequent clearing of a premises and when a vehicle or container of no greater than five cubic yards capacity is used to remove the solid waste or green waste. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.060 Collection – Contract – Bonds and insurance.
The contractor shall furnish a bond, in the amount determined by the city attorney, in favor of the city conditioned upon the faithful performance by him of the duties imposed by ordinance, contract and rules and regulations of the city. The contractor shall obtain and keep in force, for the period covered by the contract, insurance in the types and amounts determined by the city attorney. (Ord. 01-5, 2001).

8.24.070 Collection – Contract – Termination – Grounds.
The city may terminate a contract entered into under this chapter and revoke the privilege granted by it if the contractor violates the contract, this chapter or any rule or regulation of the city, or state or federal law. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.080 Collection – Contract – Termination – Hearing.
Before terminating a contract under BMC 8.24.070, the city council shall notify the contractor of the violation, default or breach, and give the contractor 10 days from the date of such notice to cure the same. If the contractor fails to cease the violation or if the contractor is guilty of the same or a similar violation within any calendar year, or fails to cure the default or breach after being so notified by the city, the city shall give the contractor at least 20 days’ notice of a hearing. The hearing conducted by the city council shall commence on the date stated in the notice and may be continued from day to day thereafter until completed and the city council shall hear any and all relevant evidence, and after the hearing has been completed, and the matter submitted, if the council finds that the contractor has violated (1) the contract, or (2) this chapter, or a rule or regulation of the city, or state or federal law applicable to the contractor, and has failed to cure the defect pursuant to the written notice previously served upon the contractor, the city council may terminate the contract. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.090 Collection – Hauling requirements.
Refuse conveyed on streets in the city shall be hauled in a watertight-bodied motor truck, and in a manner so that the contents do not sift through or fall upon the street and do not blow upon the street or adjacent property. The truck body shall be constructed of material of sufficient strength to withstand fire within, without endangering persons or property. The truck body in which refuse is regularly hauled shall be washed at least once each week. Each truck shall be equipped with a covering drawn over the load as completed to full depth. Refuse in the truck shall be completely covered between the point of collection and the point of disposal; that insofar as is practicable, these requirements shall apply to refuse conveyed on streets in the city. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.100 Collection – Frequency.
A. Refuse shall be collected at least once each week.

B. Hotels, restaurants and other institutions and business establishments may provide for more frequent collection by agreement with the contractor. Where necessary to protect the public health, the city manager may require that more frequent collection be made. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.110 Property maintenance.
Each property owner shall maintain his property free of refuse, excessive recyclables, and excessive green waste. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.130 Container – Use required.
Every person who has charge or control of a residential place where refuse accumulates shall use the containers provided by the contractor for refuse, recyclables, and/or green waste. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.140 Container – Refuse.
A. A person having control of a place where refuse accumulates shall place the refuse in a container which:

1. Is watertight and made out of galvanized metal or equivalent quality;

2. Is covered continuously except when being filled or emptied;

3. Is placed in a location accessible to the collector;

4. Is kept clean by the user.

B. Persons living in the same apartment house may use a single container in common. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.150 Green waste – Bundles.
A person having control of a place where green waste accumulates may place such green waste in bundles weighing not more than 60 pounds and not more than four feet in length. Such bundles shall be at all times located not more than 10 feet from the refuse container required under BMC 8.24.130. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.160 Container – Area to be kept clean.
Each person who has a refuse container shall keep the area where the refuse container(s) is/are located clean and free of refuse. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.170 Container – Location.
Refuse containers and bundles shall be placed for collection at ground level in the street or alley. Containers and bundles may be placed for collection at other than ground level and at a distance of more than 40 feet from the street or alley when approved by the contractor and an additional charge for the extra service is agreed upon by both parties. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.180 Container – Inspection.
The department of public health shall see that refuse containers are kept clean and sanitary and shall inspect the vehicles used in the collection and disposal of refuse and see that they are kept clean and sanitary. The department of public health is responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, all other health ordinances of the city and the health laws of the state. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.190 Storage prohibited.
No person may keep or dispose of refuse, recyclables, and/or yard waste in a manner or upon any place which affords food or harborage for rodents or insects, or which causes a public nuisance or public health hazard, or in a manner which violates this chapter. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.200 Removal of hazardous materials.
A. Hazardous materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of in a manner approved by state and federal authorities, at the expense of the person owning or possessing such material.

B. Removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from a place where highly infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall be under the direction of the department of public health. Such refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.210 Rates and charges – Classification of services.
A. For the purpose of rates, refuse collection service is classified as:

1. Single-family residential; and

2. Commercial.

B. “Single-family residential” means a single-family dwelling. “Commercial” means dwellings with two or more individual living units, business and commercial establishments and all other types of premises except single-family residential. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.220 Rates and charges – Designated.
A. A person from whom refuse is collected shall pay the monthly fees for refuse collection service to the contractor. Such fees shall be set by the contractor and approved by the resolution of the city council.

B. Multiple Dwellings, Businesses, Restaurants, and All Other Establishments. A flat monthly charge for the collection of refuse may be levied by the refuse collector based on the average monthly amount of refuse removed as per agreement between the contractor and the customer subject to review by the city council. (Ord. 01-5, 2001; Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.230 Basic commercial rate.
A. The basic commercial rate shall be established by the contractor for commercial establishments or premises, and the rate so established by the contractor shall be reasonable and uniform. Such rates shall be in line with rates charged for comparable service in similar cases in cities within the county and shall be subject to review by the city council.

B. A flat monthly charge for collection of refuse may be levied based on the average monthly amount of refuse removed, as agreed between the contractor and each owner of a building or establishment subject to commercial rates. An agreement setting a flat monthly charge is subject to review by the city council. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.240 Hearing upon complaint of unreasonable charges.
A person complaining that a charge for collection is unreasonable shall file a written complaint with the city manager setting forth the basis of the complaint and the factual grounds for the same. The city manager shall notify the contractor in writing of the complaint filed and furnish the contractor with a copy of the complaint, and if either party requests, the city manager may conduct a hearing to determine the reasonableness of a charge in the complaint. After the city manager has made a determination, either the contractor or the complainant or both may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council, and the city council may, with or without a hearing, make a finding and decision which shall be final as to both the contractor and the complainant. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.250 Prohibited disposal methods.
A. A person shall not throw or deposit refuse on any place.

B. A person shall not burn or bury refuse. (Ord. 89-16 N.S. § 1, 1989).

8.24.260 Ownership of refuse, green waste, and recyclables.
A. All refuse, green waste, recyclables, and any other material deposited into approved waste containers, including both residential and commercial containers, are the property of the contractor when containers are placed out for collection services. This does not apply to any hazardous waste or other wastes that are not permitted by federal, state, or local laws and regulations to be deposited in refuse collection containers.

B. Prior to being placed out for collection, all material in approved waste containers belongs to the property owner(s)/tenant(s) in all areas of the city. (Ord. 13-11 § 1).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to contract for the collection and disposal of refuse, see Public Resources Code §§  40059 and 49300.

    Prior legislation: prior code §§ 7-301, 7-311 – 7-320, 7-331 – 7-341, 7-351 – 7-355; Ords. 77-1 N.S., 81-7 N.S. and 86-1 N.S.


Chapter 8.28
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY CODE1
Sections:

8.28.010    Findings.

8.28.020    Adoption by reference.

8.28.030    Establishment and duties of the division of fire and life safety.

8.28.040    Definitions.

8.28.050    Establishment of limits within the city of Benicia where materials regulated by this code are prohibited or limited.

8.28.060    Amendments made in the California Fire Code.

8.28.070    Penalties.

8.28.010 Findings.
That portion of the California Fire Code that imposes substantially the same requirements as are contained in the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission with errata, together with those portions of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters 4, B, C, D, F, I and N, as modified and amended by this chapter, are adopted by this reference into this chapter, and are hereby collectively declared to be the fire code of the city of Benicia, in the state of California, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the fire chief are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in BMC 8.28.060.

This code adopts changes, modifications and requirements not mandated by the California Fire Code (CFC) and International Fire Code (IFC) because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions. The modifications are needed due to the following local conditions that exist in Benicia and on the following findings:

A. The city is geographically situated in an area subject to frequent periods of strong, gusty winds from the southwest and north. In addition, temperatures during the summer months range from 80 to 100-plus degrees. During this period, the relative humidity can fall below 20 percent. The city contains a significant amount of hilly, undeveloped acreage designated as permanent open space. This wildland/urban interface, in conjunction with the hot, dry and windy climatic conditions, creates a hazardous situation that has led to extensive grass and brush fires in recent years. With more development extending into and adjacent to the open space areas, heat- and wind-driven fires could lead to serious consequences.

B. The city is divided by several topographic features, including Interstates 680 and 780. As a result, the city is primarily divided into three parts. Traffic within and between the parts of the city is channeled onto several major thoroughfares that must cross freeways by way of underpasses and overpasses. In addition, it is bordered on two sides by the Carquinez Straits. Periodic heavy traffic congestion on the city’s major streets and interstates acts as a barrier to timely response for fire and emergency service vehicles. Because of traffic or accidents, there could be times that fire equipment could be sufficiently slowed to increase the risk of substantial structural damage. With the possibility of fire services unable to guarantee rapid response to various sections of the city during these times, it is necessary to mitigate this problem by requiring adequate access, road construction allowing apparatus approach, and other features to aid mitigation efforts.

C. The city is subject to ground tremors from seismic events on the San Andreas, Concord/Green Valley, Hayward, and/or other major active faults in the greater San Francisco Bay area. The Concord/Green Valley fault is immediately adjacent to the city to the north. Seismological evidence indicates the probability of an earthquake in the region capable of doing significant damage to buildings is high. A major seismic event would create a citywide demand on fire protection services, which would be beyond the response capability of the fire department. This problem can be lessened or mitigated by requiring initial fire control through the installation of automatic fire protection systems. (Ord. 16-11 § 1; Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.020 Adoption by reference.
A. International Fire Code Adopted. That portion of the California Building Standards Code that imposes substantially the same requirements as are contained in the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission with errata, together with those portions of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendix Chapters 4, B, C, D, F, I and N, as modified and amended by this chapter, are adopted by this reference into this chapter, and are hereby collectively declared to be the fire code of the city of Benicia for the purpose of regulating and governing the safeguarding of life, property and public welfare to a reasonable degree from the hazards of fire, hazardous materials release and explosion(s) arising from the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances and devices, and conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy and use of buildings and premises, the operation, installation and maintenance of adequate means of egress not provided for by the building code, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof.

B. The city of Benicia adopts the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code (2015 International Fire Code as amended by the state of California), regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city of Benicia; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and repealing Chapter 8.28 BMC and all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith. (Ord. 16-11 § 2; Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.030 Establishment and duties of the division of fire and life safety.
The California Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the fire and life safety division in the fire department of the city of Benicia which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief of the fire department. All members of the fire department may enforce the California Fire Code as adopted and amended herein. (Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.040 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein below:

Bureau. Whenever the words “bureau of fire prevention,” or “bureau,” are used, they shall be held to mean the fire and life safety division.

Fire Code Official. Whenever the words “fire code official” are used, they shall be held to mean fire chief or designee.

Jurisdiction. Whenever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the California Fire Code, it is the city of Benicia. (Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.050 Establishment of limits within the city of Benicia where materials regulated by this code are prohibited or limited.
A. Establishment of Limits in Which Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is to Be Restricted. The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of the California Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in all residentially zoned areas of the city, excluding public and public safety facilities.

B. Establishment of Limits in Which the Storage of Stationary Tanks of Flammable Cryogenic Fluids Is to Be Prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5504.3.1.1 of the California Fire Code in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited are hereby established as follows: Any area which is zoned for other than industrial use.

C. Establishment of Limits in Which Storage of Flammable or Combustible Liquids in Outside Aboveground Tanks; Bulk Plants or Terminals; and Bulk Transfer Operations Is to Be Prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6 of the California Fire Code in which storage of Class I and II liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows:

1. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids in excess of 2,000 gallons shall be limited to refineries or bulk storage plant locations.

2. Storage shall be limited to public, limited industrial (IL), general industrial (IG), and water-related industrial (IW) zoned districts or public safety facilities. (Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.060 Amendments made in the California Fire Code.
The California Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respects:

A. Section 101.1 – Title. Section 101.1 of Chapter 1 is amended to read as follows:

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Benicia, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

B. Section 103.2 is deleted in its entirety.

C. Section 104.3.2 – Fire Clearance. Section 104.3.2 of Chapter 1 is added to read:

104.3.2 Fire Clearance. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a business unless a fire clearance inspection has been made and such businesses are in compliance with all fire department requirements.

D. Section 104.10.1 – Assistance from Other Agencies. Section 104.10.1.1 of Chapter 1 is added to read:

104.10.1.1 Fire Prevention Bureau Personnel and Police. All sworn safety personnel assigned to the Fire and Life Safety Division, or such other full-time Fire Department officers or fire prevention personnel including the Community Preservation Officer(s), as may be authorized by the Chief, shall be peace officers as described in Section 830.37 of the California Penal Code and shall enforce the Penal Code, California Fire Code, and where necessary and appropriate, any sections of the Benicia Municipal Code, California Health and Safety Code, and any other county or state fire-related laws or codes not specifically covered in any part of this Code. These police powers include the issuance of misdemeanor citations (Notice to Appear), and as approved by the Chief, carrying and use of firearms.

When requested to do so by the Fire Chief, the Chief of Police is authorized to assign such available police officers as necessary to assist the Fire Department in enforcing the provisions of this Code.

E. Section 105.4.2.2 – Plan Review and Fees. Section 105.4.2.2 of Chapter 1 is added to read as follows:

1. Plan Review: The Fire Code Official may review all plans for the construction or remodeling of buildings for the purpose of ascertaining and requiring to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, or endanger life from fire or panic, or any violation of this Code, state laws and regulations, and any other local ordinances or requirements which the Fire Code Official may deem necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department may establish a schedule of fees, as approved by resolution of the City Council; to be charged and collected for plan checking and other required inspection services.

2. Inspection and permit Fees. The Fire Chief may establish a schedule of fees, as approved by the City Council, to be charged and collected for completing required inspection services and for the issuance of permits pursuant to Section 105.7 of this Code. Fire service fees may be charged to any person, firm, corporation or business that through negligence, violation of the law or as a result of carelessness is responsible for the cause of any fire department response to the scene of such an incident. A copy of fee schedules shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Fire Chief, and shall be available for public inspection.

E1. Section 105 is amended to add new subsections 50 and 51 as set forth below.

50. Oil Extraction Process. An operational permit is required for processes that uses a volatile solvent or Liquid Carbon Dioxide to extract oil from organic material.

51. Indoor Growing Operation. An operational permit is required for a commercial indoor growing operation.

Exception: Agricultural greenhouses in an agricultural zone.

F. Section 108.1, Board of appeals established, is amended to read as follows:

Appeals of orders, decisions, interpretation or determinations made by the Fire Code Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code shall be heard by of the City of Benicia Building Board of Appeals. The Fire Code Official shall serve as an ex officio member of the board when the board is hearing matters related to this code but shall have no vote on any matter before the board.The board shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a copy to the Fire Code Official.

G. Section 108.3, Qualifications, is amended to read as follows:

The qualifications for the Building Board of Appeals are defined in the BMC 2.96.020.

H. Section 109.4 – Violation Penalties. Section 109.4 of Chapter 1 is amended to read as follows:

109.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an Infraction or Misdemeanor as specified in the California Penal Code. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

I. Section 110.4.1 – Abatement of Hazards. Section 110.4.1 of Chapter 1 is added to read as follows:

110.4.1 Abatement of hazards. In situations where immediate abatement of a fire hazard or another potentially hazardous condition is required, the Fire Code Official shall have the authority to abate such hazard immediately. This may include, but is not limited to, confiscation of flammable liquids, fireworks, removing hazardous wiring and adapters, temporary closure of commercial occupancies, extinguishing unsafe or illegal fires and any other similar hazards, determining no smoking and ceasing operation of any type of apparatus that may be a danger to property or life. Costs of abatement may become a lien upon the property affected. Affected persons shall be notified of action taken as soon as possible.

J. Section 111.4 – Failure to Comply. Section 111.4 of Chapter 1 is amended to read as follows:

111.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than ($500.00) dollars or more than ($1,500.00) dollars.

K. Section 202 – General Definitions Fire Watch. Section 202 is amended by adding the following:

202 General Definitions Fire Watch. Qualified individual(s) shall mean an employee of an acceptable security guard/patrol service or employee approved by the fire code official.

L. Section 307.6 – Open Burning. Section 307.6 of Chapter 1 is added to read as follows:

1. 307.6 Open Burning. No person may ignite, permit or maintain an open fire within the city.

2. Open Outdoor Fires – Exceptions. The following are exceptions from the prohibitions in Section 307.6:

(a) Fire for cooking of food for human consumption, where such use is accomplished in an approved barbecue pit.

(b) Fire for recreational heating, where such use is accomplished in an approved fireplace.

(c) A fire set or permitted by a public fire official in the performance of official duties.

M. Section 502.1 of Chapter 5 is amended to add the following definition:

502.1 All Weather Driving Surface. A roadway designed to carry the imposed weight loads of fire apparatus complete with all underground utilities, curbs, gutters, and a minimum surface finish of one layer of asphalt or concrete or road pavers.

N. Section 503.1.2 – Additional Access. Section 503.1.2 is amended to add subsection 503.1.2.1 as follows:

503.1.2.1 Access to Open Spaces. When access to open land/space or fire trail systems maintained for public or private use is obstructed by vehicles of any kind, or other obstructions both within the access or the road or street access to the open space, the vehicle or obstruction may be removed and the cost of such removal will be assessed to the responsible party or vehicle owner.

O. Section 503.2.1 – Dimensions. Section 503.2.1 is amended to add subsection 503.2.1.1 as follows:

503.2.1.1 Parking of vehicles on fire apparatus access roads. For the parking of vehicles on a fire apparatus access road, roadway widths shall be increased to accommodate the parking of vehicles as follows:

1. Roadways 20 feet (6096 mm) in width, no parking permitted,

2. Roadways 28 feet (8534 mm) in width, parking permitted on one side only. Parking is permitted on the side of the street absent fire hydrants, and

3. Roadways 36 feet (10 973 mm) in width when parking is not restricted.

P. Section 503.2.7 – Grade. Section 503.2.7 is amended in its entirety and replaced as follows:

503.2.7 Grade. A fire department access road having a grade of between 12% and 15% shall be designed to have a finished surface of grooved concrete to hold a 74,000-pound traction load. Design for grooved concrete shall be 1/4 inch (6 mm) wide by 1/4 inch (6 mm) deep and 3/4 inch (19 mm) on center. Grades exceeding 15% are not permitted.

Exception: Other approved all weather surfaces may be used if the skid resistance is equivalent to or greater than grooved concrete as certified by a registered engineer and approved by the Fire Code Official.

Q. Section 503.2 – Specifications. Section 503.2 is further amended to add Section 503.2.9 as follows:

503.2.9 Roadway minimum design weight load capacity. A fire department access road shall be designed and maintained to support a minimum load of 74,000 pounds (HS-20-44 Cal-Trans Design Standard) and shall be provided with an all-weather driving surface as specified in this standard.

R. Section 503.3.1 – Access-Parking Prohibited. Section 503.3.1 is added to read:

503.3.1 Access-parking Prohibited. If, in the judgment of the Fire Code Official, it is necessary to prohibit vehicular parking along public or private driveways and other access ways devoted to public use in order to maintain clear and unobstructed access, the Fire Code Official may require the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of the premises to paint the curbs red, install signs, or give other appropriate notice that parking is prohibited. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any such owner, lessee, or other person in charge to fail to install and maintain in good condition the painted curbs, signs, or other appropriate notice so prescribed. When such areas are marked or signed as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a vehicle adjacent to any such curb marking or contrary to such sign(s).

It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or in any other way obstruct or block any “Fire Lane”, general access road to any building or complex, fire department connection, access roads or areas to any open space, no parking zones at fire stations or within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.

S. Section 505 – Premises Identification. Section 505.1 is added to read:

505.1 Address Identification. Any business or building that affords vehicular access to the rear through a driveway, alleyway, or parking lot, shall also display the building identification or address numbers on the rear of the building.

At the main entrance driveway to each newly constructed multiple dwelling complex, there shall be positioned an illuminated diagram (map) of the complex, which lists all individual addresses of each unit in the complex. The design and location of the map shall be approved by the Fire Chief.

T. Section 507.5.1 – Where Required. Section 507.5.1 of Chapter 5 is amended to read:

507.5.1 Where Required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the Fire Code Official.

Fire hydrants shall be placed as approved by the Fire Code Official within fifty (50’) feet of fire department connections on new construction.

U. Section 903.2 – Where Required. Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 is amended to read:

Section 903.2 Where Required. An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in each new building, with the City requiring a building permit according to the following criteria:

1. A Building occupied or used for any purpose including occupancy group A, B, F, H, I, L, M, R, S, U (as defined in the California Fire Code), where the fire flow requirements for the building are fifteen hundred gallons per minute or more based on Appendix B requirements.

2. A building more than two stories or thirty-five feet in height;

V. Section 5602 – Firework Findings. Section 5602 is added to Chapter 56 to read as follows:

1. 5602 Firework Findings. The City Council finds that the sale, use and/or discharge of fireworks in the City, whether classified as “dangerous fireworks” and/or “safe and sane fireworks” pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 et seq. will endanger life and property, and may encourage the use and/or discharge of fireworks in neighboring jurisdictions where their sale, use and/or discharge are prohibited.

2. 5602.1 Definitions. Any and all terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 et seq. and shall govern the construction of this article.

3. 5602.2 Applicability of State Law. This article does not supersede State law, but is intended to supplement the provisions of Division 11, Part 2, of the Health and Safety Code (Sections 12500 et seq.) and the administrative regulations adopted pursuant to law, and to prohibit and/or regulate by local authority, as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section 12541, the sale used and/or discharge of fireworks in the City.

4. 5602.3 Sale, Use, Possession and/or Discharge Prohibited. No person or organization shall sell, use, possess and/or discharge in the city any fireworks, including, but not limited to, dangerous fireworks and safe and sane fireworks, subject to the exceptions set forth in this article.

5. 5602.4 Seizure of Fireworks. The Fire Code Official is authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner any and all fireworks, including, but not limited to, dangerous fireworks and safe and sane fireworks, which are possessed in violation of Chapter 56. Confiscation by any law enforcement officer and/or fire department official is subject to the exceptions set forth in this chapter.

Exceptions. This article does not prohibit, and does not authorize confiscation of fireworks possessed for, the following:

a. A public display of fireworks, including, but not limited to, dangerous fireworks and safe and sane fireworks, in the city; provided, that the person or organization is properly licensed, strictly complies with all applicable provisions of this article, all regulations adopted by the Fire Code Official, all city resolutions and ordinances, all provisions of the Health and Safety Code, and receives authorization of the Fire Code Official for the public displays of fireworks.

b. Any special item containing pyrotechnic compositions which the State Fire Marshal, with the advice of the State Advisory Board, has investigated and determined to be limited to industrial, commercial, agricultural use, or religious ceremonies when authorized by a permit granted by the authority having jurisdiction and is classified as “exempt fireworks” in the Health and Safety Code.

c. The use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroads or transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination.

d. The sale, use or discharge of blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic or sports events, or military ceremonies or demonstrations.

6. 5602.5 Bond – Insurance. An applicant for a permit to make a public display of fireworks shall furnish proof of adequate compensation insurance for employees as required by State law. The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the Fire Code Official for payment of damages that may result to person(s) or property caused by the public display of fireworks or negligence on the part of the applicant or his agents or employees.

W. Section 1103.5 – Sprinkler Systems Where Required. Section 1103.5.3 is added to read as follows:

An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed and maintained in each new building and addition to an existing building and in the case of the major remodeling of an existing building, with the City requiring a building permit according to the following criteria:

1. A building occupied or used for any purpose including occupancy group A, B, F, H, I, L, M, R, S and U (as defined in the California Fire Code), Where the fire flow requirements for the building are fifteen hundred gallons per minute or more based on Appendix B requirements;

2. Each building existing on January 1, 2017 is exempt from this section until such time as:

a. Structural changes are made which increase the gross floor area by 40% or more (in such cases, the automatic sprinkler system shall protect the existing portions of the structure as well as the addition).

b. The building adds or changes occupancy classification as defined in the California Building Code.

X. Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings, is amended as follows:

Appendix B, Table B105.1(1) is amended to delete line one, two, and three, and to change minimum fire flow for 0-3,600 sf to 1,000 GPM for a 1-hour duration.

Appendix B, Table B105.2 is amended to delete line one and three, change minimum fire flow in line 2, column 2 from 25% to 50%.

Y. Appendix C, Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution, is adopted in its entirety except as amended below:

Section C102 is deleted in its entirety.

Section C103.1, Hydrant spacing, is amended to read:

The average spacing between fire hydrants shall not exceed 500 feet on center between hydrants in one and two family dwellings and 300 feet on center between hydrants in all other occupancies.

Tables C103.2 and C103.3 are deleted in their entirety.

Z. Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Access Roads, is adopted in its entirety except as amended below:

Section D103.1 is deleted in its entirety.

Section D103.2 is deleted in its entirety.

Section D103.2.1 is added to read:

D103.2.1 Angles of approach and departure. The angles of approach and departure for any means of access shall not exceed 10 percent at 10 feet of the grade break.

Section D103.3 is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following to read:

D103.3 Turning radius. Based on a minimal unobstructed width of 20 feet, a fire apparatus access roadway shall be capable of providing a minimum standard turning radius of 25 feet (7620 mm) inside and 45 feet (13 716mm) outside.

Table D103.4 is amended to read:

Table D103.4

REQUIREMENTS FOR DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS

LENGTH (feet)

MINIMUM WIDTH (feet)    

TURNAROUNDS REQUIRED

0 – 150

20a

None required

151 – 750

20a

100-foot Hammerhead, 50-foot “Y”, 75-foot Shunt or 90-foot-diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with figure D103.1

Over 750

Special approval requiredb

a. A driveway with a minimum width of 16 feet is acceptable for access to no more than two single-family dwellings.

b. Any fire apparatus access roadway or driveway that is approved to be less than 20 feet wide and to exceed 750 feet in length shall have outsets or turnouts every 300 feet along the length of the road or driveway, or at locations approved by the fire code official. Each outset or turnout shall be of the following dimensions: an 8 foot wide turnout that extends at least 40 feet in length.

Figure D103.1 is amended to read:

D103.5 is amended by amending criterion 1 and adding criterion 9 to read:

1. The minimum clear width shall be 20 feet (6096 mm)

Exception: For access to one and two single-family dwellings, 16 feet clear width is acceptable.

9. All gates shall be installed and located a minimum of 30 feet off the street.

Section D103.6.1 is amended to read:

D103.6.1 Roads less than 28 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads less than 28 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane.

Section D103.6.2 is amended to read:

D103.6.2 Roads 28 feet in width or greater, but less than 36 feet in width. Fire apparatus access roads 28 feet wide or greater, but less than 36 feet wide, shall be posted on one side of the road as a fire lane.

Section D105.3 is amended to read:

D105.3 Proximity to building. At least one of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of 15 feet (45 772 mm) and a maximum of 30 feet (9 144 mm) from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building with the largest vertical dimension while allowing access to each floor of the building.

Section D106.1 is amended to read:

Section D106.1 Projects having more than 100 dwelling units. Multiple-family residential projects having more than 100 dwelling units shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of Section D104.3. Exception: Deleted.

Section D106.2 is deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 16-11 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 13-14 § 2).

8.28.070 Penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this code or standards hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire code official or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time.

B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions or the invocation of other remedies provided in the Benicia Municipal Code or by other law.

C. Each person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by that person. (Ord. 13-14 § 2).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing adoption by reference of nationally recognized codes, see Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.


Chapter 8.32
REPAIR OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
Sections:

8.32.010  Purpose.

8.32.020  Definitions.

8.32.030  Permit – Required.

8.32.040  Exception – Temporary work.

8.32.050  Exception – Emergency repairs.

8.32.060  Permit – Application.

8.32.070  Permit – Approval.

8.32.080  Permit – Contents – Duration.

8.32.090  Permit – Terms and conditions.

8.32.100  Site restoration required.

8.32.110  Violation declared public nuisance.

8.32.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce fire hazards, alleviate police problems, prevent unsightly neighborhood nuisances, and restrict nonresidential uses of residential property by regulating the outdoor repair of mechanical equipment on public and private property in residentially zoned areas. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-801).

8.32.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. "Mechanical equipment" means and includes appliances, automobiles, boats, machinery, mechanical equipment, motor vehicles, motorcycles, or other mechanical apparatus, but does not include a bicycle.

B. "Repair" means and includes construction, building, servicing, dismantling, disassembling or the performing of any work. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-802).

8.32.030 Permit – Required.
No person may repair mechanical equipment out-of-doors, if the mechanical equipment is visible from a public way, for a period of more than 48 hours in the following land use districts without a permit to do so:

A. One-family residential district (RS);

B. Duplex-residential district (RD);

C. Multiple residential district (RM). (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-803).

8.32.040 Exception – Temporary work.
This chapter does not apply to a person who performs work on mechanical equipment for a period which does not exceed 48 hours. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-809).

8.32.050 Exception – Emergency repairs.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, no person may repair mechanical equipment on public rights-of-way in any land use district in the city, except in the case of an emergency. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-811).

8.32.060 Permit – Application.
An applicant for a permit shall file a request with the city manager on a form provided by the city. The application shall include:

A. Name and address of applicant;

B. Address where work is to be done;

C. Description of exact location of work site;

D. Written consent of owner of premises if other than applicant;

E. Description of vehicle or conveyance sufficient to identify it;

F. General statement of work to be done and an estimate of the time required. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-804).

8.32.070 Permit – Approval.
The city manager may refer the permit request to the police department and the fire department. The city manager shall approve the request and issue a permit if he finds that the work:

A. Will not create a police problem or a fire hazard;

B. The work with regard to location of the work site and type of work to be done will not create a public or private nuisance and is not detrimental to the welfare of the residents of the area. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-805).

8.32.080 Permit – Contents – Duration.
The permit shall describe the vehicle and the time within which the work is to be completed. The city manager may grant a time extension of any permit upon showing a good cause. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-806).

8.32.090 Permit – Terms and conditions.
As a condition of the permit the applicant and the owner of the premises shall authorize the city to:

A. Remove and store at the expense of the applicant and the owner, the vehicle or portion of it which is on the site after the permit expires; and

B. Restore the premises as required in BMC 8.32.100. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-808).

8.32.100 Site restoration required.
Within the time granted, the applicant shall complete the work and shall clear the area where the work is performed of all debris. The applicant, and, in the case of private property, the owner of the premises, is responsible for the cost of restoring the work site to the condition existing before the work began. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-807).

8.32.110 Violation declared public nuisance.
The activity prohibited by this chapter is a public nuisance. A person who maintains, permits or allows the activity prohibited by this chapter to exist on his property is subject to provisions of Penal Code Section 373, Civil Code Section 3494, Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, Government Code Section 38773, and Chapter 8.04 BMC. (Ord. 72-1 N.S. § 1, 1972; prior code § 8-810).

Chapter 8.34
COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLES
Sections:

8.34.010  Definitions.

8.34.020  Collection – Provision.

8.34.030  Collection – Contract – City to enter.

8.34.040  Collection – Contract – Exclusive.

8.34.045  Educational and promotional services.

8.34.050  Collection – Contract – Use of contractor’s services required.

8.34.060  Collection – Contract – Bonds and insurance.

8.34.070  Collection – Contract – Termination – Grounds.

8.34.080  Collection – Contract – Termination – Hearing.

8.34.090  Collection – Hauling requirements.

8.34.100  Collection – Frequency.

8.34.110  Property maintenance.

8.34.130  Container – User required.

8.34.150  Yard trimmings – Bundles.

8.34.160  Container – Area to be kept clean.

8.34.170  Container – Location.

8.34.180  Container – Inspection.

8.34.190  Storage prohibited.

8.34.200  Removal of refuse and dangerous materials.

8.34.210  Rates and charges – Classification of services.

8.34.220  Rates and charges – Adopted by resolution.

8.34.240  Hearing upon appeal or complaint of unreasonable charges.

8.34.010 Definitions.
A. In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1. "Authorized recycling agent" means a person that the city authorizes or contracts with to collect its recyclable waste material as defined by Government Code Section 66710.5.

2. "Contractor" means an agent or employee of the city, or a person with whom the city contracts to collect and dispose of recyclables produced in the city.

3. "Department of public health" means the department of public health of Solano County.

4. "Person" means an individual, firm, association, public or private corporation, or public agency.

5. "Place" means public or private land, building, site, public or private drainage ditch, or public or private road in the city.

6. "Recyclables" means all items designated by the city to be collected within designated recycling collection containers during residential curbside recycling programs, including glass, plastic, tin, aluminum cans and newspapers; and all items designated by the city as commercial and industrial recyclables, including wood, sawdust, glass, cardboard, aluminum, plastic and paper. Household hazardous waste collected during collection programs may also be recycled when appropriate. "Recyclables" do not include waste items defined as "refuse" by BMC 8.24.010(A)(9). Recyclables shall be collected for the purpose of recycling as defined by Government Code Section 66716.5.

7. "Yard trimmings" means and includes organic material from trees, shrubs, grass and similar vegetation. Yard trimmings may also be designated as recyclables by the city.

B. The city council may add or delete substances to be included or excluded from the definitions contained in subsections (A)(6) and (A)(7) of this section. All additions or deletions shall be deemed included within the terms and conditions of any existing collection or disposal contract with the city without further action by the council. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.020 Collection – Provision.
The city may provide for the collection and disposal of recyclables accumulated inside the city by granting to a qualified person the privilege of doing so, who shall be the authorized recycling agent for the city. The privilege granted by the city may be either exclusive or nonexclusive, and may relate to all or a portion of the area within the city and may relate to all of such substances or to any one or more of said substances. The privilege granted may be limited to single-family residences, excluding all other producers of recyclables, or both single-family residences and multifamily residences, excluding all other producers of recyclables. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.030 Collection – Contract – City to enter.
If the city grants a privilege for the collection and removal of recyclables, it shall enter into a contract with the contractor, which contract shall be approved by resolution of the city council. Said contract shall provide that the collected recyclables shall be disposed of in a manner that will reasonably assure their reuse as reprocessed useable products and that said recyclables shall not be disposed of as refuse; provided, that the city manager may waive this requirement if there is substantial evidence that no market exists for the reuse as a specific collected recyclable. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.040 Collection – Contract – Exclusive.
The city council may enter into an exclusive contract with a person for the collection and removal of recyclables from within the city. The exclusive contract may provide that the contractor may collect a recyclable collection charge ("recyclable collection rate") as compensation for the cost of providing the curbside recycling service. If the contractor also has entered into a refuse collection contract with the city pursuant to Chapter 8.24 BMC, the recyclable collection rate may be collected by the contractor as a surcharge on the refuse collection rate provided for in any refuse contract. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.045 Educational and promotional services.
The city may require the contractor to provide community educational and promotional services for the recycling program. The city may also enter into a contract for additional community educational and promotional services with another contractor. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.050 Collection – Contract – Use of contractor’s services required.
If the city enters into an exclusive contract, it is mandatory for every person in the city, who under the terms of the contract receives curbside recycling service, to pay the rate for the service offered by the contractor, whether or not the service is used by the resident. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.060 Collection – Contract – Bonds and insurance.
A. The contractor shall furnish a bond in the amount of $50,000 in favor of the city conditioned upon the faithful performance by him of the duties imposed by ordinance, contract and the rules and regulations of the city. The contractor shall obtain and keep in force for the period covered by the contract:

1. Public liability insurance in an amount not less than $5,000,000 for the death or injury of one person and $5,000,000 for the death or injury of more than one person;

2. Property damage insurance in the amount of not less than $5,000,000 upon each of the vehicles used in carrying out the contract; and

3. Extended liability coverage insuring against the acts of the contractor’s officers, employees and agents while acting in the course and scope of their employment with the contractor under the franchise with the city.

B. The contractor shall also furnish workman’s compensation insurance and such other insurance as the city council may require. All such liability insurance obtained by the contractor shall also cover the city, its officers, agents and employees. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.070 Collection – Contract – Termination – Grounds.
The city may terminate a contract entered into under this chapter and revoke the privilege granted by it if the contractor violates the contract, this chapter or a rule or regulation of the city. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.080 Collection – Contract – Termination – Hearing.
Before terminating a contract under BMC 8.34.070, the city council shall notify the contractor of the violation, default or breach, and give the contractor 10 days from the date of such notice to cure the same. If the contractor fails to cease the violation or if the contractor is guilty of the same or a similar violation within any calendar year, or cure the default or breach after being so notified by the city, the city shall give the contractor at least 20 days’ notice of a hearing. The hearing conducted by the city council shall commence on the date stated in the notice and may be continued from day to day thereafter until completed and the city council shall hear any and all relevant evidence, and after the hearing has been completed, and the matter submitted, if the council finds that the contractor has violated (A) the contract, or (B) this chapter, or a rule or regulation of the city applicable to the contractor, and has failed to cure the defect pursuant to the written notice previously served upon the contractor, the city council may terminate the contract. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.090 Collection – Hauling requirements.
Recyclables conveyed on streets in the city shall be hauled in an all-metal, watertight-bodied motor truck, and in a manner so that the contents do not sift through or fall upon the street and do not blow upon the street or adjacent property. The truck body shall be constructed of metal of sufficient strength to withstand fire within, without endangering persons or property. The truck body in which recyclables are regularly hauled shall be washed at least once each week. Each truck shall be equipped with a covering drawn over the load as completed to full depth. Recyclables in the truck shall be completely covered between the point of collection and the point of disposal; that insofar as is practicable, these requirements shall apply to recyclables conveyed on streets in the city. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.100 Collection – Frequency.
Recyclables shall be collected at least once every other week; provided, that the city may contract for more frequent service. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.110 Property maintenance.
Each property owner shall maintain his property free of recyclables. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.130 Container – User required.
Every person who has charge or control of a place where recyclables are accumulated shall provide a suitable and sufficient recyclable container. In the event that the city enters into a recycling collection contract and the contractor is required to provide containers, then recyclables shall be placed in the provided containers. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.150 Yard trimmings – Bundles.
A person having control of a place where yard trimmings accumulate may place such yard trimmings in bundles weighing not more than 60 pounds and not more than four feet in length. Such bundles shall be at all times located not more than 10 feet from the recyclable container required under BMC 8.34.130. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.160 Container – Area to be kept clean.
Each person who has a recyclable container shall keep the area where the recyclable container is located clean and free of recyclables. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.170 Container – Location.
Recyclable containers and bundles shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property at curbside of a street or alley. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.180 Container – Inspection.
The department of public health shall see that recyclable containers are kept clean and sanitary and shall inspect the vehicles used in the collection and disposal of recyclables and see that they are kept clean and sanitary. The department of public health is responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, all other health ordinances of the city and the health laws of the state. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.190 Storage prohibited.
No person may keep or dispose of recyclables in a manner or upon any place which affords food or harborage for rodents or insects, or which causes a public nuisance or public health hazard, or in a manner which violates this chapter. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.200 Removal of refuse and dangerous materials.
A. Refuse shall not be placed in containers used for regular collection of recyclables, but shall be disposed of pursuant to Chapter 8.24 BMC.

B. Highly inflammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers used for regular collection of recyclables but shall be disposed of pursuant to Chapter 8.24 BMC.

C. Paper or any other material which may be otherwise recyclable, removed from a place where highly infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall not be placed in containers used for regular collection of recyclables, but shall be disposed of pursuant to Chapter 8.24 BMC. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.210 Rates and charges – Classification of services.
A. For the purpose of rates, recyclable collection service is classified as:

1. Single-family residential;

2. Multifamily residential; and

3. Commercial.

B. "Single-family residential" means a single-family dwelling. "Multifamily residential" includes dwellings with two or more individual living units. "Commercial" includes business and commercial establishments and all other types of premises except single-family and multifamily residential. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.220 Rates and charges – Adopted by resolution.
A. A person from whom recyclables are collected by the city or its contractor and whose rate is regulated by the city council shall pay monthly fees for recyclable collection service, which fees shall be adopted by the city council by resolution in the amounts stated therein. The rates adopted by the city council may be a single fee for all classes of users or a fee for each class of users, such as one fee for single-family residential users and another fee for the owners of multifamily residential property. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a recyclable collection contract may provide for an automatic annual increase tied to cost-of-living index increases, and said annual increase, if any, shall not require the approval of the city council.

B. Notwithstanding that rates are fixed by resolution of the city council, any approved recyclable contract shall provide that rates may be changed by the city. Any change by the city council of the rate stated in any such contract shall become the contract rate within 30 days after the adoption of said rate change. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

8.34.240 Hearing upon appeal or complaint of unreasonable charges.
A person complaining that a charge for collection is unreasonable shall file a written complaint or appeal with the city manager setting forth the basis of the complaint and the factual grounds for the same. The city manager shall notify the contractor in writing of the complaint or appeal filed and furnish the contractor with a copy of the complaint. The city manager shall investigate the matter of the complaint or appeal, and if either party requests, the city manager or his or her designee may conduct a hearing to determine the reasonableness of a charge in the complaint or appeal. After the city manager has made a determination, either the contractor or the complainant or both may appeal the decision of the city manager or the designee to the city council, and the city council may, with or without a hearing, make a finding and decision which shall be final as to both the contractor and the complainant or appellant. (Ord. 90-13 N.S. § 1, 1990).

Chapter 8.36
DENIAL OF PERMITS OR APPROVALS IF PROPERTY ALREADY VIOLATES CODE
Sections:

8.36.010  Prohibition against granting permits.

8.36.010 Prohibition against granting permits.
All departments, commissions, councils, officials and public employees of the city who are vested with the duty or authority to issue and/or approve permits, licenses or other approvals pursuant to the provisions of this code may withhold the approval and/or issuance of such permits, licenses or approvals where a violation of this code exists on or with respect to the parcel or land for which such license, permit or approval is sought. Licenses, permits and/or approvals which may be withheld include, but are not limited to, building permits, zoning clearance on building permits, certificates of occupancy, business licenses, conditional use permits, precise development plans, variances, lot line adjustments, subdivisions, and rezonings. When the applicable violation(s) has/have been physically abated or otherwise eliminated, permits, licenses or approvals withheld pursuant to this section may be released or granted if otherwise appropriate. Approval of any discretionary permit may be conditioned upon the physical abatement or elimination of a violation of this code. (Ord. 91-4 N.S. § 1, 1991).

Chapter 8.38
GRAFFITI CONTROL
Sections:

8.38.010    Purpose and findings.

8.38.020    Definitions.

8.38.030    Graffiti under state law.

8.38.040    Purchase or possession of graffiti implements.

8.38.050    Penalties for violations.

8.38.060    Declaration of nuisance.

8.38.070    Removal by person applying graffiti.

8.38.071    Removal of graffiti by the property owner.

8.38.080    Abatement at owner’s expense.

8.38.090    Abatement at owner’s expense – Notice to abate.

8.38.100    Abatement at owner’s expense – Hearing.

8.38.110    Abatement at owner’s expense – Costs.

8.38.120    Removal at city expense.

8.38.121    Recovery of funds from the person applying graffiti.

8.38.130    Alternative means of enforcement.

8.38.140    Reporting graffiti – Reward.

8.38.150    Graffiti prevention provisions – Design of new graffiti-attracting surfaces.

8.38.010 Purpose and findings.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide enforcement tools in addition to those already provided by state law for removal of graffiti and to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti on walls and structures on both public and private property in the city. It is further the intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to give notice to all who disregard the property rights of others that the city will strictly enforce all laws prohibiting graffiti, including but not limited to Sections 594, 594.1, 640.5 and 640.6 of the California Penal Code, Section 13202.6 of the California Vehicle Code, and the provisions of this chapter.

B. The city council finds:

1. Graffiti is inconsistent with the city’s property maintenance goals and aesthetic standards;

2. The increase of graffiti on both public and private property is creating a condition of blight within the city which results in deterioration of property and business values for the property tagged by the graffiti as well as the surrounding properties;

3. Graffiti is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance which must be abated;

4. Graffiti has also been found to be associated with criminal activity and delinquency. It is also a means of identification and intimidation utilized by gangs and its presence may further gang-related activities. The proliferation of graffiti, especially gang-related graffiti, presents an imminent danger to the public safety and welfare. Law enforcement officials and other experts agree that immediate removal of gang-related graffiti is necessary to reduce the risk of violent and other criminal activities associated with gangs and gang territories. In addition, the power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, to devalue property and to detract from a sense of community enjoyed by residents and businesses in the city goes beyond the cost of clean-up or removal. Not only is graffiti a criminal act of vandalism, but it is also a social crime upon the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that citizens desire in their neighborhoods; and

5. This chapter provides an immediate and practical method for combating the effects of graffiti on publicly and privately owned structures and real property. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.020 Definitions.
“Administrative hearing officer” means the chief of police or his/her designated representative.

“Aerosol container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it was made, which is adopted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, dye, ink or other substance capable of defacing property.

“Demand for payment” means an invoice for graffiti abatement costs prepared by the city containing the location and description of defaced property, a summary of graffiti abatement actions performed, a listing of abatement costs and expenses incurred by the city, and the basis for the determination of the responsible person or offender.

“Etching solution” means any caustic cream, gel, liquid, or other solution capable, by means of a chemical action, of defacing, damaging, or destroying hard surfaces in a manner similar to acid.

“Felt tip marker” means any marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth inch and contains an ink, paint or other liquid that is not water soluble and that is capable of defacing property.

“Graffiti” includes any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, inscribed, marred, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to, or on, any real property, building, structure, or facility, or any surface without the owner’s prior authorization.

“Graffiti abatement costs” include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or the surface to which the graffiti is attached, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and law enforcement costs.

“Graffiti-attracting surfaces” means any publicly viewable surfaces deemed by the city manager or his/her designee to be likely to attract graffiti.

“Graffiti implement” means an aerosol or pressurized container, a felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick, etching solution or an etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, or other graffiti-attracting surfaces.

“Gum label” means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removable.

“Paint stick” means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application leaving a mark at least one-eighth inch in width, and not water soluble.

“Parent or guardian” means the parent or legal guardian who has custody and control of a minor.

“Pressurized container” means any can, bottle, spray device or other mechanism which is designed to propel or expel liquid, ink, paint, chalk, dye or other similar substances under pressure and which contains liquid, ink, paint, chalk, dye or other similar substances capable of defacing property with permanent, indelible or waterproof liquid, ink, paint, chalk, dye or other similar substances.

“Property” means real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, within city limits.

“Structure” means the same as defined in the California Building Code.

“Surface” means the exposed area of any object including, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, rocks, curbs, street lamp poles, utility boxes and poles, trees, vegetation, signs, and trash receptacles. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.030 Graffiti under state law.
A. It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 640.6, which provides that any person who writes, sprays, scratches, or otherwise affixes graffiti on any real or personal property not his or her own is guilty of an infraction.

B. It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 594, which provides that any person who maliciously (1) defaces with paint or any other liquid; (2) damages; or (3) destroys any real or personal property not his or her own, in cases other than those specified by state law, is guilty of vandalism punishable by fine and/or imprisonment.

C. It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 640.5, which provides that any person who writes, sprays, scratches, or otherwise affixes graffiti on or in the facilities or vehicles of a governmental entity, whether leased or owned by the governmental entity, is guilty of an infraction.

D. It is unlawful for any person to violate California Penal Code Section 594.1, which provides that it is a misdemeanor for (1) any person to sell or furnish to any minor under the age of 18 an aerosol container, other than the parent or legal guardian of such minor; (2) any minor to purchase an aerosol container; and (3) any minor to possess an aerosol container while upon any public highway, street or alley. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.040 Purchase or possession of graffiti implements.
A. Purchase by or Furnishing to Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase any graffiti implement unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of 18 years without the prior consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian of the person.

B. Possession. No person shall have in his/her possession and in plain view any graffiti implement for the purpose of inscribing graffiti while upon any public right-of-way or property in the city. Public property shall include any public park, playground, swimming pool, school or recreational facility if such is posted with signs stating that it is a misdemeanor to possess graffiti implements (as defined in this chapter). This section shall not apply to any person who has received valid authorization from the governmental entity which has jurisdiction over the public area. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.050 Penalties for violations.
Unless otherwise provided by California State law, any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable by either six months in jail, a $1,000 fine, or both. Additional penalties which may be recommended to the court on an ad hoc basis:

A. Vehicle Code Section 42001.7 permits a court to require a littering offender (Vehicle Code Sections 23111, 23112 and 23113) to pick up litter or clean up graffiti;

B. Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 permits a court to suspend or delay issuance of a driver’s license for one year for each conviction of a graffiti offense;

C. Minors determined to be wards of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 as a result of committing an offense in the city of Benicia shall be required, at the city’s request of the court, to perform community service, which may include a graffiti removal service of not less than six hours nor more than 80 hours;

D. The city may request the court, pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1, to hold the parent or legal guardian of a minor who violates this chapter, or the state laws mentioned herein, personally responsible for any and all costs incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said minor, including attorneys’ fees and court costs;

E. If the court does not hold the parent or legal guardian of a minor who violates this chapter, or the state laws mentioned herein, responsible for the city’s removal costs, then the city may make such costs a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the parent or legal guardian pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.6 so long as 30 days’ prior written notice is provided to the parent or legal guardian about the anticipated special assessment if such costs are not paid to the city. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.060 Declaration of nuisance.
The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti anywhere within the boundaries of the city of Benicia is obnoxious and offensive, thereby constituting a public and private nuisance. Such graffiti shall be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this chapter. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.070 Removal by person applying graffiti.
Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same immediately, and in no event longer than 72 hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. Each instance of failure by any person to remove graffiti following notice shall constitute a separate violation. Every day that said graffiti is not removed, after notice, shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.071 Removal of graffiti by the property owner.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful for a property owner to permit property that has been defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of longer than 72 hours after notification by the city of the existence of the graffiti and the requirement to remove the graffiti. Property shall be considered no longer defaced when the graffiti is removed or the defaced area is covered with paint that is similar in shade and color to the surface upon which the graffiti is placed.

B. For the purpose of this section, notification to the property owner may be made by posting a notice on the property that has been defaced. The notice shall state that the graffiti must be removed within 72 hours unless the chief of police or his/her designee agrees that additional time for removal is reasonable considering the graffiti and the difficulty of removal. (Ord. 09-13 § 1).

8.38.080 Abatement at owner’s expense.
Graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city of Benicia so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way may be removed by the city at the owner’s expense as a public nuisance after service of a notice to abate as herein set forth. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.090 Abatement at owner’s expense – Notice to abate.
A. Whenever the city is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city of Benicia, the city shall serve a written notice to abate such graffiti upon the owner of the affected premises as such owner’s name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, and to the tenant, where applicable and if known to the city.

B. Contents of Notice. The notice shall be substantially as set out in Form 8.38.090 at the end of this chapter and contain substantially the following information:

1. The street address, legal description, or other description sufficient to identify the premises affected by the described graffiti;

2. The length of time permitted for voluntary abatement of the graffiti;

3. A statement that the property owner may, during the abatement period, file a written request for hearing if the owner disagrees with the demand to abate the graffiti;

4. A statement that if the graffiti is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, the city will abate the graffiti, that the costs of such abatement shall be assessed against the premises and shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes.

C. Service of Notice.

1. The notice to abate the graffiti shall be personally served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Section 415.10 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Solano County pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

2. The failure to make or attempt such service on any person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other person duly served. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.100 Abatement at owner’s expense – Hearing.
A. A written request for hearing must be received by the administrative hearing officer or his/her designated representative within 72 hours of service of the notice. The administrative hearing officer, or designee, shall set a time and date for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of the time, date, and place. The hearing shall be before the administrative hearing officer. The hearing shall be an informal opportunity for the person requesting the hearing to present his/her arguments against the requirement to abate the graffiti at his/her expense. Such arguments may include requesting the city to abate at its cost in accordance with BMC 8.38.120.

B. At the hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall render a decision, in writing, upholding or denying the requirement of abatement. If the requirement is upheld, the decision shall contain an order to abate and a deadline for abatement, and shall be served on the person requesting the hearing by U.S. mail. The decision of the administrative hearing officer may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 07-39 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.110 Abatement at owner’s expense – Costs.
A. If the graffiti is not completely abated by the owner or occupier of the premises within the time prescribed in the (1) notice to abate; (2) decision of the administrative hearing officer; or (3) decision of the city council, whichever is applicable, the city’s director of parks and community services or his/her designated representative is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city personnel or private contract, and the city, or its private contractor, is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes.

B. The city’s chief of police or his/her designated representative shall keep an account of the costs and expenses, including all administrative and legal costs, in abating such graffiti and shall serve by U.S. mail a statement of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice to abate. Such person or persons receiving the notice to abate shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in abating the graffiti.

C. If all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating the graffiti and accounted for by the city’s chief of police or his/her designated representative remains unpaid after 30 days, then pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code Sections 38773.5, 38773.6 and 38773.7, such portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and is hereby declared to constitute an assessment on the real property which was served with the notice to abate and/or the subject property. The city’s chief of police or his/her designated representative or city clerk, prior to August 10th of each year, shall deliver to the county auditor of Solano County a notice to levy the special assessment on the property for placement on the secured roll. Thereafter, the special assessment shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as municipal taxes. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.120 Removal at city expense.
Graffiti located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city of Benicia so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way may be removed solely at the city’s expense, without reimbursement from the property owner or assessment upon the property, upon all of the following conditions:

A. The administrative hearing officer, pursuant to a hearing under BMC 8.38.100, determines that (1) the owner of the affected property is unable to remove the graffiti due to extreme financial hardship; or (2) the same owner of the affected property has made no more than one request for such city removal at the city’s sole expense within a calendar year; and

B. In removing the graffiti, the painting or repair of a more extensive area beyond the tagged area shall not be authorized;

C. When the work is to be performed by the city, or by contract at the direction of the city, the removal of the graffiti may not proceed until the written consent of the person or entity having jurisdiction over the structure is obtained along with a release of the city from liability. Such consent and release shall be substantially as set out in Form 8.38.120 at the end of this chapter.

Nothing herein shall be construed as obligating the administrative hearing officer to require that any graffiti be abated at the sole expense of the city. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.121 Recovery of funds from the person applying graffiti.
A. Once the person applying the graffiti has been identified by the police department or other law enforcement agency and the city and/or the property owner/manager have expended funds to remove the graffiti, regardless of its location, which was caused by the identified person, the city may recover the funds in accordance with the following procedures:

1. The property owner/manager shall promptly submit an itemized statement of expenses along with appropriate documentation to the police department.

2. The police department will work in conjunction with the court and/or diversion system to submit a demand for payment, ordering payment to be made to the city within 10 days after receipt of notice. The demand for payment shall be requested during the criminal adjudication process or as part of the diversion process. The demand for payment shall also provide the offender with notice of appeal procedures.

3. If the identified offender is a minor, then pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.3(d), the police department will submit a demand for payment to the minor and the minor’s parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, ordering payment to be made within 10 days. The demand for payment shall also provide the parents or guardian with notice of appeal procedures.

B. Appeals from the demand for payment shall be made in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC and must be filed within 10 calendar days from the service of the notice.

1. At the hearing, if one is requested, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor may each be heard and provided with the opportunity to show cause why the city should not recover funds from the offender or, if a minor, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the city should recover funds from the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The hearing officer may determine that the city should recover the funds if he or she finds that: (a) the offender applied the graffiti; (b) the property or structure was damaged with graffiti; (c) the property owner or city incurred costs to remove the graffiti; and (d) if applicable, whether a reward was paid in this case.

2. If the administrative hearing officer determines that the city and/or property owner/manager should recover funds from the offender or, if a minor, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, the administrative hearing officer shall issue an order to that effect, and the amount shall be payable to the city. The determination of the administrative hearing officer is final.

3. Pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772, 38773.2 and 38773.6, the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for the funds expended by the city and/or property owner. If payment is not made within 30 days from the date of the accounting and demand for payment, the payment shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty assessment of $100.00 plus interest on the unpaid amount, which interest shall accrue at the rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid.

4. In the event the funds have not been paid within 30 days from the date of issuing an accounting and demand for payment, the amount unpaid including any penalty and interest thereon shall constitute a lien pursuant to Government Code Sections 38772 and 38773.2 against the property of the minor and against the property of the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. Prior to recording a notice of lien, the city shall provide notice pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.2. Any such lien not paid by June 30th of each year may, upon adoption of a resolution by the city council, be collected along with, and in the same manner as, the general property taxes. The liened property shall be subject to the penalties, procedures, and sale in case of delinquency as provided in the Civil Code of California.

5. As an alternative to a lien and pursuant to Government Code section 38773.6, the funds shall constitute a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor. The assessment shall be collected as provided for in Government Code Section 38773.6.

6. In addition to any other remedy provided herein or available at law, the amount owed pursuant to Government Code Section 38772 shall constitute a personal obligation against the offender or, if a minor, the minor and the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor.

C. Funds recovered by the city on behalf of a property owner/manager shall be turned over to the property owner/manager within 10 days of receipt by the city. In the event that the full amount claimed by the property owner/manager and the city is not received, the amounts recovered shall be shared between the property owner/manager and the city on a pro rata basis. (Ord. 09-13 § 1).

8.38.130 Alternative means of enforcement.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceedings to enjoin or abate a public nuisance under applicable provisions of state law as an alternative to proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 09-13 § 1; Ord. 96-13 N.S.).

8.38.140 Reporting graffiti – Reward.
The city may pay a reward, as established by city council resolution, to any person who provides information which satisfies the chief of police or his/her designated representative that there is probable cause to believe a specific person is responsible for the application of graffiti to property or any surface. In addition to any fines levied by the city for a violation of this chapter, any person who has damaged property by applying graffiti shall be liable for the amount of any reward paid pursuant to this chapter and Section 53069.5 of the California Government Code. If such person is an unemancipated minor, the minor’s parent or guardian is jointly and severally liable and shall pay such amounts to the city. (Ord. 09-13 § 1).

8.38.150 Graffiti prevention provisions – Design of new graffiti-attracting surfaces.
Any applicant for design review approval, conditional use permit, temporary activity permit, land development permit, site plan approval, planned development approval, development agreement, or other form of development or building permit shall, to the extent deemed feasible by the city manager or his/her designee, have designed any building structures visible from any public or quasi-public place in such a manner as to consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not limited to, the following: (A) use of additional lighting; (B) use of nonsolid fencing, where permitted; (C) use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; and (D) use of architectural design to break up long continuous walls or solid areas. (Ord. 09-13 § 1).

Form 8.38.090

Date:

Name

Street Address

Benicia, CA 94510

Re: NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI

Dear ________:

It has come to my attention that your property at ADDRESS has been tagged with graffiti. Benicia Municipal Code Chapter 8.38 requires graffiti to be removed within 72 hours after notice by the City. If you cannot remove the graffiti in this time, please contact the City at the number listed below. If you object to removing the graffiti yourself, please submit a written request for a hearing to the City’s Chief of Police within 72 hours from the date of this notice. If no such written objections are received by the City by the conclusion of this 72 hour period, the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti on your property at your expense without further notice.

Thank you in advance for your prompt attention to this matter. If you have any questions, please contact me at (707) 746- ____.

___________________________

(Signature of City Employee)

CITY OF BENICIA

250 East L Street

Benicia, CA 94510

Form 8.38.120

CONSENT TO ENTER PROPERTY AND HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT

GRAFFITI REMOVAL

We grant permission to the City of Benicia, or its authorized agents, to enter our property for Graffiti removal. We recognize that the City of Benicia can only provide for the removal or painting of the area which is the subject of the Graffiti. We waive any claims which we may have against the City arising out of this work and agree to indemnify it, its City Council, its agents, officers and employees against any claims or demands whatsoever arising out of their performance of this work.

DATE:

NAME & ADDRESS:

TELEPHONE NO.:

SIGNATURE OF PROPERTY OWNER OR TENANT:

Return to:    City of Benicia
250 East L Street
Benicia, CA 94510

Chapter 8.42
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
(Repealed by Ord. 18-17)

Chapter 8.46
FORECLOSED PROPERTIES
Sections:

8.46.010    Foreclosed properties.

8.46.010 Foreclosed properties.
A. The city may issue civil fines and penalties of up to $1,000 per day, pursuant to the procedures set forth in California Civil Code Section 2929.3, against the legal owner of vacant residential property purchased at a foreclosure sale or acquired by that owner through foreclosure under a mortgage or deed of trust who fails to maintain such vacant residential property so long as California Civil Code remains in effect.

B. Appeals of notices of failure to maintain foreclosed property and orders to correct violations or the civil fines and penalties imposed pursuant to this section may be appealed in the same manner and within the same time limitations as appeals of notices of administrative penalty and orders to abate as fully set forth in Chapter 8.06 BMC. (Ord. 08-18 § 1).

Chapter 8.50
MAINTENANCE AND REGISTRATION OF NEGLECTED, VACANT AND FORECLOSED PROPERTIES
Sections:

8.50.010    Purpose.

8.50.020    Definitions.

8.50.030    Public nuisance.

8.50.040    Required boarding of vacant buildings.

8.50.050    Maintenance standards and monitoring.

8.50.060    Monitoring program.

8.50.070    Monitoring program registration fee.

8.50.080    Monitoring program inspections.

8.50.090    Monitoring program – Appeals.

8.50.100    Violations.

8.50.010 Purpose.
Vacant and foreclosed buildings which are neglected and not maintained can result in the physical deterioration of a neighborhood and other health problems to the community. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for maintaining vacant buildings and to establish a monitoring program for those that are neglected. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

“Appeals hearing officer” means any person appointed by the city manager to hear appeals held pursuant to this chapter. An appeals hearing officer may be a city employee.

“Boarded” means the covering of all entry points including all doors and windows with plywood or other materials for the purpose of preventing entry into the building by persons or animals.

“Foreclosed building” means a building that has been foreclosed upon or is in the process of being foreclosed upon.

“Foreclosure” means the process by which a property placed as security for a real estate loan is sold to satisfy the debt if the trustor or borrower defaults.

“Owner” means the owner of record for the property and may include a financial institution, beneficiary/trustee or any person or institution that has a possessory interest in the property or is required by agreement to maintain the property.

“Preforeclosure” means a filed notice of default or notice of a trustee sale or any other action that gives public notice of the start of the foreclosure process on a property.

“Responsible agent” means the person designated by the property owner to act on behalf of the owner under BMC 8.50.060.

“Vacant building” means any building that is not legally occupied unless one of the following is true:

A. The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation.

B. The building meets all codes, does not contribute to blight, is ready for occupancy, and is:

1. Actively being offered for sale, lease or rent; or

2. Actively being maintained and monitored by the owner as defined in BMC 8.50.050. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.030 Public nuisance.
A neglected vacant building is a public nuisance. A building is neglected if it is in material repeated or ongoing violation of this chapter. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.040 Required boarding of vacant buildings.
A. Vacant buildings shall be boarded when the buildings can no longer be secured against intrusion by the closing and locking of doors and windows.

B. The city manager or his designee may adopt standards regarding the boarding of vacant buildings.

C. The city may board vacant buildings as part of an abatement action brought under this chapter. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of boarding or the property may be subject to an abatement lien for the cost of the boarding.

D. The owner shall remove boarding and replace with secure locking doors and windows within 10 days of notice from the city. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.050 Maintenance standards and monitoring.
Each vacant building shall be maintained in accordance with the standards in this section.

A. General. Each vacant building shall be maintained in conformance with all city codes including, but not limited to, BMC Title 8 (Health and Safety), BMC Title 15 (Building and Construction) and BMC Title 17 (Zoning).

B. Structural and Building Standards. A vacant building shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition. The structure and all electrical plumbing and mechanical systems shall be maintained in conformance with the provisions of the California Building Standards Code that were in place at the time of construction and in a condition which does not create a hazard to public health or safety. A permit from the city of Benicia’s building division shall be obtained when the building requires repairs, alteration or modification necessary to meet the provisions of this chapter.

C. Fire Safety. A vacant building shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire. Weeds shall be removed if they may constitute a fire hazard. No vacant building or portion of it shall be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. Heating facilities or heating equipment in vacant buildings shall either be removed or maintained in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances. If heating equipment is removed, any fuel supply shall be removed or terminated in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances.

D. Security Standards. A vacant building shall be maintained in a way which secures it from any unauthorized entry. The owner or responsible agent of a vacant building which has suffered an unauthorized entry must provide security which meets the following minimum standards:

1. All windows and sliding doors must have either intact glazing or resistance to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a solid sheet of three-quarter-inch plywood, painted to protect it from the elements, cut to fit the opening, and securely nailed using 6D galvanized nails spaced not more than six inches on the center.

2. Doors and service openings with thresholds located 10 feet or less above grade, stairway, landing, ramp, porch, roof or similarly accessible area must be resistant to entry equivalent to or greater than that of a closed single panel or hollow core door one and three-eighths inches thick equipped with a one-half-inch throw deadbolt.

3. Exterior doors, if openable, shall be closed from the interior of the building by toenailing them to the door frame using screws or bolts.

4. The front door into each building shall be operable. The front door may be secured with a suitable lock such as a hasp and padlock or a one-half-inch deadbolt or deadlatch.

5. All locks shall be kept locked. When a door cannot be made operable, a door shall be constructed of three-quarter-inch CDX plywood and shall be equipped with a lock as described above.

E. Debris Removal. A vacant building and the adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage.

F. Appearance. A vacant building shall be maintained in a manner that minimizes the appearance of vacancy. Graffiti shall be promptly removed. All exterior surfaces, including any boarded windows or doors, shall be painted or otherwise finished to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized entry. The exterior of the property shall be kept in such a condition so as not to create the appearance of an unsecured unoccupied structure or any hazard to public safety. Landscaping shall be maintained and watered as necessary to prevent the appearance of an unoccupied structure and fire hazard.

G. Crime Prevention. A vacant building shall be maintained in a manner that minimizes the potential for criminal activity on the premises including, but not limited to, use and sale of controlled substances, prostitution and criminal street gang activity. The owner or responsible agent shall monitor the property on a regular basis and report any signs of criminal activity to the police department immediately. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.060 Monitoring program.
A. Any owner of a foreclosed building shall register the property in the monitoring program within 10 days of the building becoming vacant. The owner must provide the following information:

1. The address of the foreclosed building;

2. The name, address and telephone number of the owner;

3. The designation of a responsible agent and the address and telephone number of the responsible agent, if different from the owner;

4. The date the building became vacant;

5. The assessor’s parcel number (APN) for the lot where the vacant building is located; and

6. The name and address of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual) identified on the deed of trust if applicable.

B. The owner or responsible agent shall notify the city of any change in the information provided under this section (including a change in ownership) within 15 days of the change.

C. An owner who is subject to the registration requirements of this section shall designate a responsible agent for the building. An owner who lives within 60 miles of the foreclosed building may designate himself or herself as the responsible agent. An owner who lives more than 60 miles from the foreclosed building shall designate a responsible agent who lives within or whose place of business is within the city of Benicia.

D. The designation of responsible agent constitutes an authorization by the owner (and the agreement of the agent) to act on behalf of the owner with regard to all requirements under this code, including the acceptance of all official notices (including, but not limited to, notices under this chapter and notices of proposed abatement or summary abatement) on behalf of the owner. The responsible agent shall be an authorized agent and signatory of the owner, and may sign on behalf of the owner with regard to all requirements under this code.

E. The owner’s designation of a responsible agent shall not relieve the owner of any obligation to comply with this chapter. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.070 Monitoring program registration fee.
An owner who is subject to the registration requirements of BMC 8.50.060 must pay a registration fee to reimburse the city for the cost of administering the monitoring program. The registration fee will be set by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.080 Monitoring program inspections.
The owner or responsible agent of a vacant building which is required to be registered under this chapter shall inspect the building at least once every two weeks. The owner or responsible agent shall keep a written log of all inspections, which shall contain the following information:

A. The date and time of the inspection;

B. The name and signature of the person actually inspecting; and

C. A notation of any problems identified and the steps taken to address them.

A copy of the log shall be provided to the city immediately upon request by the city. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.090 Monitoring program – Appeals.
A. The appeals hearing officer has jurisdiction to hear appeals of:

1. The placement of the vacant building into the neglected vacant building monitoring program; and/or

2. The requirement to pay fees under this chapter.

B. The person appealing the decision under subsection (A) of this section shall file a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

C. The city may assess a hearing fee as provided in a resolution adopted by city council. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

8.50.100 Violations.
A. Violations of this chapter may be handled by criminal, civil, or administrative actions either undertaken separately or in conjunction with other remedies, at the discretion of the city attorney.

B. The first violation of this chapter shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00. The second and each subsequent violation of this chapter within a one-year period is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation.

C. A public safety officer may issue an administrative citation for a violation of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 8.54 BMC and the procedures that chapter shall be followed.

D. Owners may be liable for the city’s reasonable costs of inspection, enforcement, and abatement, pursuant to chapter.

E. In addition to the above remedies, any person who violates this chapter may be subject to other remedies as provided under the law. (Ord. 09-02 § 1).

Chapter 8.54
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
Sections:

8.54.010    Purpose.

8.54.020    Request for hearing.

8.54.030    Hearing officer.

8.54.040    Hearing notice.

8.54.050    Service of hearing notice.

8.54.060    Conduct of hearing.

8.54.070    Continuances.

8.54.080    Decision of hearing officer.

8.54.090    Final decision.

8.54.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a hearing and opportunity to contest the citations and orders or civil fines and penalties that are imposed as a result of violating various provisions in this title. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.020 Request for hearing.
A. All requests for a hearing pursuant to this chapter must be made to the city manager.

B. A request for a hearing to contest a citation and order or a civil fine or penalty shall be made in writing within 15 calendar days after the mailing of the citation and order or notice of the fine or penalty.

C. All requests for a hearing must contain the name of the party requesting the hearing and the address where the hearing notice should be sent. Failure to provide the correct mailing address on the request will result in a waiver of hearing, if the city is unable to properly serve the notice of hearing information.

D. If a request for hearing is not filed within the time period set forth above, the citation and order or civil fine and penalty shall be deemed a final order of the city. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.030 Hearing officer.
The city manager shall either preside over the hearing or assign a designee to hear the case. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.040 Hearing notice.
Upon receiving the request for a hearing, the city manager or designee shall issue a hearing notice. The notice shall contain:

A. A copy of the citation and order or notice of civil fines or penalties that will be the subject of the hearing.

B. An order to appear before the hearing officer at a stated date and time, but in no event less than 20 calendar days after the mailing of the hearing notice.

C. A statement that the person requesting the hearing may be represented by an attorney, or someone else of their choosing at their own expense.

D. A statement that if the party does not proficiently speak or understand English, the party may provide an interpreter, at the party’s own cost, to translate for the party. However, the interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the matter for which the hearing is requested.

E. A statement that all interested persons and/or witnesses may attend and testify at the hearing. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.050 Service of hearing notice.
The hearing notice shall be served either by personal delivery or by mailing a copy by first class mail to the address provided on the request for hearing, or to the record owner’s address or other applicable source for the legal owner of any property that may be subject to the civil fines, penalties or orders. At the discretion of the hearing officer, copies of the notice may also be mailed to any holder of an interest in the property or a mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record if the fines, penalties or abatement orders pertain to the maintenance of a particular property. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.060 Conduct of hearing.
A. The city shall record the proceedings at the hearing with a tape recorder. The party requesting the hearing shall be given a copy of the tape upon request. Either party may provide a certified court reporter to create a record of the proceedings at the party’s own expense.

B. At the time set for hearing, the hearing officer shall begin the hearing by administering an oath or affirmation to tell the truth to all persons giving testimony.

C. The hearing officer shall call upon city staff to begin the hearing with testimony and documentation demonstrating the violations that resulted in the citation and order or civil fines and penalties. The city ordinances, rules and regulations that were violated, as well as the provisions that provide for citations and orders or civil fines and penalties shall also become part of the hearing record.

D. The party who requested the hearing shall then be given an opportunity to provide testimony and documentation concerning the violation. Such testimony can include information regarding the means and time frame for either correction of the violation or payment of the fines and penalties.

E. The technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons would rely. Either party may ask questions or cross-examine the other party. The hearing officer may ask questions of either party at any time.

F. Hearsay evidence is allowed, but the hearing officer has the discretion to give it no weight if there is no other evidence to substantiate it.

G. The hearing officer has discretion to exclude evidence if it is duplicative and would result in an undue consumption of time. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.070 Continuances.
The hearing officer may grant continuances from time to time for good cause. However, in no event shall the hearing be extended for more than 45 calendar days unless there are extenuating circumstances to justify such an extension or continuance. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.080 Decision of hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and shall issue a written decision based on the findings within 15 business days of the hearing. The findings shall include (A) findings of facts, (B) a determination whether or not a violation of the specified code section or sections has occurred based upon the findings of facts, (C) whether the proper notice has been given in compliance with the code, and (D) if a violation has occurred, what are the appropriate costs or penalties. The hearing officer may affirm, reject or modify any citation and order or civil fine or penalty imposed on the party based upon the severity of the violation and the party’s efforts, or lack thereof, to remedy the problem. The civil fines and penalties may be adjusted if the hearing officer finds that imposition of the penalty would create a substantial undue economic hardship on the party. The hearing officer may also order the party to take such action deemed necessary to abate or correct the violation within specific deadlines. The hearing officer shall have the discretion to assign different compliance dates for different conditions or violations, if needed. The written decision shall be served on the party and/or legal owner of the property, if applicable, by personal delivery or certified mail. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

8.54.090 Final decision.
The decision of the hearing officer is final and can only be appealed by filing a petition for judicial review in accordance with the timeliness and other provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 09-03 § 1).

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.02    Social Host Accountability

9.04    Alcoholic Beverage Consumption

9.06    Smoking in Public Places

9.08    Indecent Exposure

9.12    Littering

9.16    Trespassing

9.20    Fortunetelling

9.24    Power of Police Officers to Enforce a Minimum Separation Distance

9.28    Youth Protection

9.32    Weapons

9.36    Conduct in Public Library

9.40    Interference with Police Dogs

9.44    Alarm Systems

9.48    Loitering in Parking Lots

9.52    Mobile Living Units

9.56    Transient Registration

9.60    Cannabis Public Safety License

9.64    Consumption of Marijuana

9.68    Emergency Medical Service (EMS) First Responder Fee

Chapter 9.02
SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
Sections:

9.02.010    Title.

9.02.020    Purpose.

9.02.030    Definitions.

9.02.040    Prohibition of loud or unruly gatherings when alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession of minors.

9.02.050    Civil fines.

9.02.060    Imposition of response costs for public safety responses.

9.02.070    Administrative penalties.

9.02.080    Hearings on the imposition of civil fine, response costs and/or administrative penalties – Appeals.

9.02.090    Civil fine and response costs – Debt to city – Enforcement.

9.02.100    Severability and preemption.

9.02.110    Enforcement authority.

9.02.120    Cumulative remedies.

9.02.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “social host accountability ordinance.” (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.020 Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are:

A. To protect the public health, safety and general welfare;

B. To promote the reduction of underage drinking by imposing a civil fine on persons responsible for loud or unruly gatherings where alcohol is consumed by, served to or in the possession of minors;

C. To facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service to, consumption of, or possession of alcoholic beverages by minors; and

D. To offset the municipal costs associated with providing fire, police, and other emergency services to loud or unruly gatherings by imposing a civil fee upon social hosts and/or landowners who conduct or allow such loud or unruly gatherings to occur on their premises, at their residences, or at rented facilities where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by, or in the possession of minors. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used are defined as follows:

“Alcohol” means and includes ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Hearing officer” means the city manager or his or her designee.

“Juvenile” means any person less than 18 years of age.

“Loud or unruly gathering” means a party or gathering of two or more persons at a residence or on other private property or public property upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud or unruly conduct constitutes a public nuisance and includes but is not limited to:

1. Excessive noise as defined by BMC 8.20.200;

2. Excessive traffic that is significantly in excess of the normal amount of pedestrian and vehicle traffic for the zoning district;

3. Obstruction of public streets and/or the presence of unruly crowds that have spilled into public streets;

4. Public drunkenness or unlawful consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages;

5. Service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by any minor, except as permitted by state law;

6. Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace;

7. Vandalism;

8. Litter; or

9. Any other conduct which constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property or the general welfare or violates Chapter 8.20 BMC, Noise Regulations.

“Minor” means any person less than 21 years of age.

“Person responsible for the event” means and includes but is not limited to:

1. The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the gathering occurs; and

2. The person who organizes or supervises or conducts the event or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.

A responsible person for the loud or unruly gathering need not be present at such gathering resulting in the response giving rise to the imposition of civil penalties and/or response costs. If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of the juvenile may be jointly and severally liable for the civil penalties or response costs pursuant to this chapter and/or for any administrative penalties set forth in BMC 9.02.070.

“Public safety services” and/or “response costs” means the costs associated with response, such as responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to loud or unruly gatherings, including but not limited to:

1. The portion of the costs of salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire and other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the loud or unruly gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);

2. The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering;

3. The cost of the use of any city equipment or property, and the cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a loud or unruly gathering; and

4. Any other costs recoverable in compliance with California Civil Code Section 1714.9. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.040 Prohibition of loud or unruly gatherings when alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession of minors.
Except as permitted in Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution, no person shall suffer, permit or host a gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises or host a gathering at a public place under his or her control where two or more minors are present, where the gathering is loud or unruly and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, being consumed by, or served to any minor. In addition to any fine or penalty that may be imposed by law, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine or penalty as provided here. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.050 Civil fines.
The chief of police (or his or her designee), at his or her discretion, may immediately issue a citation for this civil violation upon evidence of the violation. There is no requirement of a first warning in order for the chief of police to issue this civil citation.

A first violation of this section shall result in a citation with a $750.00 fine. A second violation shall result in a citation with a $1,500 fine. A third or subsequent violation shall result in a citation with a $2,500 fine.

The chief of police (or his or her designee) shall give notice of a violation of this section by issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons identified by the chief of police within 30 days of the violation. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the validity of the citation and the time for requesting that hearing.

The civil fine prescribed above is in addition to any response costs for public safety responses that may be assessed pursuant to BMC 9.02.060. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.060 Imposition of response costs for public safety responses.
In addition to any civil fine imposed for violation of this section, when any loud or unruly gathering where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession of minors occurs on public or private property and a public safety officer determines that conditions described in BMC 9.02.040 exist, the public safety officer shall notify the responsible party or parties of his/her/their liability for the cost of providing public safety services (i.e., fire, ambulance, police and other emergency providers). The response costs for public safety responses shall be separate and distinct from a citation and fine for a civil violation described in BMC 9.02.050. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.070 Administrative penalties.
Taking into consideration the age and/or financial ability of the responsible person(s) to pay, the hearing office may impose, in addition to or in lieu of civil fines and/or response costs in BMC 9.02.050 and 9.02.060:

A. Community service work on behalf of the city; and/or

B. Training, counseling, or classes that are relevant to the purpose of this chapter as set forth in BMC 9.02.020;

C. Failure to complete the administrative penalties as directed will result in that penalty or penalties being converted to civil fines and/or response costs as set forth herein without further right to appeal. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.080 Hearings on the imposition of civil fine, response costs and/or administrative penalties – Appeals.
Any person subject to a civil fine pursuant to BMC 9.02.050, response costs pursuant to BMC 9.02.060, or administrative penalties pursuant to BMC 9.02.070 shall have the right to request an administrative hearing. The request for the hearing shall be filed in accordance with the time frames set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC for appeals. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.090 Civil fine and response costs – Debt to city – Enforcement.
The amount of a civil fine and/or response costs shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person(s) found in violation of BMC 9.02.040 and therefore liable for a fine under BMC 9.02.050 and fees under BMC 9.02.060, and, if that person is a juvenile, then also his/her parents or guardians. Any person owing such fine and/or fees shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such fine and/or fees. These recovery costs may include reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in the action if the city prevails, as the city reserves the right to seek to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, on a case-by-case basis, pursuant to California Government Code Section 25845, subdivision (c). In those cases in which the city seeks to recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, the other party may likewise do so. Civil fines recovered by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in the budget of the Benicia police department to be used for the purpose of reducing minor access to alcohol. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.100 Severability and preemption.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are severable.

The civil fines and fees imposed by this chapter do not preclude other potential civil actions or criminal prosecution under any other provision of law, including but not limited to Penal Code Sections 272 and 415 and Business and Profession Code Sections 25658, 25658.2 and 25662.

This chapter shall not be interpreted in any manner that conflicts with the laws or constitutions of the United States or the State of California. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.110 Enforcement authority.
A loud or unruly gathering at a residence or other private property at which service to or consumption of alcohol or alcoholic beverages by minors occurs constitutes a public nuisance and an immediate threat to public health and safety and shall be summarily abated by the chief of police by all reasonable means including, but not limited to, an order requiring the gathering to be disbanded and/or a citation under this chapter as well as a citation and/or arrest under any other applicable ordinances or state statues. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

9.02.120 Cumulative remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by the city of Benicia of any right to seek reimbursement for actual response costs through other legal remedies or procedures. (Ord. 07-19 § 3).

Chapter 9.04
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION1
Sections:

9.04.010    Public consumption prohibited.

9.04.020    Exceptions.

9.04.030    Alcohol permit.

9.04.040    Repealed.

9.04.010 Public consumption prohibited.
Except as provided in BMC 9.04.020, it is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, lane, way, highway or parking lot; or upon the grounds of any public building or facility; or upon any private parking lot, including unimproved land suitable and used for the parking of vehicles, which is open to the public, whether or not any fee is charged for the entry to or use of space in the parking lot.

The consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks and playgrounds is regulated by Chapter 12.28 BMC. (Ord. 95-9 N.S.; Ord. 76-21 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 12-1001).

9.04.020 Exceptions.
A. BMC 9.04.010 shall not be construed as to make it unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage or to possess an open container of alcoholic beverage within any public building or facility, or upon any public golf course or golf driving range; further, BMC 9.04.010 shall not be construed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited or made punishable by any law of the state.

B. It shall not be unlawful for a person to consume an alcoholic beverage or possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage when the person is attending a function operating under an alcohol permit issued in accordance with BMC 9.04.030. (Ord. 95-9 N.S.; Ord. 76-21 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 12-1002).

9.04.030 Alcohol permit.
No person shall give or sell to another person any alcoholic beverage while in or upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, lane, way, highway or parking lot; or in any public park or playground, or upon the grounds of any public building or facility; or upon any private parking lot, including unimproved lands suitable and used for the parking of vehicles, which is open to the public, whether or not any fee is charged for the entry to or use of space in the parking lot; without first obtaining a permit issued by the city. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the procedure for obtaining an alcohol permit, including the fees for such permits. (Ord. 95-9 N.S.).

9.04.040 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 95-9 N.S.; Ord. 76-21 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 12-1003).

1
    For statutory provisions on public intoxication, see Penal Code § 647(f).


Chapter 9.06
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:

9.06.010    Definitions.

9.06.020    Regulation of smoking in city-owned facilities.

9.06.030    Prohibition of smoking in designated enclosed places.

9.06.040    Regulation of smoking in places of employment.

9.06.050    Smoking – Optional areas.

9.06.060    Posting requirements.

9.06.070    Enforcement.

9.06.080    Penalties.

9.06.090    Nonretaliation.

9.06.100    Other applicable laws.

9.06.110    Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places.

9.06.120    Existing tobacco shops.

9.06.130    Prohibition of all smoke lounges.

9.06.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

“Bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages on the premises.

“Electronic smoking device” means an electronic device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine, or other substances, including any component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.

“Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit.

“Employer” means any person, partnership, or corporation, including municipal corporation, who employs the services of more than three persons.

“Enclosed” means closed in by a roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

“Hookah” means the use of a water pipe, and any associated products and devices, in order to produce fumes, smoke, and/or vapor from the burning of material including, but not limited to, tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter.

“Place of employment” means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant is not a “place of employment.”

“Restaurant” means an establishment that sells, prepares, and/or serves primarily food to its guests and the dining areas in which said food is consumed.

“Smoke lounge” means any business where smoking is the primary activity and usually, but not always, accompanied by the sale of tobacco and other smoking paraphernalia, specifically, but not limited to, cigar clubs and hookah lounges.

“Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or any plant product intended for human inhalation. “Plant product” includes items such as tobacco or marijuana and includes both natural and synthetic forms of the product.

“Sports arena” means a sports pavilion, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice rink, bowling alley, and other similar place where members of the public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.

“Tobacco shop” means a retail or wholesale store that stands independently from any restaurant, bar, or other place of amusement, whose exclusive purpose, and principal business, is in the sale of tobacco and tobacco related paraphernalia evidenced by more than 50 percent of the total floor and display area being devoted to the sale of these products and more than 70 percent of gross sales deriving from the sale of said product. (Ord. 17-05 §§ 3, 4, 5; Ord. 13-10 § 2; Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.020 Regulation of smoking in city-owned facilities.
All enclosed facilities owned by the city of Benicia shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.030 Prohibition of smoking in designated enclosed places.
Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places within the city:

A. All enclosed areas available to and customarily used by the general public and all businesses patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, retail stores, hotels and motels, pharmacies, banks, attorneys’ offices and other offices;

B. Within all restaurants having an occupied capacity of 50 or more persons; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent (1) the designating of a contiguous area within a restaurant that contains no more than 50 percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant as a smoking area, or (2) the providing of separate rooms designated as smoking rooms, so long as said rooms do not contain more than 50 percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant;

C. Waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors’ and dentists’ offices, except that health facilities shall also be subject to the provisions of BMC 9.06.040 regulating smoking in places of employment;

D. Elevators, public restrooms, indoor services lines, buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city while within the boundaries of the county, and in ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit (1) establishing separate waiting areas for smokers and nonsmokers, or (2) establishing at least 50 percent of a given waiting area as a nonsmoking area;

E. In public areas of museums and galleries;

F. Enclosed theaters, auditoriums, and halls which are used for motion pictures, stage dramas, and musical performances, ballets or other exhibitions, except when smoking is part of any such production;

G. Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except those areas of such establishments set aside for the purpose of serving food and drink, restrooms and offices, and areas thereof not open to the public, which may be otherwise regulated by this chapter;

H. Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another public agency, which are available to and are customarily used by the general public, to the extent that the same are subject to the jurisdiction of the city;

I. Sports arenas and convention halls, except in designated smoking areas;

J. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.040 Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
A. It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmokers within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas.

B. Within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, each employer and each place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy, which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements:

1. Prohibition of smoking in conference and meeting rooms, restrooms, medical facilities, hallways and elevators.

2. Any employee in a place of employment shall be given the right to designate his or her immediate work area as a nonsmoking area and to post the same with an appropriate sign or signs, to be provided by the employer. The policy adopted by the employer shall include a reasonable definition of the term “immediate work area.”

3. In any dispute arising under this smoking policy, the rights of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence.

4. Provision and maintenance of a separate and contiguous nonsmoking area of not less than 50 percent of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges.

C. The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption, and at least annually thereafter.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.050 Smoking – Optional areas.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:

A. Private residences;

B. Bars;

C. Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests;

D. Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia;

E. Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions;

F. A private residence which may serve as a place of employment except when used as a child care or a health care facility. Board and care facilities shall provide smoke-free living quarters for nonsmoking boarders;

G. A private enclosed place occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such a place may be visited by nonsmokers, and a private enclosed office, excepting places in which smoking is prohibited by the fire department or by any other law, ordinance or regulation. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.060 Posting requirements.
A. “Smoking” or “No Smoking” signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place.

B. Every restaurant regulated by this chapter will have posted at its entrance a sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and every patron shall be asked as to his or her preference. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.070 Enforcement.
A. Enforcement shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designees.

B. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the city manager or his/her designees.

C. Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.080 Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions of this chapter to fail to: properly post signs required hereunder; to provide signs for the use of employees in designating their areas; to properly set aside “No Smoking” areas; to adopt a smoking restriction policy; or to comply with any other requirements of this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area restricted by the provisions of this chapter.

C. Any person/business who violates subsections (A) or (B) of this section, or any other provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

1. A fine, not exceeding $100.00 for first violation;

2. A fine, not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of this chapter within one year;

3. A fine, not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of this chapter within one year.

D. Each day during which this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate and distinguishable violation of this chapter. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.090 Nonretaliation.
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.100 Other applicable laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 87-10 N.S. § 3, 1987).

9.06.110 Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places.
A. Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet of all entrance(s), exit(s), open windows, ventilation intake systems and covered entryways of any building that is (1) owned or leased by the city of Benicia and (2) used by the city of Benicia. All city of Benicia buildings will post “No Smoking Within 20 Feet” signs outside of all entrance(s), exit(s), and ventilation intake systems.

B. Smoking is prohibited within city or publicly owned or controlled parks, recreational trails, or recreational facilities. (Ord. 17-05 § 6; Ord. 03-1, 2003).

9.06.120 Existing tobacco shops.
Tobacco shops shall not permit smoking on the premises. Convenience stores, as well as retail and wholesale stores that deal primarily in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia, are subject to the indoor smoking restrictions of this chapter. (Ord. 13-10 § 2).

9.06.130 Prohibition of all smoke lounges.
No person shall establish, maintain, manage or operate any smoke lounge or permit or allow any smoke lounge to be established, maintained, managed or operated within any building or structure owned, occupied, or controlled by him/her. (Ord. 13-10 § 2).

Chapter 9.08
INDECENT EXPOSURE
Sections:

9.08.010  Legislative authorization – Definitions.

9.08.020  Prohibition against display of female breasts.

9.08.030  Prohibition against display of private parts.

9.08.040  Accessories.

9.08.050  Exceptions.

9.08.010 Legislative authorization – Definitions.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this chapter which also are used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the respective words used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Added during 1980 codification).

9.08.020 Prohibition against display of female breasts.
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

A. Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such straight line; or

B. Employs any device or covering, which is intended to stimulate such portions of the breast; or

C. Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (Added during 1980 codification).

9.08.030 Prohibition against display of private parts.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

A. Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks, or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair of such person, while participating in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer; or

B. Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose himself or herself, or to employ any such device. (Added during 1980 codification).

9.08.040 Accessories.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any provision of this chapter. (Added during 1980 codification).

9.08.050 Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to:

A. A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

B. Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Added during 1980 codification).

Chapter 9.12
LITTERING1
Sections:

9.12.010  Deposit of rubbish on streets prohibited.

9.12.020  Littering prohibited.

9.12.030  Depositing refuse on private property prohibited.

9.12.040  Repealed.

9.12.010 Deposit of rubbish on streets prohibited.
No person shall dump or place or permit to accumulate in or upon any land or ditch, road, street, sidewalk, or alley within the city any dead animal, butcher’s offal, fish or parts of fish, or any waste vegetable or animal matter, or any garbage, filth, rubbish, waste or refuse except in an approved refuse receptacle or in a place approved as a dump. This does not prohibit the dumping of clean fill on private property, unless such dumping creates a nuisance. No person upon any sidewalk shall carry so as to be offensive to other persons any rubbish, garbage or filth. (Ord. 79-5 N.S. § 1, 1979).

9.12.020 Littering prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, place, scatter, or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed, scattered, or deposited, upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or public place in the city, any handbills, posters, dodgers, advertisements, paper, sweepings, feathers, hay, straw, grass, weeds, tree and shrub trimmings, glass, crockery, tins, fruit, vegetables, manure, offal, dead animals, filth, debris, swill, or any garbage, rubbish, or refuse, except as specifically provided for in this section; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to grass, weeds, leaves, tree and shrub trimmings, and yard sweepings, when placed out in the prescribed manner for regularly scheduled pickup as provided in this code. (Ord. 79-5 N.S. § 2, 1979).

9.12.030 Depositing refuse on private property prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop, leave, dump, bury, burn, place, keep, accumulate, or otherwise dispose of any garbage, refuse or rubbish upon the private property of another person either with or without intent to later remove the same without the consent of the other person, and then only in an approved garbage or refuse receptacle intended for regularly scheduled pickup. (Ord. 79-5 N.S. § 3, 1979).

9.12.040 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 79-5 N.S. § 5, 1979).

1 For statutory provisions on littering, see Penal Code § 374 et seq.


Chapter 9.16
TRESPASSING1
Sections:

9.16.010  Entry prohibited.

9.16.020  Remaining on premises prohibited.

9.16.030  Exceptions.

9.16.040  Repealed.

9.16.010 Entry prohibited.
No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee or other person in charge of private property or business premises shall enter upon such private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to keep off or keep away therefrom. (Ord. 71-4 N.S. § 1(b), 1971).

9.16.020 Remaining on premises prohibited.
No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof to remove therefrom. (Ord. 71-4 N.S. § 1(a), 1971).

9.16.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:

A. Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin;

B. Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers;

C. Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities;

D. Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions not involving offensive personal conduct; or

E. Where the person who is upon another’s private property or business premises is there under claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies: marital and post-marital disputes; child custody or visitation disputes; disputes regarding title to or rights in real property; landlord-tenant disputes; disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute; employer-employee disputes; business-type disputes such as those between partners; debtor-creditor disputes; and instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court. (Ord. 71-4 N.S. § 1(c), 1971).

9.16.040 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 71-4 N.S. § 2, 1971).

1 For statutory provisions on trespass to property, see Penal Code §§ 602 and 602.5.


Chapter 9.20
FORTUNETELLING
Sections:

9.20.010    Fortunetelling permit required.

9.20.020    Fortunetelling permit requirements.

9.20.030    Permit – Conditions – Renewal, suspension, revocation.

9.20.040    Appeal – Denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of permit.

9.20.010 Fortunetelling permit required.
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall conduct or carry on, in exchange for any fee, consideration or thing of value, the business of fortunetelling, astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, mediumship, prophecy, augury, divination, magic or necromancy without first obtaining a permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 93-19 N.S. § 2, 1993).

9.20.020 Fortunetelling permit requirements.
A. Application. An applicant for a fortunetelling permit under this chapter must file with the chief of police a sworn, written application on a form to be furnished by the police department, which shall provide the following information:

1. Name and description of the applicant;

2. Address, both business and residential;

3. A brief description of the nature of the business or profession to be conducted;

4. Driver’s license number and date of birth of applicant;

5. The location(s) of any other similar business which the applicant has operated or at which the applicant has been employed, and the length of time at each such location;

6. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

7. Evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility;

8. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and

9. The payment of a fee, as established by the city council, for the cost of the investigation.

B. Investigation and Issuance.

1. The application shall be referred to the chief of police who shall cause such investigation, including fingerprinting of the applicant, to be made as necessary for the protection of the public good.

2. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant is found to have committed one or more of the acts described in BMC 9.20.030(A) through (D), the chief of police shall disapprove such application, and state in writing reasons for the same and return the application to the applicant.

3. If, as a result of such investigation, none of the conditions in BMC 9.20.030(A) through (D) are found, the chief of police shall approve the application. Upon payment of the permit fee, the chief of police shall issue the permit to the applicant. Such permit shall contain the signatures of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative. The police department shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. (Ord. 93-19 N.S. § 2, 1993).

9.20.030 Permit – Conditions – Renewal, suspension, revocation.
Upon submission of an application for renewal of a permit under this chapter, or at any time during the existence of said permit, the chief of police may conduct an investigation of the holder of said permit, may deny the application for renewal, or may suspend or revoke said permit upon a finding that the holder of said permit:

A. Has been convicted of any crime which is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or manner of operation of the activities governed by this chapter;

B. Has done any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit himself or another, or substantially injure another;

C. Has knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in any application for a permit or any renewal thereof; or

D. Has failed to pay any fees required by this code for said permit. (Ord. 93-19 N.S. § 2, 1993).

9.20.040 Appeal – Denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of permit.
Upon written notification of the denial of an application for renewal of a permit, or upon suspension or revocation of said permit, the holder of said permit may appeal said denial, suspension or revocation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not suspend said denial, suspension or revocation. If no appeal is filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. (Ord. 07-40 § 1; Ord. 93-19 N.S. § 2, 1993).

Chapter 9.24
POWER OF POLICE OFFICERS TO ENFORCE A MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE
Sections:

9.24.010  Findings.

9.24.020  Purpose.

9.24.030  Definitions.

9.24.040  Authority to enforce a minimum separation distance during investigation and/or removal of potential ordnance and explosives – Unauthorized entry into area prohibited.

9.24.050  Cost recovery.

9.24.010 Findings.
The city council finds as follows:

A. Military ordnance and explosives (OE) have been located on land within the Benicia city limits that was previously used by the U.S. Army as part of the Benicia Arsenal. The OE was apparently left when the U.S. Army discontinued use of the Benicia Arsenal. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps), the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) and private landowner(s) are involved, or may become involved, in the investigation and removal of potential OE in certain areas of the former Benicia Arsenal.

B. In accordance with the Benicia general plan, it is the goal of the city of Benicia to "[e]nsure that existing and future neighborhoods are safe from risks to public health that could result from exposure to hazardous materials." (See Goal 4.7).

C. To carry out Goal 4.7, the general plan directs the city to provide protection from hazards including OE and to require that sites suspected to have OE be remediated as required by appropriate regulatory agencies before development can occur. (See, for example, Policies 4.7.3, 4.7.4, 4.7.5 and Program 4.7.F.)

D. Public health and safety is a primary concern during investigation and removal of potential OE. Although the procedures approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the DTSC are designed for safety, additional precautions are needed because OE, if unintentionally detonated, could cause physical harm.

E. To provide for public safety during investigation and cleanup of potential OE, the city of Benicia police department will enforce a minimum separation distance where OE is being investigated and removed. The purpose of this minimum separation distance is for the protection of the public from a potential blast and fragmentation hazard created by an unintentional detonation. The appropriate minimum separation distance will be determined in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

F. There are existing houses and businesses within the anticipated minimum separation distance. During the hours when the potential OE is being investigated and/or removed, occupants of those houses and businesses as well as other persons not authorized to be within the minimum separation distance will be required to leave the area. (Ord. 01-2).

9.24.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public safety and welfare during the investigation and removal of potential OE in the city of Benicia. This chapter shall provide police officers with the ability to enforce the minimum separation distance surrounding the sites where OE is being investigated and removed. (Ord. 01-2).

9.24.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:

A. "DTSC" means the California Department of Toxic Substances Control.

B. "Minimum separation distance" is the minimum distance from the area where potential OE is being investigated and removed that persons must vacate during working hours, which minimum separation distance shall be determined in accordance with procedures established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

C. "OE" means ordnance and explosives.

D. "Person" means an individual, business, or other legal entity.

E. "Working hours" means the hours during which work plans, approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the DTSC, to investigate and remove potential OE will be completed. Such working hours are generally expected to be between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. (Ord. 01-2).

9.24.040 Authority to enforce a minimum separation distance during investigation and/or removal of potential ordnance and explosives – Unauthorized entry into area prohibited.
A. During the investigation and removal of potential OE within Benicia’s city limits, police officers of the city of Benicia are hereby authorized to assist security personnel engaged by the contractor or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers conducting the cleanup activities in preparing for, supervising, and enforcing the implementation of the minimum separation distance. Such assistance may include ordering persons residing or doing business or otherwise present within the minimum separation distance and not authorized to remain in the area to vacate such area during working hours. The minimum separation distance may be designated with signs, markers, and/or guards.

B. Any unauthorized person who wilfully and knowingly enters or attempts to enter a closed area pursuant to subsection (A) of this section or who wilfully remains within the area after receiving notice from the contractor’s or U.S. Army Corps’ security personnel or a police officer to leave the area shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be arrested. (Ord. 01-2).

9.24.050 Cost recovery.
Extraordinary costs related to enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the property owner and/or the state or federal agency responsible for the investigation and removal of any ordnance. Extraordinary costs include, but are not limited to, items such as staff time, including overtime and overhead, materials and equipment. The costs may be recovered pursuant to Government Code Section 38773 et seq. as the abatement of a nuisance or pursuant to any other legal method. (Ord. 01-2).

Chapter 9.28
YOUTH PROTECTION
Sections:

Article I. Nighttime Curfew

9.28.010    Purpose and intent.

9.28.020    Definitions.

9.28.030    Offenses.

9.28.040    Defenses.

9.28.050    Enforcement.

9.28.060    Penalties.

Article II. Daytime Curfew

9.28.070    Purpose and intent.

9.28.080    Definitions.

9.28.090    Offenses.

9.28.100    Lawful defenses for absence from school.

9.28.110    Enforcement – Penalties.

9.28.120    Penalties.

Article I. Nighttime Curfew

9.28.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council finds that a juvenile curfew ordinance is necessary and desirable because the protection of minors warrants a higher degree of governmental regulation. This higher degree of regulation is premised upon the peculiar vulnerability of children and minors’ inability to make critical decisions in an informed and mature manner. The city recognizes a compelling interest in preserving the safety of the community generally and providing a higher degree of protection for its minors specifically during nighttime hours. (Ord. 98-4).

9.28.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Curfew hours” shall mean the period from 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday nights and from 12:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights until 5:00 a.m. the following morning.

B. “Emergency” shall mean any unforeseen combination of circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, explosion, or any condition requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

C. “Establishment” shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

D. “Guardian” shall mean (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

E. “Loiter” shall mean to delay an activity, errand, or journey with aimless idle stops and purposeless distractions, to remain in a place in an idle manner, to hang around aimlessly or without real necessity.

F. “Minor” shall mean any person under 18 years of age.

G. “Operator” shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment.

H. “Parent” shall mean a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor.

I. “Public place” shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

J. “Remain” shall mean (1) to stay behind while others withdraw, to tarry, to stay, or (2) to fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.

K. “Responsible adult” shall mean a person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

L. “Serious bodily injury” shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 98-4).

9.28.030 Offenses.
It is unlawful for:

A. Any minor to remain or loiter in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or

B. Any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, allow the minor to remain or loiter in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. (Ord. 98-4).

9.28.040 Defenses.
It is a defense to prosecution of the above offenses that the minor was:

A. Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or by a responsible adult; or

B. On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian or responsible adult without detour or delay; or

C. In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel, and such driving during curfew hours does not constitute loitering; or

D. Engaged in employment, or going to or returning home from employment without detour or delay; or

E. Involved in an emergency; or

F. On the sidewalk adjacent to the minor’s residence, providing the minor is not otherwise violating the law; or

G. Attending an official school, religious or other adult-supervised recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor; or going to or returning home from an official school, religious or other adult-supervised recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization or other similar entity, without detour or delay; or

H. Emancipated pursuant to law; or

I. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or

J. Traveling from an activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop. (Ord. 11-01 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 98-4).

9.28.050 Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and based upon the minor’s response(s) and other circumstances, no defense under BMC 9.28.040 appears present or applicable. (Ord. 98-4).

9.28.060 Penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Any person who violates the offenses described in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord. 98-4).

Article II. Daytime Curfew

9.28.070 Purpose and intent.
State law requires all persons between the ages of six and 18 to attend school. Regular school attendance provides important benefits not only to the students themselves but also to the health, safety, and welfare of all residents within the city. Regular school attendance promotes employability upon graduation and reduces delinquency as well as the potential for future dependence upon public assistance.

The community as a whole suffers when a minor student is not attending school. Truancy or unexcused absenteeism from school results in a loss of educational opportunities to the student and a loss of revenue to the school. Truancy also often leads to vandalism, petty theft, daytime burglaries, and other criminal activity. Truants often tend to loiter in and about public places; frequently, persons going about their lawful business as well as public property become targets of the delinquent behaviors of truants when they should be in school. This is not intended to abridge or interfere with the lawful rights of parents or legal guardians or to contravene or supersede the laws of the state of California dealing with such matters.

This article is intended to assist with the policing of public places in the city during specified daytime hours and the prevention of crimes by and against minors during those hours. It is not intended to interfere with the enforcement of state laws regulating truancy or with the school district’s truancy programs. This article is intended to provide the city with an additional proactive intervention tool to protect youth. (Ord. 08-17 § 1).

9.28.080 Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

A. “Curfew hours” shall mean the period of the minor’s regular scheduled school time on school days.

B. “Emergency” shall mean any unforeseen combination of circumstances or a situation that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, explosion, or any condition requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

C. “Establishment” shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

D. “Guardian” shall mean:

1. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of a minor; or

2. A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

E. “Loiter” shall mean to delay an activity, errand, or journey with aimless idle stops and purposeless distractions, to remain in a place in an idle manner, to hang around aimlessly or without real necessity.

F. “Minor” shall mean any person under 18 years of age.

G. “Operator” shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment.

H. “Parent” shall mean a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of a minor.

I. “Public place” shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

J. “Remain” shall mean:

1. To stay behind while others withdraw, to tarry, to stay; or

2. To fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace officer, the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.

K. “Responsible adult” shall mean a person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

L. “Serious bodily injury” shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 08-17 § 1).

9.28.090 Offenses.
It is unlawful for any minor subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education to be found away from his or her home during the minor’s regular scheduled school time when absent from school within the city without lawful defense as defined herein in BMC 9.28.100. (Ord. 08-17 § 1).

9.28.100 Lawful defenses for absence from school.
A. When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having care or custody of the minor.

B. When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian, or other adult person having care or custody of the minor.

C. When the minor is going or coming directly to or from his or her place of gainful employment or to or from a medical, dental or other health care appointment.

D. When the minor has permission to leave for lunch or school-related activity.

E. When the minor is going or coming directly to or from a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession, occupation or program in which the minor is lawfully engaged, such as a work study or work experience program, subject to verification by a proper school authority.

F. When the minor is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continued education.

G. When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school under the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any applicable state or federal law.

H. When the minor is going directly to or from an event or activity that is directly related to any medical condition of a parent or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.

I. Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly.

J. Traveling from an activity listed in this section to another activity listed in this section, without any detour or stop. (Ord. 11-01 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 08-17 § 1).

9.28.110 Enforcement – Penalties.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in a public place or on the premises of an establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and, based upon the minor’s response(s) and other circumstances, no defense under BMC 9.28.100 appears present or applicable. (Ord. 08-17 § 1).

9.28.120 Penalties.
Any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed or continued. Any person who violates the offenses described in this article shall be guilty of an infraction.

The fine for this violation shall be $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense within one calendar year of the first offense, and $200.00 for the third and consecutive offense(s) within one year from the second offense. In lieu of paying the fine, first-time offenders who are eligible for the city’s diversion program may provide community service through the diversion program. (Ord. 08-17 § 1).

Chapter 9.32
WEAPONS1
Sections:

9.32.010  Concealed weapons – Generally.

9.32.020  Concealed weapons – License.

9.32.030  Repealed.

9.32.040  Use of firearms.

9.32.050  Prohibited discharge – Designated.

9.32.060  Prohibited discharge.

9.32.010 Concealed weapons – Generally.
A. It is unlawful for any person not being a peace officer and not having a permit from the chief of police of this city to carry concealed on his person in the corporate limits of this city any pistol, revolver or other firearm.

B. "Pistol," "revolver" and "firearm" as used in this section and in BMC 9.32.020 apply to and include any device, designated to be used as a weapon, from which is expelled a projectile by force of any explosion, or other form of combustion, and which has a barrel less than 12 inches in length. (Amended during 1980 codification; Ord. 214 M.C. § 1, 1882).

9.32.020 Concealed weapons – License.
Upon proof that the person applying is of good moral character and that good cause exists for the issuance, the chief of police may issue to such person a license to carry concealed a pistol, revolver or other firearm for a period of one year from the date of the license. (Amended during 1980 codification; Ord. 214 M.C. § 2, 1882).

9.32.030 Concealed weapons – Violation and penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Added during 1980 codification; Ord. 214 M.C. § 3, 1882).

9.32.040 Use of firearms.
A. As used in this section, "firearm" denotes a weapon from which a missile is discharged by gunpowder or other explosive.

B. It is a misdemeanor for any person not being a peace officer to discharge a firearm within the city limits except under those circumstances which would justify such action in defense of person or property. (Ord. 214-A M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1952).

9.32.050 Prohibited discharge – Designated.
A. It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause the discharge of any BB gun, air pistol, air rifle or gun, bow, crossbow, slingshot or any other mechanical contrivance designed to propel a bullet, pellet, projectile or arrow within the city limits or within 100 yards of any occupied dwelling which is situated in the city.

B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any situation where an adult, or a minor in the presence of and under the temporary or permanent custody and care of an adult, causes the discharge of any weapon named in this section. (Ord. 214-B M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1956).

9.32.060 Prohibited discharge.
Any weapon used in violation of BMC 9.32.050 and lawfully taken into possession by any arresting officer or person is subject to confiscation thereof upon the conviction of such a violation. (Ord. 03-9 § 17; Ord. 214-B M.C. § 3, 1956).

1 For statutory provisions on carrying concealed weapons, see Penal Code § 12020 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to grant licenses to carry concealed a pistol, revolver, or other firearm, see Penal Code § 12050 et seq.; for provisions on discharging firearms, see Penal Code § 246.


Chapter 9.36
CONDUCT IN PUBLIC LIBRARY
Sections:

9.36.010  Scope.

9.36.020  Unlawful conduct.

9.36.030  Prohibited noises.

9.36.010 Scope.
This chapter governs the conduct of and applies to each person in or about the public library. (Ord. 74-5 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-1001).

9.36.020 Unlawful conduct.
It is unlawful for a person in or about the public library to:

A. Smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match or use any flame-producing device within an area posted with a "No Smoking" sign;

B. Make a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the health, peace, or safety of others;

C. Engage in riotous, threatening or indecent conduct or abusive, threatening, or profane or indecent language;

D. Maliciously deface, break, or injure any item of property belonging to the city;

E. Explode or cause to be exploded a device which produces a loud or unusual noise or a foul or offensive odor;

F. Eat or drink a food or beverage except when given permission to do so by an employee of the library;

G. Give a name, address or telephone number, other than his own lawful name, address or telephone number, for the purpose of using, participating in a program or receiving library material or equipment. (Ord. 74-5 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-1002).

9.36.030 Prohibited noises.
A. For the purpose of the prohibition set forth in BMC 9.36.020(B), the following acts are declared to be loud, unnecessary and disturbing noises in violation of BMC 9.36.020(B):

1. Radios, Phonographs, Etc. The playing, operating or permitting to be played or operated a radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, except when played, used, or operated by or under the direction of an employee of the library, or representative of Solano County or the city of Benicia;

2. Yelling, Shouting, Etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling, loud talking or singing, except when done under the direction of an employee of the library;

3. Excessive Noise. The creation of any excessive noise adjacent to the library while the library is in use.

B. This enumeration is not exclusive. (Ord. 74-5 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-1003).

Chapter 9.40
INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS
Sections:

9.40.010  Unlawful acts.

9.40.020  Repealed.

9.40.010 Unlawful acts.
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously torture, tease, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department while any such dog is in the performance of the functions or duties of the police department, or to wilfully interfere with any such dog while it is being used in the performance of any of the functions or duties of the police department. (Ord. 79-11 N.S. § 1, 1979).

9.40.020 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 79-11 N.S. § 3, 1979).

Chapter 9.44
ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:

9.44.010    Purpose and intent.

9.44.020    Definitions.

9.44.030    Exemptions.

9.44.040    Requirements and duties.

9.44.050    Prohibitions.

9.44.060    Enforcement – Violations and penalties.

9.44.070    Suspension of police response.

9.44.080    Registration of alarm agents.

9.44.090    Additional rules and regulations.

9.44.100    Nonliability.

9.44.010 Purpose and intent.
A. The city council finds that the incidence of false alarms within the city is unreasonably high, reaching 99 percent of all alarm calls. The problems of excessive false alarms include:

1. A high dollar cost and consequent waste of resources in response to false alarms;

2. The congestion of telephone communication into the police department and of radio communication between the police department and the patrol units;

3. The incidence of accidents and potential accidents during emergency responses to false alarms;

4. The diversion of police officers from other duties and possible delays in answering valid calls for service; and

5. Potential danger to an officer who could develop a complacent attitude toward alarm calls after investigating repeated false alarms.

B. False alarms and police response to them pose a hazard to police officers and the general public.

C. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate police response to burglar, holdup, and other alarms. Such regulation is necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the people.

D. The purpose of this chapter is also to encourage alarm users to reduce the high number of false alarms by:

1. Repairing or correcting defective or overly sensitive alarm systems;

2. Training themselves and their business employees or family members in the proper and careful use of the alarm system; and

3. Installing good quality, reliable alarm systems. (Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.020 Definitions.
“Alarm administrator” means a person or persons designated by the city to administer the provisions of this chapter.

“Alarm company” means a business entity, whether an individual, partnership, company, firm, or corporation, subject to the Alarm Company Act under Business and Professions Code Chapter 11.6, which is engaged in selling, leasing, installing, maintaining, moving, altering, repairing, replacing, responding or monitoring an alarm system. This entity shall be licensed in compliance with city, county and state laws.

“Alarm permit” means a permit issued to an alarm user by the city allowing the operation of an alarm system within the city of Benicia.

“Alarm signal” means a detectable signal, audible or visible, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond.

“Alarm system” means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.

“Alarm user” means any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning, leasing, or operating an alarm system, or the current residents or leasers whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises.

“Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.

“Cancellation” means termination of response by the police department when the alarm company notifies the police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed.

“City” means the city of Benicia or its agent.

“Compliance standards” means equipment and installation methods shall comply with all appropriate nationally recognized testing laboratories and American National Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements.

“Confirmation” means an attempt by the alarm system monitoring company to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement response. A second call shall be made to an alternate number provided by the alarm user if the first attempt fails. Except in case of a fire, panic or robbery-in-progress alarm or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified as defined in ANSI/CSAA CS-V-01-2016 (or current version).

“False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system when, upon inspection by the police department, there is no evidence of unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm does not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature.

“Local alarm” means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user.

“Permit year” means a 12-month period beginning on the day and month on which an alarm permit is issued.

“Runaway alarm” means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The police department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. (Ord. 17-10 § 3; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.030 Exemptions.
This chapter does not apply to alarms on vehicles, boats, boat trailers, house trailers or recreational vehicles or fire alarms. (Ord. 17-10 § 4; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.040 Requirements and duties.
A. A user of an alarm system must provide to the alarm company or alarm company’s answering service the name and telephone number of one person who can respond with keys to the premises and alarm system to provide to the city when needed.

B. Audible Alarm Requirements. Every person owning or maintaining an audible alarm shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of the persons to be notified to render repairs or services during any hour of the day or night the burglar alarm rings. Such notice shall be posted near the alarm in such a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building. In addition to the posting requirements referred to in this subsection, the occupant of the premises upon which any audible alarm is installed shall notify the police department of his name and the telephone number at which he may be reached at any time of the day or night; registration of the alarm system will satisfy this requirement. The alarm business or owner of any audible alarm shall be responsible for deactivating any alarm within 30 minutes after notification or after reasonable efforts have been made to notify the owner or alarm business that such alarm has been activated and is ringing. The ringing of any alarm for a period in excess of 30 minutes after such notification or effort of notification has been made is declared to be a public nuisance and subject to misdemeanor prosecution, or summary abatement as a nuisance pursuant to the Benicia Municipal Code.

C. A user or his authorized representative shall respond to all activated alarms as required above.

D. Each burglar alarm installed after the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective shall be equipped with a minimum 30-second delay device with an audible sound or visual indication to notify any person on the premises of a potential false alarm; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to burglar alarm systems that are required to have Underwriters’ Laboratories certification for insurance purposes.

E. Permit Required. No person shall use an alarm system without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the city. A fee will be required for the initial registration and annual renewals established by council resolution. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the user shall provide the permit number to the alarm company to facilitate law enforcement dispatch.

1. Application. The permit shall be requested on an application form provided by the city. An alarm user has the duty to obtain an application from the city.

2. Transfer of Possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person (user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm permit within 30 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable.

3. Reporting Updated Information. Whenever the information provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall provide correct information to the city within 30 days of the change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit holders will receive from the city a form requesting updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form to the city whether or not any of the requested information has changed; failure to comply will constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty.

4. Multiple Alarm Systems. If an alarm user has one or more alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each structure and/or tenant.

F. Duties of the Alarm User.

1. Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms.

2. Provide the alarm company the permit number. (The number must be provided to the communications center by the alarm company to facilitate dispatch.)

3. Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system’s location within a reasonable amount of time when notified by the police department.

4. Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.

5. An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of the location of the alarm system.

G. Duties of the Alarm Company.

1. Any person engaged in the alarm business in the city shall comply with the following:

a. Obtain and maintain the required state alarm license(s), and city business license.

b. Provide name, address, and telephone numbers of the alarm company license holder or a designee who can be called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and be able to respond to an alarm call, when notified, within a reasonable amount of time.

c. Be able to provide the most current contact information for the alarm user and to contact a key holder for a response, if requested.

2. Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm company must provide instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user.

3. Provide written information (to the city) of how to obtain service from the alarm company for the alarm system.

4. Verified Response. An alarm company performing monitoring services shall:

a. Attempt to confirm, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting dispatch. Telephone confirmation shall require, as a minimum, that a second call, also known as enhanced call confirmation (ECC), be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in case of a fire, panic or robbery-in-progress alarm or in cases where a crime-in-progress has been verified as defined in ANSI/CSAA CS-V-01-2016 (or current version).

b. Provide alarm user registration number to the city’s communications center to facilitate dispatch and/or cancellations.

c. Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm.

d. Communicate a cancellation to the city’s communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary. (Ord. 17-10 § 5; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.050 Prohibitions.
A. No person shall use or cause to be used any telephone device that automatically selects a public telephone line of the city, including, but not limited to, a 911 emergency line, and plays a prerecorded message to report an emergency without the written consent of the chief of police.

B. No person may connect or modify an alarm system terminating within the Benicia police station without the written consent of the chief of police.

C. It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm.

D. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than 15 minutes. (Ord. 17-10 § 6; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.060 Enforcement – Violations and penalties.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a violation of this code or pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.

B. A fine for failing to register an alarm system shall be paid to the city by an alarm user. A fine for each false alarm in excess of one false alarm during any 12-month period shall be paid to the city by an alarm user for each such false alarm signaled by the user’s equipment to which the Benicia police department responds. Such fines shall be established by city council resolution.

C. The city shall cause to be issued a monthly bill for the unpaid fines accrued during any monthly billing period and any prior periods. Such bills shall be due and payable within 30 days after the billing date.

D. A late payment penalty, as set forth below, shall be added to fines imposed under subsection (B) of this section when the fine is not paid within 30 days after the billing date.

1. A 10 percent penalty shall be assessed if payment is not received within 30 days after the first billing date;

2. An additional penalty of one percent of the amount then owed shall be assessed for each month thereafter that the fines and penalties remain unpaid.

E. The amount of any fine and late penalty assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and an action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction in the amount of the delinquent debt. Payment of any fine shall not prohibit criminal prosecution for the violation of any other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-10 § 7; Ord. 94-2 N.S. § 1, 1994; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.070 Suspension of police response.
A. The chief of police may suspend police alarm response for the following reasons:

1. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or

2. Failure to pay a fine and/or late penalty imposed within the time required by BMC 9.44.060;

3. A holdup alarm is intentionally activated when a burglary or other felony crime is not occurring; or

4. An alarm system emits more than five false alarms in any one location within a calendar year.

B. Before police alarm response is suspended, the chief of police shall hold a hearing. Notice of the time, date, place and nature of the hearing shall be sent to the alarm subscriber seven days before the hearing.

C. A decision suspending police alarm response may be appealed by filing written notice of appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

D. In a hearing under this section, participants shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

E. The chief of police may reinstate police alarm response when shown that the reason for suspension has been corrected. (Ord. 07-41 § 1; Ord. 94-2 N.S. § 2, 1994; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.080 Registration of alarm agents.
A. Under Business and Professions Code Section 7590 et seq., each alarm agent of an alarm company operator is required to register with the Bureau of Consumer Affairs.

B. An alarm agent shall register his name with the city and police department and file a copy of his state identification card. No fee is charged for registration in the city. (Ord. 17-10 § 8; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.090 Additional rules and regulations.
A. The chief of police may adopt rules and regulations he considers necessary to endorse conformance to this chapter.

B. Appeals Process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this chapter may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the police department within 10 business days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the city. The hearing officer’s decision is subject to review in the district court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.

C. Appeal Standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted.

D. Confidentiality. In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the city. (Ord. 17-10 § 9; Ord. 82-15 N.S. § 1, 1982).

9.44.100 Nonliability.
Nothing in this chapter shall create or be construed to create a duty upon the police department or the city to respond to any alarm whether or not the alarm was false. An alarm, like any other request for service from the police department, may be responded to within the resources of the police department at the time of the alarm. (Ord. 94-2 N.S. § 3, 1994).

Chapter 9.48
LOITERING IN PARKING LOTS
Sections:

9.48.010  Loitering prohibited – Penalty.

9.48.010 Loitering prohibited – Penalty.
A. It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or about any parking lot of a commercial business without the express or implied permission of the owner or person in lawful control of such business and/or parking lot.

B. Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 03-9 § 19; Ord. 83-3 N.S. § 1, 1983).

Chapter 9.52
MOBILE LIVING UNITS
Sections:

9.52.010  Definitions.

9.52.020  Use or occupancy of mobile living units for sleeping purposes prohibited – Exceptions.

9.52.030  Permitting property to be occupied or used for such purposes prohibited.

9.52.040  Overnight parking exception.

9.52.050  Exemption for parking or storage on owned or leased premises.

9.52.060  Enforcement.

9.52.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

A. "Mobile living unit" means a commercial coach, mobile home, recreational vehicle or travel trailer as each of these terms is defined in Chapter 1 (Sections 18000 through 18014), Part 2 (Mobile Homes) and in Chapter 1 (Sections 18200 through 18220), Part 2.1 (Mobile Home Parks Act), Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, and a camp trailer, house car, trailer coach or motor vehicle, as each of these terms is defined in Division 1 (Sections 100 through 680) of the Vehicle Code of the state, or any other vehicle or structure originally designed or permanently altered in such a manner as will permit occupancy or use thereof for living or sleeping purposes, and so designed or equipped with wheels, or capable of being mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on public streets or highways, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power, excepting a vehicle or device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

B. "Person" means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, company, corporation, trust or unincorporated association. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

9.52.020 Use or occupancy of mobile living units for sleeping purposes prohibited – Exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy or use any mobile living unit for living or sleeping purposes upon any street, alley, lane, highway, municipal off-street parking lot or other public place, or upon any lot, piece, parcel or tract of land within the city except as provided below and in BMC 9.52.040:

A. Within a lawfully established and licensed mobile home park; recreational trailer park; travel trailer park; labor camp subject to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 17000), Part 1, Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California; or other like facility which is designed and equipped to operate for the purpose of providing temporary or permanent accommodations for such mobile living units.

B. A mobile living unit may be occupied or used for sleeping purposes only by friends, relatives or visitors on land that is paved, zoned residential, and entirely owned by or leased to the host person for a period not to exceed two weeks in any one calendar year; provided, that said mobile living unit shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electric hookups; and provided further, that the host person shall receive no compensation for such occupancy or use. No such mobile living units shall discharge any litter, sewage, effluent or other matter except into sanitary facilities designed to dispose of such material.

C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any occupancy of a mobile living unit or mobile home which is permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city, or pursuant to permits granted thereunder, shall be permitted. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

9.52.030 Permitting property to be occupied or used for such purposes prohibited.
Subject to the exceptions set forth in BMC 9.52.020, it is unlawful for any owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot, piece, parcel, or tract of land within the city, whether for gain, hire, reward, gratuity or otherwise, to permit the same to be occupied or used by any mobile living unit for living or sleeping purposes; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to any use of land permitted by the zoning ordinance (BMC Title 17) or any permit granted thereunder. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

9.52.040 Overnight parking exception.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the temporary occupancy, for sleeping purposes, of a mobile living unit or any other motor vehicle within the city limits for a single period of not more than 24 hours in any one calendar year from the evening of one day to the morning of the next day, if lawfully parked on a public street or in a public parking facility, when the following conditions are met:

A. Said vehicle must conform to all applicable sections of the Vehicle Code of the state of California;

B. Said vehicle must have completely self-contained utilities meeting all applicable codes and laws of the state of California governing such mobile living units, as defined in BMC 9.52.010, or meeting such requirements in the jurisdiction of registration, if the vehicle is registered outside the state of California; this subsection is not applicable to motor vehicles;

C. The self-contained utilities described in subsection (B) of this section must include toilet facilities; this subsection is not applicable to motor vehicles;

D. Said vehicle, or the occupants thereof, may not discharge or discard any litter, effluent, sewage or other matter into any public street or way or upon any private property while parked as provided in this section. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

9.52.050 Exemption for parking or storage on owned or leased premises.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the owner or operator of any mobile living unit from parking or storing his mobile living unit upon premises owned, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied or used by him, so long as such mobile living unit is not occupied or used for living or sleeping purposes in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and as long as such mobile living unit is not in violation of zoning or any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the city. This chapter does not apply to temporary mobile offices. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

9.52.060 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer, the building official, the health officer and any other employee of the city designated by the city manager, in writing filed with the city clerk, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The building official, the health officer or any regularly appointed employee of the city so designated by the city manager is empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to Sections 836.5 and 853.6 of the Penal Code of the state for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 01-4 N.S., 2001).

Chapter 9.56
TRANSIENT REGISTRATION
Sections:

9.56.010    Definitions.

9.56.020    Registration.

9.56.030    Required identification.

9.56.040    Period of retention.

9.56.050    False information.

9.56.060    Register inspection.

9.56.070    Unlawful to occupy room without registering.

9.56.080    Room rates.

9.56.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the terms “hotel,” “occupancy,” “operator,” “person,” “rent,” and “transient” are as defined in BMC 3.24.020. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.020 Registration.
Every operator of a hotel in the city of Benicia shall, from and after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, maintain a register in which all transients shall enter the following information in a legible and organized fashion:

A. The true name(s) and address(es) of all persons taking occupancy;

B. The make, model, year, license plate number and state of registration of any automobile, trailer or other vehicle being used during their occupancy; or provide a parking permit to be displayed on the dash area of the vehicle while parked on the premises. Hotels with pay parking or event centers are exempt from this requirement;

C. The correct day, month and year in which the information was entered into the register or hotel database; and

D. The room(s) identification number to be occupied by such person(s). It shall be unlawful for any operator of a hotel in the city of Benicia to refuse or neglect to comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.030 Required identification.
The operator providing the hotel accommodations, as specified in BMC 9.56.020, shall require photographic identification to be presented upon registration that is sufficient to confirm the identity of the transient(s) taking occupancy, and shall set forth in the register the type of identification so presented. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.040 Period of retention.
All of the information received and set forth in the hotel register or database pursuant to the provisions outlined in BMC 9.56.020 shall be kept on site and in an accessible area for a period of not less than one year by the operator. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.050 False information.
It shall be unlawful for any transient(s) taking occupancy in a hotel within the city of Benicia to use or allow the use of any name other than his or her true name in so registering. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.060 Register inspection.
Such register as described in BMC 9.56.020 shall at all times during the hours that such hotel is occupied and open for business be available for inspection by any peace officer either having reasonable suspicion of criminal activity or with the consent of the business operator. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.070 Unlawful to occupy room without registering.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy any room or rooms as a transient or transients in any hotel without first having registered as provided by this chapter. The number of registered transients and guests of any transients shall not exceed the lawful occupancy for the room. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

9.56.080 Room rates.
Room rates shall be posted in a prominent location in the guest rooms. Posting room rates in the reception area is strongly encouraged. Guests shall not be charged in excess of posted rates. A range of rates is acceptable.

No owner of any hotel shall charge or accept money or other consideration by an hourly rate or any rate less than that which is charged or accepted for one full day’s accommodation within any 24-hour period. No guest room shall be rented more than once in any 24-hour period. (Ord. 09-18 § 1).

Chapter 9.60
CANNABIS PUBLIC SAFETY LICENSE
Sections:

9.60.010    Purpose and intent.

9.60.020    Definitions.

9.60.030    Cannabis businesses – General provisions.

9.60.040    Cannabis public safety license – General provisions.

9.60.050    Public safety license and public safety license renewal – Approval and denial.

9.60.060    Expiration and renewal of cannabis public safety licenses.

9.60.070    Suspension and revocation by chief of police.

9.60.080    Establishment of regulations.

9.60.090    No vested rights.

9.60.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a cannabis public safety license and the procedures for issuance of said license. A cannabis public safety license shall be required as a condition for the continued operation of any cannabis business as set forth in Chapter 17.84 BMC. The regulations in this chapter are meant to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Benicia. Cannabis businesses within the city must comply with all provisions of the Benicia Municipal Code for obtaining permits and licenses for a cannabis business and must comply with the state cannabis laws and all other applicable local and state laws. Nothing in this chapter permits activities that are otherwise illegal under state or local laws. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Applicant” means person who is required to file an application for a cannabis business under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, management member, employee, or agent of a cannabis business.

“Application for renewal” shall mean an application for a renewed cannabis public safety license, which application may be submitted by a licensee.

“Cannabis” shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f) and as it may be amended.

“Cannabis business” shall include:

1. Any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where a commercial cannabis activity takes place.

2. Any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location whether fixed or mobile where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any activity that requires a state license under California Business and Professions Code Division 10 including, but not limited to, cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis delivery, cannabis manufacturing, cannabis testing and cannabis retail sales, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness.

“Chief of police” or “police chief” shall mean the chief of the city of Benicia police department.

“Commercial cannabis activity” shall include the cultivation, possession, manufacturing, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products. “Commercial cannabis activity” shall not include those private activities that are made lawful under state and local law under Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1.

“Cultivation” shall mean any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

“Licensee” shall mean the cannabis business owner identified to the city as such, and to whom a city cannabis public safety license has been issued.

“Operator” shall mean any person responsible for management of the cannabis business, any person listed on the cannabis business’s chapters of incorporation, any person owning an interest in the cannabis business, and any person that supervises another employee of the cannabis business.

“Owner” shall have that meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(al) and as it may be amended.

“Property” shall mean the designated structure or structures and land specified in the cannabis public safety license application that is owned, leased or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted.

“State cannabis laws” means and includes California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45, 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996), and 11362.7 through 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program); California Business and Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”)); all state laws enacted or amended pursuant to SB-94, Chapter 27, Statutes of 2017; the California Attorney General’s Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use issued in August 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from time to time by action of the Attorney General; California Labor Code Section 147.5; California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 31020 and 34010 through 34021.5; California Fish and Game Code Section 12029; California Water Code Section 13276; all state regulations adopted pursuant to MAUCRSA; any license issued pursuant to MAUCRSA; and all other applicable laws of the state of California regulating cannabis or cannabis products.

“State license” shall mean a license from the state issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Division 10. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.030 Cannabis businesses – General provisions.
A. Cannabis Use Permit and Public Safety License Required to Operate. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, to conduct or carry on (or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on) in or upon property located within the city, the operation of a cannabis business unless that person has first obtained and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid cannabis use permit issued by the city for that property and that type of cannabis business and a valid cannabis public safety license issued by the city to the owner and/or operator of the cannabis business, pursuant to this chapter.

B. Imposition of Public Safety License Fees.

1. Every application for a cannabis public safety license or renewal of such license shall be accompanied by a license fee in an amount set forth by separate resolution of the city council, which amount is calculated to recover the city’s full cost of reviewing, issuing and administering said license or renewal or inspections. The application fee shall include the standard city fees for fingerprinting, photographing, and background check costs and shall be in addition to any other business license fee or permit fee imposed by the Benicia Municipal Code or other governmental agencies.

2. A fee for renewal of a public safety license will be due annually.

C. Conditions of Operation.

1. Security Plan. A licensee shall provide adequate security on the property of the cannabis business. The security plan shall include interior and exterior physical layout and design plans and operational details as they relate to security. The layout, plans and operational details shall be approved by the chief of police. The following minimum security standards shall be maintained at all times:

a. Surveillance System.

i. Each cannabis business shall be monitored at all times by closed-circuit television surveillance system. The camera and video recording surveillance system must be capable of providing surveillance of both interior and exterior areas of the cannabis business as directed by the police department in the interest of public safety and must be of adequate quality, color rendition and resolution to allow the ready identification of an individual on or adjacent to the property. The recordings shall be maintained at the cannabis business for a period of not less than 30 days and shall be provided to the city police department within 24 hours of a written request from the police department for any recordings. Each licensee shall notify the chief of police immediately after discovering any of the following: diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the cannabis business; significant discrepancies identified during inventory; or any other breach of security.

ii. A sign shall be posted inside and at the entrances to the establishment indicating that the property is under camera/video surveillance.

b. Windows and Window Coverings. Store fronts (front facade of the cannabis business) shall be primarily glass with glass occupying at least 45 percent of the entire store front and 60 percent of the horizontal length of the store. Window and door areas shall not be covered, tinted, or made opaque in any way, or obscured in any way by landscaping, floor displays, equipment, or the like. The chief of police may modify these standards for windows and doors, if the police chief determines standards may be reduced from a public safety standpoint due to the location and/or type of business.

c. Loitering Adjacent to a Cannabis Business. Licensees, owners, and operators shall take reasonable measures to reduce loitering by cannabis business employees, owners, managers, customers, members, patrons, guests and invitees in public areas, sidewalks, alleys and areas surrounding the property and adjacent premises during the business hours of the cannabis business.

2. Nuisances Prohibited. A licensee, owner, and operator shall take reasonable steps to correct objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance on any public sidewalk or public space abutting the cannabis business property.

a. For purposes of this section, “objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance” includes public consumption of cannabis products, disturbance of the peace, drug trafficking, disposing of litter or trash, or excessive loud noise.

b. For purposes of this section, “reasonable steps” means all of the following:

i. Calling the local law enforcement agency. Timely calls to the local law enforcement agency that are placed by the licensee, or his or her agents or employees, shall not be used against a licensee, owner, or operator as evidence of objectionable conditions that constitute a nuisance.

ii. Requesting those persons engaging in activities causing objectionable conditions to cease those activities, unless the licensee, or his or her agents or employees feel that their personal safety would be threatened in making that request.

iii. Making good faith efforts to remove items that facilitate loitering, such as furniture, except those structures approved or permitted by the local jurisdiction. The licensee shall not be liable for the removal of those items that facilitate loitering unless placed by, or permitted to be placed by, the licensee or his or her agents.

3. State License Required to Operate. Operation of a cannabis business shall not commence until a licensee has obtained a valid state license. Licensees shall maintain a valid state license at all times during operation of a cannabis business.

D. Inspection of Dispensaries.

1. City officials may enter and inspect a cannabis business at any time during normal business hours with reasonable notice on any day of the week or at any reasonable time to ensure compliance and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

2. No licensee, owner, operator, or any other person shall refuse, impede, obstruct, or interfere with an inspection pursuant to this chapter.

E. Transfer of Cannabis Public Safety Licenses Prohibited. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable to a different person or entity. Any attempt to transfer or any transfer of ownership or control of a cannabis business shall be grounds for revocation of the cannabis public safety license by the chief of police. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.040 Cannabis public safety license – General provisions.
A. Application Procedures.

1. A public safety license application must be approved prior to the applicant initiating the cannabis use permit application process as set forth more fully in Chapter 17.84 BMC, unless the applicant requests concurrent processing of the public safety license and use permit application. Concurrent processing does not guarantee either or both will be approved.

2. A public safety license shall not be issued until after the planning commission has approved a cannabis use permit for the proposed cannabis business.

B. Application Filing Requirements. A complete cannabis public safety license application or application for renewal along with all required fees and materials required by this chapter, shall be submitted in order for an applicant to be considered for a public safety license. All cannabis public safety license applications or applications for renewal shall be filed with the chief of police using forms and authorizations provided by the city.

1. Eligibility for Filing. Public safety license applications and applications for renewal shall be filed by the owner of the cannabis business.

2. Public safety license applications and applications for renewal shall include:

a. For each licensee, owner, operator and employee of the cannabis business, a fully legible copy of one valid government-issued form of photo identification, such as a state driver’s license or identification card. Acceptable forms of government-issued identification include, but are not limited to, driver’s license or photo identity cards issued by the state Department of Motor Vehicles (or equivalent) that meet REAL ID benchmarks, a passport issued by the United States or by a foreign government, U.S. Military ID cards (active duty or retired military and their dependents) or a permanent resident card.

b. A certified copy of the cannabis business’s Secretary of State chapters of incorporation, certificate(s) of amendment, statement(s) of information and a copy of the cannabis business’s bylaws.

c. If the cannabis business is an unincorporated association, a copy of the chapters of association.

d. The name, address, electronic mail address and mobile phone number of the applicant’s or licensee’s current designated agent for service of process.

e. Emergency Contact. The name, electronic mail address, and mobile phone number, of an owner, operator, or manager to act as an on-site community relations staff person to whom the city may provide notice of any operating problems associated with the cannabis business.

f. A statement dated and signed by each applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, that the information contained therein is true and correct.

3. In addition to a completed public safety license application or application for renewal, applicants or licensees shall provide and submit the following information to the chief of police:

a. The applicant and each owner, operator and employee shall consent to fingerprinting and a criminal background investigation, and shall undergo fingerprinting and a criminal background investigation.

b. Security Plans. Applicants shall provide a plan to provide adequate security on the property of the cannabis business. The plan shall include standards showing the cannabis business’s ability to comply with the conditions of BMC 9.60.030(C).

C. Ongoing Filing Requirements. Where a cannabis business or licensee replaces, hires, appoints or employs new operators and/or employees, all such operators and employees shall submit to fingerprinting and a criminal background investigation pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section. A cannabis business or licensee has an ongoing obligation to immediately report to the police chief any conviction for an offense listed below in BMC 9.60.050(A)(4) suffered by an owner, operator and/or employee of the cannabis business or licensee. A cannabis business or licensee shall also have an ongoing obligation to immediately report to the police chief any of the events listed in BMC 9.60.050(A)(5) or (6). (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.050 Public safety license and public safety license renewal – Approval and denial.
A. Criteria for Approval. Cannabis public safety licenses shall be approved when the chief of police confirms that the following criteria have been met:

1. The application is complete and provides all necessary and requested information.

2. The applicant and each owner, operator and employee of the cannabis business have authorized and completed fingerprinting.

3. The applicant and each owner, operator and employee of the cannabis business have authorized the use of their fingerprinting results to run a state and nationwide criminal background check.

4. The results of the criminal background checks establish that the applicant, owner(s), operator(s), and employees have not been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a cannabis business. The following offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a cannabis business:

a. A violent felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 667.5(c).

b. A serious felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 1192.7(c).

c. A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement.

d. A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling, any controlled substance to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor.

e. A felony conviction for drug trafficking with enhancements pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11370.4 or 11379.8.

f. Conviction for any controlled substance felony subsequent to licensure shall be grounds for revocation of a license or denial of the renewal of a license.

g. Conviction for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands pursuant to Fish and Game Code Section 12025 or 12025.1.

h. Conviction for unauthorized commercial cannabis activities in any city, county or city and county in the five years immediately preceding the issuance of a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license.

5. The applicant has not been convicted, cited, fined, or penalized by the state or any city, county, or city and county, or enjoined by any court of law, in the five years immediately preceding the application for a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license, for any unauthorized, unpermitted, or unlawful cannabis activities.

6. The applicant has not been convicted, cited, fined, or penalized by the state or any city, county, or city and county, or enjoined by any court of law, in the five years immediately preceding the application for a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license, for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands.

7. Security Plan. The applicant or licensee has provided a security plan providing the minimum standards set forth in BMC 9.60.030(C)(1).

B. Criteria for Denial. Cannabis public safety licenses shall not be issued or renewed where the chief of police confirms that one or more of the criterion set forth in subsection (A) of this section have not been met. A cannabis public safety license shall not be issued or renewed where the chief of police determines that the application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation and/or omission of a material fact or other information required by this chapter and/or the approved application form. If the chief of police denies the cannabis public safety license application or application for renewal, he or she shall specify in writing the reasons for the denial of the application or application for renewal, and notify the applicant that the decision shall become final unless the applicant seeks an appeal pursuant to subsection (C) of this section.

C. Appeal from Chief of Police Determination. An applicant who disagrees with the chief of police’s decision may appeal the chief of police’s decision to the city manager, and decisions of the city manager may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.060 Expiration and renewal of cannabis public safety licenses.
A. Cannabis public safety licenses shall expire one year after issuance.

B. Public safety licenses must be renewed on an annual basis prior to expiration by filing with the police chief a public safety license application for renewal and a renewal fee in an amount set forth by separate resolution of the city council, which amount is calculated to recover the city’s full cost of reviewing, issuing and administering said license.

C. The application for renewal and the renewal fee shall be filed at least 30 days, but not more than 60 days, prior to the expiration of the public safety license. If a timely, complete renewal application is filed, the cannabis business’s public safety license shall not expire until the date that the chief of police approves or denies the public safety license application for renewal.

D. An application for renewal shall be subject to all filing requirements set forth in BMC 9.60.040(B) and (C).

E. The chief of police shall issue or deny an application for renewal in accordance with the provisions of BMC 9.60.050. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.070 Suspension and revocation by chief of police.
A. A cannabis public safety license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the chief of police if he or she concludes any of the following:

1. The cannabis business has violated any of the requirements of this chapter or its cannabis public safety license.

2. The cannabis business is being operated in a manner which violates the security plan required by this chapter.

3. The cannabis business is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance.

4. The cannabis business has failed to comply with the conditions of operation set forth in BMC 9.60.030(C).

5. The cannabis business has ceased to operate for 30 days or more.

6. The licensee, and/or an owner, operator, and/or employee of the licensee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a cannabis business. If the convicted person is completely removed from the ownership and/or operation of the cannabis business, the chief of police may determine the suspension or revocation may be reversed. The following offenses are substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a cannabis business:

a. A violent felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 667.5(c).

b. A serious felony conviction, as specified in Penal Code Section 1192.7(c).

c. A felony conviction involving fraud, deceit, or embezzlement.

d. A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for sale, or peddling, any controlled substance to a minor; or selling, offering to sell, furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled substance to a minor.

e. A felony conviction for drug trafficking with enhancements pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11370.4 or 11379.8.

f. Conviction for any controlled substance felony subsequent to licensure shall be grounds for revocation of a license or denial of the renewal of a license.

g. Conviction for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands pursuant to Fish and Game Code Section 12025 or 12025.1.

h. Conviction for unauthorized, unpermitted, or unlawful commercial cannabis activities in any city, county or city and county in the five years immediately preceding the issuance of a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license.

7. The applicant has been convicted, cited, fined, or penalized by the state or any city, county, or city and county, or enjoined by any court of law, in the five years immediately preceding the application for a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license, for any unauthorized, unpermitted, or unlawful cannabis activities.

8. The applicant has been convicted, cited, fined, or penalized by the state or any city, county, or city and county, or enjoined by any court of law, in the five years immediately preceding the application for a cannabis public safety license or cannabis public safety renewal license, for cultivation or production of a controlled substance on public or private lands.

9. The cannabis business is being operated in a manner which conflicts with or violates state cannabis laws.

10. A licensee’s cannabis use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 17.84 BMC has been terminated or revoked.

11. A licensee has attempted to transfer or has transferred a cannabis public safety license to another person or entity.

12. A licensee’s state license has been suspended, terminated, or revoked.

13. A licensee has failed to comply with the ongoing filing requirements set forth above in BMC 9.60.040(C) or provided false or misleading information when attempting to comply with BMC 9.60.040(C).

14. The police chief determines that the licensee’s application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation and/or omission of a material fact or other information required by this chapter and/or the approved application form.

B. Expiration. Any cannabis public safety license revoked pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed to be expired and shall no longer entitle the licensee to any privileges authorized by the cannabis public safety license.

C. Appeal from Chief of Police Determination. A licensee who disagrees with the chief of police’s decision to suspend or revoke a public safety license may appeal the police chief’s decision to the city manager, and decisions of the city manager may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.080 Establishment of regulations.
The city council may adopt, by resolution, additional regulations for the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

9.60.090 No vested rights.
No person(s) shall have any vested rights to public safety license, right or interest under this chapter, regardless of whether such person(s) cultivated, sold, distributed or otherwise engaged in acts related to the use of cannabis prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 18-02 § 1).

Chapter 9.64
CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA
Sections:

9.64.010    Regulating public consumption of marijuana.

9.64.010 Regulating public consumption of marijuana.
A. The consumption of marijuana otherwise permitted by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1 for nonmedical purposes or Section 11362.5 for medical purposes is prohibited on any public property or in any facility or space to which members of the public have access.

B. Any person who violates subsection (A) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

1. A fine, not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;

2. A fine, not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of this chapter within one year;

3. A fine, not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. (Ord. 17-02 § 1; Ord. 16-01 § 5).

Chapter 9.68
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS) FIRST RESPONDER FEE1
Sections:

9.68.010    Purpose.

9.68.020    Definitions.

9.68.030    Emergency medical service first responder fee.

9.68.040    Fee collection.

9.68.050    No effect on emergency medical first responder services.

9.68.060    No waiver of other means of cost recovery.

9.68.070    Appeal.

9.68.010 Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to allow for the collection of fees related to the cost of providing emergency medical services. The emergency medical service first responder fee is required to cover the costs of the first responder services that the fire department must provide to both city residents and nonresidents. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Fire chief” means chief of the city of Benicia fire department or his or her designee.

“First responder fee” means the fee established pursuant to this chapter and charged to each person to whom the city provides medical emergency first responder services to recover the costs for providing such services.

“Insurer” means the recipient’s medical insurance provider.

“Recipient” means the person to whom the city provides medical emergency first responder services.

“Services” means medical emergency first responder services provided by the city. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.030 Emergency medical service first responder fee.
A. Fee Amount Established. The city council shall, by resolution, adopt and amend from time to time a first responder fee to recover the actual and reasonable costs incurred by the fire department in providing services and processing the first responder fee, including administrative or enforcement costs.

B. Fee Applies to All. The first responder fee shall be charged to each recipient, whether a city resident or nonresident, who receives services during a single incident. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.040 Fee collection.
A. Policies for Discharging Accountability.

1. The fire chief, or designee, will develop policies and procedures for invoicing, billing, and receiving payments for each fee charged under this chapter and will coordinate the administration with any contracted third party service provider, if applicable. The policies and procedures will include a process to discharge from accountability accounts that are not collectible.

2. The fire chief, or designee, shall establish a compassionate billing policy. Such policy may include waiver of the first responder fee for uninsured patients.

3. The city shall accept the payment, if any, from the insurer as the full payment for the recipient’s first responder fee obligation and the city shall not require the recipient to pay for any portion of the first responder fee not paid by the insurer.

B. Administration of the Fee. The fire chief, or designee, may delegate all or some of the tasks required for the administration of the first responder fee. Administration of the first responder fee will consist of tasks including, but not limited to, tracking of emergency medical first responder services provided by the fire department, identification of financially responsible parties, calculation of total fees to be charged, invoicing and payment collection, and the processing of waiver requests and appeals, if permitted. The city manager may approve of delegation of administration of the first responder fee by a contracted third party by resolution.

C. Invoicing. When the fire department provides emergency medical first responder services to a person, the city, or its designee, shall bill the recipient and the insurer, if any, for payment of the first responder fee. In the case of a minor, the city, or its designee, shall bill the parent or guardian of the recipient who received the services and the insurer, if the person, or his or her representative, has identified to the fire department the insurer to which the invoice should be sent. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.050 No effect on emergency medical first responder services.
This chapter neither expands nor limits services. Nothing in this chapter relieves the fire department from providing services. These services will continue to be provided without regard to whether a person is insured by an insurer, has the ability to pay the first responder fee, or has or has not paid the first responder fee in the past. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.060 No waiver of other means of cost recovery.
This chapter does not preclude the city or the fire department from recovering its emergency response costs in any other manner authorized by law. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

9.68.070 Appeal.
A. Any person wishing to contest an invoice regarding the first responder fee imposed under this chapter must submit a written request for reconsideration to the fire chief explaining the reasons for requesting a reconsideration within 30 days of the date of receiving the invoice for the first responder fee. The fire chief will review the written request and based on that review make a final decision on the request and notify the party in writing within 30 days of receiving the request to reconsider.

B. If the aggrieved party is unhappy with the fire chief’s decision, the party may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 16-07 § 1).

1
    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 16-07 adds these provisions as Chapter 9.64. The chapter has been renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC1
Chapters:

10.04    General Provisions

10.08    Definitions

10.10    Traffic, Pedestrian and Bicycle Committee and Traffic Engineer

10.12    Speed Limits

10.16    Stopping, Standing or Parking

10.20    One-Way Streets

10.24    Miscellaneous Regulations

10.28    Vehicles on Unimproved Property

10.32    Vehicles on Open Space Land

10.36    Pedestrian Regulations

10.40    Truck Routes

10.44    Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles

10.48    Bicycles

10.52    Violation and Penalty

10.56    Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning

1
    For statutory provisions requiring uniform applicability of the State Vehicle Code, and limiting local regulatory power over matters covered by the code, see Vehicle Code § 21; for provisions on local regulation, see Vehicle Code § 21100 et seq.

    Prior legislation: Ord. 116-B; prior code §§ 13-101 – 13-1105.


Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

10.04.010  Police department – Powers and duties.

10.04.020  Traffic engineer – Powers and duties.

10.04.030  Police or authorized officers – Directing of traffic.

10.04.040  Police or authorized officers – Obedience to directions.

10.04.050  Police or authorized officers – Obstruction or interference.

10.04.060  Directing of traffic prohibited.

10.04.070  Application to persons riding bicycles or animals.

10.04.010 Police department – Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to issue citations, to make arrests for traffic violations, to cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this title and the traffic ordinances of this city. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.020 Traffic engineer – Powers and duties.
It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, traffic regulation and informational signs and roadway markings; to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures subject to limitations as imposed by this title or other city ordinances; to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions; to maintain a current record map of all authorized signs, signals and markings; and to carry out such additional powers and duties as may be assigned. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.030 Police or authorized officers – Directing of traffic.
Officers of the police department, and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.040 Police or authorized officers – Obedience to directions.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police, traffic engineer, or law. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.050 Police or authorized officers – Obstruction or interference.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in the enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration, or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.060 Directing of traffic prohibited.
No person, other than an officer of the police department, members of the fire department or a person authorized to do so by the chief of police, traffic engineer or a person authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the traffic engineer. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.04.070 Application to persons riding bicycles or animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under this title, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

Chapter 10.08
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

10.08.010  Generally.

10.08.020  Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used.

10.08.030  Council.

10.08.040  Divisional island.

10.08.050  Holidays.

10.08.060  Loading zone.

10.08.070  Police officer.

10.08.080  Traffic engineer.

10.08.090  Traffic regulations.

10.08.100  Vehicle.

10.08.010 Generally.
The words and phrases set forth in this chapter when used in this title shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.020 Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used.
Whenever any words or phrases used in this code are not defined but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.030 Council.
"Council" means the council of the city. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.040 Divisional island.
"Divisional island" means a raised or painted island or area which is located in the roadway and which separates opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.050 Holidays.
Within the meaning of this title, "holidays" are all days recognized by the state as legal holidays. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.060 Loading zone.
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.070 Police officer.
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.080 Traffic engineer.
"Traffic engineer" means the director of public works or his authorized representative. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.090 Traffic regulations.
"Traffic regulations" mean any ordinances or resolutions of the city council passed for the purposes of regulating or controlling traffic. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.08.100 Vehicle.
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

Chapter 10.10
TRAFFIC, PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE COMMITTEE AND TRAFFIC ENGINEER
Sections:

10.10.010  Traffic engineer – Appointment.

10.10.020  Traffic engineer – Powers and duties – Delegation.

10.10.030  Traffic, pedestrian and bicycle committee – Established – Membership.

10.10.040  Traffic, pedestrian and bicycle committee – Duties.

10.10.010 Traffic engineer – Appointment.
The office of city traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager and he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this chapter and in the traffic ordinances of this city. Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Ord. 83-8 N.S. § 1, 1983).

10.10.020 Traffic engineer – Powers and duties – Delegation.
It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. 83-8 N.S. § 1, 1983).

10.10.030 Traffic, pedestrian and bicycle committee – Established – Membership.
There is established an advisory traffic committee to serve without compensation, consisting of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police or at his discretion his representative, the chief of the traffic division, a member of the city council and such number of other city officers and representatives of unofficial bodies as may be determined and appointed by the mayor. The chairman of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor and may be removed by four affirmative votes of the council. (Ord. 04-04 § 2; Ord. 83-8 N.S. § 1, 1983).

10.10.040 Traffic, pedestrian and bicycle committee – Duties.
It shall be the duty of the traffic, pedestrian and bicycle committee to suggest the most practicable means for coordinating the activities of all officers and agencies of this city having authority with respect to the administration or enforcement of traffic regulations; to stimulate and assist in the preparation and publication of traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with this city and to recommend to the legislative body of this city and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of the traffic division and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. (Ord. 04-04 § 3; Ord. 83-8 N.S. § 1, 1983).

Chapter 10.12
SPEED LIMITS1
Sections:

10.12.010    Authority.

10.12.020    Increase of state speed limit on certain streets.

10.12.030    Decrease of state speed limit on certain streets.

10.12.010 Authority.
Sections 22357 and 22358 of the Vehicle Code authorize local authorities to establish prima facia speed limits on streets and roads under their jurisdiction on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey. (Ord. 93-4 N.S. § 2, 1993).

10.12.020 Increase of state speed limit on certain streets.
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is less than necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the designation and posting of such streets as through highways and by reason of widely spaced intersections; and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth on both streets or parts of streets designated in this section when signs are erected giving notice thereof:

•    

Adams Street, 30 miles per hour.

•    

Bayshore Road, 35 miles per hour.

•    

Channel Road/West Channel Road (California Court to Industrial Way), 30 miles per hour.

•    

Columbus Parkway (Rose Drive and city limits), 45 miles per hour.

•    

Columbus Parkway (between Rose Drive and I-780 on-ramp), 35 miles per hour.

•    

East Channel Road, 30 miles per hour.

•    

East E Street, (East Second to East Fifth), 30 miles per hour.

•    

East Fifth Street (Hillcrest Avenue and Military East), 30 miles per hour.

•    

East Second Street (Lake Herman Road to 1,000 feet north of Tennys Drive), 45 miles per hour.

•    

East Second Street (1,000 feet north of Tennys Drive and I-780), 35 miles per hour.

•    

East Second Street (I-780 and Military East), 30 miles per hour.

•    

Goodyear Road, 40 miles per hour.

•    

Industrial Way, 40 miles per hour.

•    

Lake Herman Road, 45 miles per hour.

•    

Military West (I-780/West K Street to West Third Street), 40 miles per hour.

•    

Military (West Third Street to East Second Street), 35 miles per hour.

•    

N Street (West Second to East Second Street), 30 miles per hour.

•    

Park Road (East Second Street and Industrial Way), 40 miles per hour.

•    

Park Road (Industrial Way and Adams Street), 35 miles per hour.

•    

Rose Drive (Dempsey Drive/Community Park Drive and East Second Street), 35 miles per hour.

•    

Southampton Road, (Military West to O’Farrell Drive), 35 miles per hour.

•    

Southampton Road, (O’Farrell Drive to I-780 at West Seventh Street), 30 miles per hour.

•    

State Park Road (Columbus Parkway to I-780 on-/off ramps), 35 miles per hour.

•    

Stone Road, 35 miles per hour.

•    

West Seventh Street (I-780 and Military), 35 miles per hour.

(Ord. 17-04 § 1; Ord. 93-4 N.S. § 2, 1993).

10.12.030 Decrease of state speed limit on certain streets.
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by state law outside of business and residential districts as applicable upon the following streets is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets; and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth on those streets or parts of streets designated in this section when signs are erected giving notice thereof:

•    

Reservoir Road, 40 miles per hour.

(Ord. 17-04 § 2; Ord. 97-15 N.S.).

1
    For statutory provisions as to speed generally, see Vehicle Code §§ 22349 through 22407; for provisions on local speed limits, see Vehicle Code §§ 22357 et seq.


Chapter 10.16
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING1
Sections:

10.16.010  Erection of stop signs.

10.16.020  Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building.

10.16.030  Stop required near school pedestrian lane.

10.16.040  Curb markings – Designated.

10.16.050  Curb markings – Maintenance.

10.16.060  No parking areas.

10.16.070  Time limit parking.

10.16.080  Parking of commercial and certain noncommercial vehicles in residential district.

10.16.090  Parking of trucks loaded with flammables or explosives.

10.16.100  Parking in alleys.

10.16.110  Loading zones.

10.16.120  Bus stop locations.

10.16.130  Parking on grades.

10.16.140  Repairing vehicles on public streets.

10.16.150  Emergency parking signs.

10.16.160  Parking in side yard or setback areas.

10.16.170  Removal of vehicles.

10.16.180  Parking prohibitions for public off-street lots.

10.16.010 Erection of stop signs.
The traffic engineer is authorized to and shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated, at those entrances to other intersections where an engineering study shows that a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, that stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.020 Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.030 Stop required near school pedestrian lane.
It is unlawful for any person driving or operating, propelling, or causing to be propelled any vehicle or street car to fail to stop within 50 feet of the nearest side of a school pedestrian lane where any signal device, flagman, or other person is stationed giving warning that children are about to or are crossing the street; and it is further declared unlawful to proceed until such signal has stopped, raised, or been removed, or the flagman or person stationed at such pedestrian lane has given a signal to go or has left the locality. (Ord. 110 M.C. § 2, 1945).

10.16.040 Curb markings – Designated.
A. The traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place and, when required in this title shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:

1. Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or designated as a bus zone.

2. White shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox which shall not exceed three minutes; and such restrictions shall apply between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

a. When such zone is in front of a motel or in front of a mailbox, the restriction shall apply at all times.

b. When such zone is in front of a theater or assembly hall, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater or assembly hall is closed.

3. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading and unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading and unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes.

4. Green shall mean time limit parking with the time limit painted on the curb or stated on a sign placed at or near the face of the curb.

5. Blue indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

B. When the traffic engineer, as authorized under this title, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any provisions of this section. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.050 Curb markings – Maintenance.
A. The traffic engineer is authorized to maintain by appropriate signs, or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this chapter.

B. When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.060 No parking areas.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places:

A. Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings;

B. In any area where the traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;

C. On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.070 Time limit parking.
The traffic engineer is authorized to place, and to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined in this chapter. When curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any legible curb marking or sign in violation of such sign or curb marking between the hours stated on such signs or curb markings of any day. (Ord. 02-3 N.S.; Ord. 84-5 N.S. § 1, 1984; Ord. 82-13 N.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.080 Parking of commercial and certain noncommercial vehicles in residential district.
A. No person shall park any vehicle described in subsection (B) of this section on any street, alley or parkway in a residential district as same is defined in Section 515 of the California Vehicle Code, unless such vehicle is actively engaged in the delivery or receipt of appliances, equipment, furniture, household goods, materials, merchandise, passengers or supplies at an adjacent commercial establishment, designated loading area, lot, office building or residence, and then only for such period of time that the loading or unloading operation is actually in progress.

B. Parking of the following described vehicles is prohibited in a residential district as defined in subsection (A) of this section:

1. Any commercial vehicle or recreational vehicle having a manufacturer’s rated capacity in excess of one ton.

2. Any boat, boat trailer, school bus, truck semi, semi-trailer, trailer coach, truck, or truck tractor, camp trailer or trailer, either singularly or in combination, regardless of weight. (Ord. 84-2 N.S. § 1, 1984; Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.090 Parking of trucks loaded with flammables or explosives.
No person shall park or leave standing on any public right-of-way any vehicle loaded with flammables or explosives, except for loading and unloading. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.100 Parking in alleys.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in an alley. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.110 Loading zones.
A. The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:

1. At any place in any business district;

2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

B. In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

C. Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

D. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.120 Bus stop locations.
The traffic engineer shall be responsible for locating, posting and marking bus stop locations which have been approved by the city council. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.130 Parking on grades.
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent without blocking the wheels of such vehicle or by turning them against the curb. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.140 Repairing vehicles on public streets.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, or dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.150 Emergency parking signs.
A. Whenever the traffic engineer determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions or for other reasons, the traffic engineer shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.160 Parking in side yard or setback areas.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park automobiles, trucks, or motorcycles, or parts thereof, within the side yard or setback areas required under and pursuant to applicable ordinances of the city, except that existing driveways or concrete aprons constructed in accordance with permits granted by the building inspector are excluded from this requirement. (Ord. 109-A M.C. § 1, 1960).

10.16.170 Removal of vehicles.
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:

A. Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;

B. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal, or when such vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard;

C. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway, or for the installation or repair of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.16.180 Parking prohibitions for public off-street lots.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours stated on such signs or curb markings of any day for a period of time longer than the time designated by such signs or curb markings. Such time or times provided for in this section shall be fixed by order of the traffic engineer. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be fined $25.00 and the vehicle may be removed at the owner’s expense. (Ord. 00-3).

1 For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate standing and parking, see Vehicle Code § 22506 et seq.; for provisions on stopping, standing and parking generally, see Vehicle Code §§ 22500 et seq.; for provisions on local parking curb markings, see Vehicle Code § 21458; for provisions on removal of unlawfully parked vehicles, see Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.


Chapter 10.20
ONE-WAY STREETS1
Sections:

10.20.010  Portion of East L Street.

10.20.020  Portion of Denfield Avenue.

10.20.010 Portion of East L Street.
A. East L Street between the easterly line of First Street and the westerly line of East Second Street in the city of Benicia is declared to be a one-way street; and traffic upon East L Street between the easterly line of First Street and the westerly line of East Second Street shall move from west to east only.

B. It is declared that suitable signs, paintings or other devices shall be installed at each point of access to the street indicating that it is unlawful to travel in other than an easterly direction. (Ord. 106-A M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1959).

10.20.020 Portion of Denfield Avenue.
A. Denfield Avenue between West Tenth Street and West Eleventh Street in the city is declared to be a one-way street, and traffic upon such portion of Denfield Avenue shall move from east to west only.

B. It is declared that suitable signs, paintings or other devices shall be installed at each point of access to the avenue indicating that it is unlawful to travel in other than a westerly direction. (Ord. 106-B M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1961).

1 For statutory provisions granting local authorities the power to designate one-way streets, see Vehicle Code § 21657.


Chapter 10.24
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Sections:

10.24.010  Roadway markings.

10.24.020  U-turn signs.

10.24.030  Bicycle routes and crossings.

10.24.040  Use of motor-driven bicycles.

10.24.050  Clinging to moving vehicles.

10.24.060  Commercial vehicles using private driveways.

10.24.070  Driving through funeral procession.

10.24.080  Obstructing intersections or marked crosswalks.

10.24.090  Load limits in residence districts.

10.24.100  New pavement and markings.

10.24.110  Excessive acceleration.

10.24.120  Movement of vehicles while fire apparatus are engaged.

10.24.010 Roadway markings.
A. The superintendent of streets is authorized to place and maintain upon highways within the jurisdiction of the city distinctive roadway markings as described and with the effect set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 21460.

B. The distinctive roadway markings shall be employed to designate any portion of a highway where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of the marking or to indicate no driving to the left as provided in California Vehicle Code Section 21460, and shall not be employed for any other purpose. (Ord. 105 M.C., 1941; amended during 1980 codification).

10.24.020 U-turn signs.
The city council is authorized by resolution to provide for the installation of "NO U-TURN" signs at other intersections in the city upon the determination by the city council that such prohibition is necessary for the protection of life or property or for the proper regulation of vehicle traffic. (Ord. 116-C M.C. § 3, 1952).

10.24.030 Bicycle routes and crossings.
The traffic engineer is authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate signs, or by paint upon roadway surfaces, such bicycle routes, lanes or paths as the city council shall establish. The signing shall include, but not be limited to, the establishment of bicycle crossings at locations where traffic conditions warrant. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.040 Use of motor-driven bicycles.
No person shall operate or drive a motor-driven bicycle, in, on or across any private driveway approach, sidewalk area, public walkway, bicycle path or trail without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.050 Clinging to moving vehicles.
No person shall attach himself with his hands or catch on or hold on with his hands or by other means to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.060 Commercial vehicles using private driveways.
A. No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach, sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.

B. For the purpose of this section, "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.070 Driving through funeral procession.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade if such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the police department. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.080 Obstructing intersections or marked crosswalks.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.090 Load limits in residence districts.
A. Pursuant to Section 35701 of the State Vehicle Code, no person shall operate or drive a vehicle within a residence district when such vehicle exceeds the maximum gross weight stated on appropriate signs which are erected indicating the streets affected. "Residence district" shall be as defined in the State Vehicle Code.

B. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any commercial or public utility vehicles from having ingress and egress by direct route on restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries from or to any structure located within the restricted area. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.100 New pavement and markings.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.24.110 Excessive acceleration.
No person shall intentionally operate a vehicle on a street or alley of the city in such a manner that the wheels thereof rotate so that the forward progress of the vehicle is less than the circumferential distance traveled by its wheels. (Ord. 110-A M.C. § 1, 1960; amended during 1980 codification).

10.24.120 Movement of vehicles while fire apparatus are engaged.
Whenever the fire apparatus of the city or any part of the apparatus is engaged in extinguishing a fire within the city, it is unlawful for any vehicle of any kind to enter upon any street where the apparatus is so engaged from any direction between or from the two adjoining streets of the block in which the apparatus is so engaged. This restriction shall be in force and operative continuously during the entire time that the fire apparatus is so engaged and until the apparatus, hose and appliances are in place and ready to depart. (Ord. 108 M.C. § 1, 1922).

Chapter 10.28
VEHICLES ON UNIMPROVED PROPERTY
Sections:

10.28.010  Findings.

10.28.020  Operation of vehicles near dwellings.

10.28.030  Written permission required.

10.28.040  Noise limitation.

10.28.050  Exceptions.

10.28.010 Findings.
A. The city council finds and declares that numerous motor vehicles have been driven in and upon unimproved lands located within the boundaries of the city causing serious soil erosion of slopes, hills, washes, gullies and ravines.

B. The city council further finds and declares that the excessive noise and dust emanating from and caused by such motor vehicles being driven upon and operated off the public roads and upon the unimproved lands within the city has tended to and does create a public nuisance by disturbing the quiet and repose of the citizens of the city so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.28.020 Operation of vehicles near dwellings.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, as such are defined in the State Vehicle Code, closer than 2,000 feet from the nearest dwelling, except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.28.030 Written permission required.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, as such are defined in the State Vehicle Code, on unimproved private or public property within the city without first having obtained the prior written permission of the owner thereof. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to permit the operation of such motor vehicles in violation of BMC 10.28.020. Any person operating a motorcycle with such prior written permission shall have such permission within his immediate possession at all times while operating a motor vehicle upon such unimproved land. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.28.040 Noise limitation.
No person shall operate on public or private property, other than a public street or highway, a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, as is defined by the State Vehicle Code, at any time or under any condition of grade, load acceleration, or deceleration in such a manner as to exceed the noise limit established for the type of vehicle being operated by the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.28.050 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the operation of motor vehicles when such motor vehicles are:

A. Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in the State Vehicle Code Section 165;

B. Operated upon property used for raceways, racing stadiums, or racing facilities which are authorized under the ordinances of the city;

C. Operated upon parking lots or structures open to the public, or private parking lots or structures operated solely for ingress to and egress from such parking area and parking;

D. Operated upon property primarily used for motor vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle retail or wholesale sales, service or repair, manufacture or distribution; but operated in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the general neighborhood;

E. Generally used in conjunction with commercial, industrial, or office uses and used solely in conjunction with such uses, and in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the general neighborhood;

F. Operated upon private roadways or easements necessary for ingress to and egress from property used for those purposes designated in subsections (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, and for no other purposes;

G. Operated upon public streets and highways; or

H. Operated on property actually used for residential purposes, where such motorcycles or motor-driven cycles are on such property at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant, and when such use is solely for ingress to or egress from such residential property. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

Chapter 10.32
VEHICLES ON OPEN SPACE LAND
Sections:

10.32.010  Findings and purpose.

10.32.020  Definitions.

10.32.030  Vehicles prohibited.

10.32.010 Findings and purpose.
The city council finds that the use of publicly owned and controlled open space lands by motor vehicles is a threat to the safety of persons, causes damage to the natural drainage systems, interferes with the existing ecological systems, and erodes and scars the land by inhibiting natural growth. The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the open space lands available for public use by prohibiting the entry of motor vehicles onto these lands except where expressly authorized. (Ord. 74-3 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-901).

10.32.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

A. "Motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle as defined in Section 415 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California;

B. "Open space land" means open space land as defined and described in Section 65560 of the Government Code. (Ord. 74-3 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-902).

10.32.030 Vehicles prohibited.
It is unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle on open space land other than for maintenance, law enforcement, lifesaving, or emergency purposes without the express written consent of the city manager. (Ord. 74-3 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-903).

Chapter 10.36
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS1
Sections:

10.36.010  Crosswalks – Establishment and maintenance.

10.36.020  Crosswalks – Use required in business districts.

10.36.030  Use of nonmotorized vehicles.

10.36.040  Skateboards and rollerblades.

10.36.010 Crosswalks – Establishment and maintenance.
A. The traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections where the traffic engineer determines that there is a particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, except that no crosswalks shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and such crosswalks shall be located as nearly as practicable to the middle of the block.

B. The traffic engineer may place signs indicating no crossing at any given intersection. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.36.020 Crosswalks – Use required in business districts.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district as defined in the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.36.030 Use of nonmotorized vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates, skateboards or riding in or by any means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device to go upon:

A. Any public street;

B. Any public sidewalk on either side of First Street between the intersections of First Street and A Street and First Street and Military Street;

C. Any public sidewalk adjacent to property on which is located a school during the hours which the school is open for educational instruction; and

D. Any private sidewalk or private driving surface in front of any stores or buildings used for business purposes. (Ord. 87-2 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 78-11 N.S. § 1, 1978).

10.36.040 Skateboards and rollerblades.
It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard or rollerblades in a city park designated and maintained for recreational skateboard and rollerblade use unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. (Ord. 96-8 N.S.).

1 For statutory provisions on pedestrians generally, see Vehicle Code §§ 21950 through 21965; for provisions on the power of local authorities to establish crosswalks, see Vehicle Code § 21106.


Chapter 10.40
TRUCK ROUTES1
Sections:

10.40.010  Definitions.

10.40.020  Through truck routes.

10.40.030  Restricted streets.

10.40.040  Prohibited on certain streets.

10.40.050  Truck traffic – Outside origin.

10.40.060  Truck traffic – Inside origin.

10.40.070  Weigh-in.

10.40.080  Exceptions.

10.40.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:

"Destination or destinations" means either a single delivery or several deliveries within multiple delivery zones as delineated on the maps attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof.

"Restricted street" means all streets in the city except through truck routes as established in this chapter.

"Through truck route" means any city street as designated in this chapter upon which the unrestricted use of trucks is permitted.

"Truck" means any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of seven tons. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(A), 1979).

10.40.020 Through truck routes.
Through truck routes shall be established by resolution. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(C), 1979).

10.40.030 Restricted streets.
All streets or parts of streets in the city other than those designated in this chapter as through truck routes are designated as restricted streets. When appropriate signs are erected as provided in this chapter, no person shall operate, drive, or cause or permit to be operated or driven any truck on any restricted street except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(B), 1979).

10.40.040 Prohibited on certain streets.
No person shall drive a commercial vehicle or a vehicle exceeding a gross maximum weight of seven tons, or permit a commercial vehicle or a vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of seven tons to be driven, on any street within the city, other than on a through truck route except as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(D), 1979).

10.40.050 Truck traffic – Outside origin.
A. Entering City. No truck shall enter the city except on a through truck route.

B. Outside Destination – Through Traffic. All trucks passing through the city shall operate only over a through truck route.

C. Inside Destinations. All trucks entering the city for destinations in the city shall proceed only over a through truck route and shall deviate therefrom only by the shortest and most direct route between each destination and the nearest through truck route. Upon leaving each destination, a deviating truck shall return to the nearest through truck route by the shortest and most direct route. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(E), 1979).

10.40.060 Truck traffic – Inside origin.
A. Outside Destinations. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destinations outside the city, shall proceed by the shortest and most direct route to the nearest through truck route.

B. Inside Destinations. All trucks, on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destinations in the city, shall proceed by the shortest and most direct route to the nearest through truck route and shall deviate therefrom only by the shortest and most direct route between each destination and the nearest through truck route; except that a truck with a load which will experience serious deterioration if delivery is delayed more than one hour may proceed by the shortest and most direct route to the destination using through truck routes to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(F), 1979).

10.40.070 Weigh-in.
Any police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a through truck route to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this chapter has been complied with. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(G), 1979).

10.40.080 Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the operation of any truck coming from a through truck route having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has been previously obtained, so long as the operator of such truck takes a route as prescribed in BMC 10.40.050 and 10.40.060.

B. The provisions in this chapter shall not apply to:

1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission and school buses;

2. Any vehicle owned by the city, or used for the removal of refuse under contract with the city, or by any public utility or licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility within the city;

3. Any authorized emergency vehicle. (Ord. 79-14 N.S. § 1(H), 1979).

1 For statutory provisions authorizing local authorities to prohibit the use of particular highways by certain vehicles, see Vehicle Code § 21101(c).


Chapter 10.44
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES1
Sections:

10.44.010    Generally.

10.44.020    Definitions.

10.44.030    Findings.

10.44.040    Scope.

10.44.050    Exceptions.

10.44.060    Administrative costs.

10.44.070    Authority for removal – Contract or franchise.

10.44.080    Abatement and removal – Notice.

10.44.090    Abatement and removal – Hearing.

10.44.100    Notice of hearing to Highway Patrol – Required.

10.44.110    Hearing – Procedure.

10.44.120    Hearing – Action by the police chief.

10.44.130    Appeals.

10.44.140    Removal and disposal.

10.44.150    Removal – Required information.

10.44.160    Costs – Payment or assessment.

10.44.170    Administration and enforcement.

10.44.010 Generally.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the findings and declarations set forth in BMC 10.44.030 and 10.44.040. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 1, 1968).

10.44.020 Definitions.
The following words are defined for use in this chapter:

A. “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes streets.

B. “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 93-2 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 1, 1968).

10.44.030 Findings.
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof on private or public property, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 93-2 N.S. § 2, 1993; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 1, 1968).

10.44.040 Scope.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 3, 1968).

10.44.050 Exceptions.
A. This chapter shall not apply to:

1. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

2. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

B. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10, commencing with Section 22650, of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 2, 1968).

10.44.060 Administrative costs.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof under this chapter. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 6, 1968).

10.44.070 Authority for removal – Contract or franchise.
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 5, 1968).

10.44.080 Abatement and removal – Notice.
Not less than a 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be issued, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 7(a), 1968; amended during 1980 codification).

10.44.090 Abatement and removal – Hearing.
A public hearing shall be held before the police chief upon request for such a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located. This request shall be made to the police chief within 10 days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the police chief shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. (Ord. 88-4 N.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 83-7 N.S. § 1, 1983; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 7(b), 1968; amended during 1980 codification).

10.44.100 Notice of hearing to Highway Patrol – Required.
Notice of the hearing shall also be given to the California Highway Patrol identifying the vehicle or part thereof proposed for removal, such notice to be mailed at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 8, 1968).

10.44.110 Hearing – Procedure.
A. All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the police chief, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The police chief shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.

B. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the police chief shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner.

C. If an interested party makes a written presentation to the police chief but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 88-4 N.S. § 2, 1988; Ord. 83-7 N.S. § 2, 1983; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 9, 1968).

10.44.120 Hearing – Action by the police chief.
The police chief may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the police chief may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on public or private property; and may order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter; and may determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (Ord. 88-4 N.S. § 3, 1988; Ord. 83-7 N.S. § 3, 1983; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 9, 1968).

10.44.130 Appeals.
A. Any interested party may appeal the decision of the police chief pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.

C. The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in BMC 10.44.080 and 10.44.090.

D. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 07-42 § 1; Ord. 88-4 N.S. § 4, 1988; Ord. 83-7 N.S. § 3, 1983; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 10, 1968).

10.44.140 Removal and disposal.
A. Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by BMC 10.44.110 and 10.44.120 or 15 days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard.

B. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 11, 1968; amended during 1980 codification).

10.44.150 Removal – Required information.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. In addition, if the owner of the vehicle is not known or cannot be ascertained, or if the notice required by Section 22852 of the Vehicle Code cannot be given to the owner of the vehicle, immediate notice shall be given to the Department of Justice, Stolen Vehicle System, pursuant to Section 22853 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 93-2 N.S. § 3, 1993; Ord. 109-C § 12, 1968).

10.44.160 Costs – Payment or assessment.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to BMC 10.44.110 and 10.44.120 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other taxes. (Ord. 109-C M.C. § 13, 1968).

10.44.170 Administration and enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police chief. In the enforcement of this chapter such person and his employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 88-4 N.S. § 5, 1988; Ord. 83-7 N.S. § 5, 1983; Ord. 109-C M.C. § 4, 1968).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate abatement and removal of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, see Vehicle Code §§ 22660 et seq.


Chapter 10.48
BICYCLES1
Sections:

10.48.010  Statutory authority.

10.48.020  License – Required.

10.48.030  License – Application.

10.48.040  License – Fees.

10.48.050  License – Nonpayment of fees – Penalty.

10.48.060  License – Fee and penalty – Debt to city.

10.48.070  License – Issuance.

10.48.080  License – Loss or theft – Duplicate.

10.48.090  Change of address.

10.48.100  Sale or disposition.

10.48.110  Purchase or acquisition.

10.48.120  Dealer’s report – Information required.

10.48.130  Dealer’s report – Report of purchases.

10.48.140  Identification on new bicycle required.

10.48.150  Removal and mutilation of license plate and serial number.

10.48.153  Sidewalk safety.

10.48.154  Signs prohibiting bicycle riding.

10.48.155  Bicycle riding prohibited in the central traffic district.

10.48.160  Violation – Penalty.

10.48.170  Violation – Remedies.

10.48.010 Statutory authority.
Licensing under this chapter is under Division 16.7 (commencing with Section 39000) of the Vehicle Code of the state and any rules and regulations adopted under it. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1979; prior code § 12-207).

10.48.020 License – Required.
No resident of the city may operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon a street, road, highway, or other public property of the city without first obtaining a license from the chief of police. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1979; prior code § 12-201).

10.48.030 License – Application.
Every applicant for a bicycle license shall apply to the chief of police. The application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall contain information as may be required by the chief of police concerning the applicant and the bicycle. The chief of police shall not issue a license unless he finds that the bicycle complies with the requirements prescribed for safe mechanical condition. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1979; prior code § 12-202).

10.48.040 License – Fees.
The annual fee for a license is $2.00, payable to the city with the application. The fee for a transfer of ownership or issuance of a new license after loss or theft is $1.00. The revenue received from license fees shall be used as prescribed by Vehicle Code Section 39004. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1979; prior code § 12-203).

10.48.050 License – Nonpayment of fees – Penalty.
The chief of police shall add a penalty of 20 percent of the license fee for failure to pay the fee within 15 days from the date it is due. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-221).

10.48.060 License – Fee and penalty – Debt to city.
The licensing fee and penalty is a debt to the city. The city may bring an action to collect the debt. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-222).

10.48.070 License – Issuance.
A. Upon approval of the application and payment of the license fee, the chief of police shall issue a bicycle license to be operated in the city for the period of three calendar years beginning the first day of January in the year the license is issued, and ending on the thirty-first day of December of the calendar year three years from the year of issue.

B. After December 31, 1975, no license may be issued for any bicycle not in conformance with Section 39007 of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-204).

10.48.080 License – Loss or theft – Duplicate.
The licensee shall report the loss or theft of a license sticker within 10 days. Upon receipt of the report, the chief of police shall cancel the license and issue a new license sticker to the licensee. Upon the loss of a registration slip, the licensee shall apply for a duplicate slip. The chief of police shall issue a duplicate slip without fee. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-206).

10.48.090 Change of address.
Every person in possession of a licensed bicycle who changes his address shall notify the chief of police in writing within 10 days of the change. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-205).

10.48.100 Sale or disposition.
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed under this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he shall within 10 days notify the chief of police of such disposition. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-211).

10.48.110 Purchase or acquisition.
A person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle shall within 10 days of taking possession apply for a transfer of licenses to his name. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-212).

10.48.120 Dealer’s report – Information required.
Every person engaged in the business of selling new or used bicycles in the city shall supply to each purchaser a record of the information required under Section 39006 of the Vehicle Code and shall forward a copy of the record to the chief of police. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-213).

10.48.130 Dealer’s report – Report of purchases.
Each person engaged in the business of buying used bicycles in the city shall make a monthly report to the chief of police on a form provided by the city, setting forth as to each bicycle purchased:

A. The name and address of each seller;

B. The year and make of the bicycle; and

C. The serial number of the bicycle. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-214).

10.48.140 Identification on new bicycle required.
No bicycle retailer shall sell any new bicycle unless the bicycle is stamped or cast as required by Vehicle Code Section 39007. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-215).

10.48.150 Removal and mutilation of license plate and serial number.
A. No person shall wilfully remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the manufacturer’s serial number or the city’s serial number on any license plate and registration card during the period the license plate and registration card is operative; or buy, sell, receive, dispose of, or conceal a bicycle or bicycle equipment from which a manufacturer’s nameplate, serial number, or other distinguishing mark is removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed.

B. The chief of police may place a police department serial number on a bicycle if the serial number is obliterated or defaced and the possessor has satisfactory proof of ownership. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-220).

10.48.153 Sidewalk safety.
Any person riding a bicycle on the sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall give a verbal signal before passing a pedestrian. (Ord. 82-5 N.S. § 1, 1982).

10.48.154 Signs prohibiting bicycle riding.
Upon a finding by the city traffic engineer that bicycle riding will endanger pedestrian traffic or the public safety on a sidewalk or roadway, the city traffic engineer is authorized to erect signs on the sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon. (Ord. 82-5 N.S. § 1, 1982).

10.48.155 Bicycle riding prohibited in the central traffic district.
A. No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk in the central traffic district.

B. For purposes of this section, the central traffic district includes the following areas: First Street from the north line of Military Highway to the south line of A Street. (Ord. 82-5 N.S. § 1, 1982).

10.48.160 Violation – Penalty.
When a person under 18 years of age violates a provision of this chapter, instead of a fine, the chief of police may prohibit the operation upon the streets and public places in the city for a period not to exceed 30 days of a bicycle used in violation. In this case, the chief of police shall impound the bicycle and retain it during the period of prohibition. The owner’s registration slip shall be held for a like period. (Ord. 03-9 § 20; Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-223).

10.48.170 Violation – Remedies.
The remedies prescribed are cumulative, as the use of one does not bar the use of another remedy under this chapter. (Ord. 75-17 N.S. § 1, 1975; prior code § 12-224).

1 For statutory provisions on bicycle registration and licensing, see Vehicle Code § 39000 et seq.; for provisions on local regulation of bicycles, see Vehicle Code § 21206.


Chapter 10.52
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Sections:

10.52.010  Violation – Infraction.

10.52.010 Violation – Infraction.
The violation of any traffic ordinance of the city currently in force, or which may be enacted in the future, shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 42001(a), except where the ordinance specifically provides for a different penalty. (Added during 1980 codification).

Chapter 10.56
PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING
Sections:

10.56.010  Parking prohibited for street cleaning.

10.56.010 Parking prohibited for street cleaning.
No person shall park any vehicle on that portion of any street on the days, and between the hours, designated by the city council for the purpose of street cleaning. Each portion of each street so designated shall be posted with signs giving notice of the days, and the hour, of the parking prohibition effective on that portion of the street. This prohibition shall not apply to a vehicle which, after the mechanized street-sweeper has passed, is then parked on a restricted portion of the street during the posted hours. (Ord. 03-10 § 1).

Title 11
(Reserved)
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.08    House Numbering

12.12    Encroachments

12.16    Repair and Construction of Sidewalks and Alleys

12.20    Street Improvements by Railways

12.24    Trees and Street Trees

12.28    Use of City Parks

12.32    Playing Games in Streets

12.36    Underground Utilities

12.40    Motorboat-Free Zone at Ninth Street Beach

12.41    Use of Ninth Street Boat Launch Facility Floats

12.44    Curb Painting

12.48    Maintenance and Repair of Sidewalks

12.52    Newsracks

Chapter 12.08
HOUSE NUMBERING
Sections:

12.08.010  System adopted.

12.08.020  Compliance.

12.08.030  Method.

12.08.010 System adopted.
There is adopted a system of house numbering. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the general welfare and the harmonious development of the city; to facilitate mail delivery; to aid in the proper delivery of goods and commodities in the rendering of services; and to promote the business and social life in the city. (Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-104(1)).

12.08.020 Compliance.
No building, house or other structure shall be numbered except in accordance with the system established by this chapter. (Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-104(2)).

12.08.030 Method.
The number system shall run starting at A Street with 100 then north, starting at First Street with 100 East to East Second Street, etc., west to West Second, etc. Numbers will be odd on the north side of the street and even on the south side of the street, and will be odd on the west side of the street and even on the east side of the street. (Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-104(3)).

Chapter 12.12
ENCROACHMENTS1
Sections:

12.12.010    Definitions.

12.12.020    Required permit and permit agreement.

12.12.030    Emergency work.

12.12.040    Exceptions.

12.12.050    Restriction of use.

12.12.060    Permits and fees.

12.12.070    Bonds and insurance.

12.12.080    Regulations.

12.12.090    Notices.

12.12.100    Care of drainage.

12.12.110    Proper execution of work.

12.12.120    Maintenance of encroachment.

12.12.130    Restoring of street.

12.12.140    Relocation or removal of encroachments.

12.12.150    Standards and specifications.

12.12.160    Supervision and inspection.

12.12.170    Storage of materials.

12.12.180    Pipes and conduits.

12.12.190    Poles and transmission line carriers.

12.12.200    Cutting exposed concrete pavement.

12.12.210    Aids to visibility.

12.12.220    Movements of vehicles or objects.

12.12.230    Mailboxes.

12.12.240    Hedges, fences or shrubbery.

12.12.250    Irrigation systems.

12.12.260    Preservation of monuments.

12.12.270    Maps of facilities.

12.12.280    Revocation of permit.

12.12.290    Imposing penalties for violations.

12.12.300    Declaration of public nuisance.

12.12.010 Definitions.
A. “City” means the city of Benicia, county of Solano, state of California; a municipal corporation.

B. “Director of public works” means the city engineer of the city of Benicia or his authorized agent.

C. “Encroach” or “encroachment” means going over, upon or under or using any right-of-way or watercourse in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere with its normal use, including the performance thereon of any of the following acts:

1. Excavating, filling or disturbing the right-of-way or watercourse;

2. Erecting or maintaining any flag, banner, post, sign, pole, fence, guard rail, wall, loading platform, mailbox, pipe, conduit, wire or other structure on, over or under a right-of-way or watercourse;

3. Planting any tree, shrub, grass or other growing thing within a right-of-way or watercourse;

4. Placing or leaving on a right-of-way or watercourse any rubbish, brush, earth or other material of any nature whatsoever;

5. Constructing, placing or maintaining on, over, under or within the right-of-way, any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, paving or other surface or subsurface drainage structure or facility, any pipe, conduit, wire or cable;

6. Traveling on the right-of-way by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension, weight or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit;

7. Lighting or building a fire;

8. Constructing, placing, planting or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree or other object adjacent to a right-of-way or watercourse which causes or will cause an encroachment.

D. “Permittee” means any person, firm or corporation that proposes to do work or encroach upon a city right-of-way or watercourse as herein defined and has been issued a permit for such encroachment by the director of public works.

E. “Private contract” means a contract between two or more parties for the installation, construction, revision, operation or creation of an encroachment, to which contract the city is not a party.

F. “Public street” means the full width of the dedicated right-of-way of any road, street, highway, alley, lane, or pedestrian walkway used by or for the general public.

G. “Right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, storm drainage, water, sanitary sewer, pedestrian walkway, or other purposes.

H. “Watercourse” means a channel for the carrying of storm water, including both natural and artificial water channels. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.020 Required permit and permit agreement.
A. No person shall encroach or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatsoever within, upon, over or under the limits of any right-of-way or watercourse; or make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature within, upon, over, or under the limits of any right-of-way or watercourse; or make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature within, upon, over, or under such right-of-way or watercourse; or construct, put upon, maintain or leave thereon, or cause to be constructed, put on, maintained, or left thereon, any obstruction or impediment of any nature whatsoever; or remove, cut or trim trees thereon; or set a fire thereon; or to place on, over or under such right-of-way any pipeline, conduit or other fixtures; or move over or cause to be moved over the surface of any right-of-way or over any bridge, viaduct, or other structure maintained by the city, any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the right-of-way; or place any structure, wall, culvert, or similar encroachment, or make any excavation or embankment, in such a way as to endanger the normal usage of the right-of-way or watercourse without having first obtained a permit as required by this chapter. An encroachment permit will normally be used only for a single parcel development.

B. Any long term encroachment of any type of private structure in the public right-of-way (i.e., awnings, poles, access ramps, etc.) will require a permit agreement as well as a permit. (Ord. 17-10 § 10; Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.030 Emergency work.
This chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public street, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises during the hours the offices of the city are closed, except that the person making an emergency use or encroachment on a public street shall apply for a permit therefor within one calendar day after the offices of the city are again opened. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.040 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to officers or employees of the city acting in the discharge of their official duties, or to any work being performed by any person, firm, or corporation, at the request of and pursuant to a public works contract with the city. The director of public works shall have the authority to issue exemptions in exceptional instances. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.050 Restriction of use.
All permits granted subject to this chapter shall be subject to the right of the city, and any person or persons entitled thereto, to use any part of a public right-of-way for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of a right-of-way may be unduly obstructed at any time. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.060 Permits and fees.
A. Application for Permit. The director of public works shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application for the use of applicants for permits required by this chapter. The application shall show such information and details as the director of public works may deem necessary to establish the exact location, nature, dimensions, duration and purpose of the proposed use or encroachment.

B. Exhibits Required. The application shall be accompanied by maps, sketches, diagrams, or similar exhibits, to the size and in the quantity as the director of public works may prescribe, sufficient to clearly illustrate the location, dimensions, nature and purpose of the proposed encroachment and its relation to existing and proposed facilities in the right-of-way or watercourse.

C. Consent of Public Agencies. The applicant shall also enclose with, attach or add to the application the written order or consent to any work thereunder, required by law, of the Public Utilities Commission, California Department of Transportation or any other public body having jurisdiction. A permit shall not be issued until and unless such order or consent is first obtained and evidence thereof filed with the director of public works. The permittee shall keep himself adequately informed of all state and federal laws and local ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the permit. The applicant shall at all times comply with and shall cause all his agents and employees to comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, court and similar authoritative orders.

D. Actions on Applications. Applications may be approved, conditionally approved or denied. The director of public works may use up to two working days to field check existing conditions related to the permit prior to issuance. Where the director of public works finds that the application is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, he shall issue a permit for the use or encroachment, attaching such conditions as he may deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public and for the protection of the city. If the director of public works finds the application is in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, he shall deny the permit, giving the reasons for said denial.

If any applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the director of public works, said applicant may appeal the decision in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

E. Excavation Prohibited. The city shall have the power to deny a permit involving excavation in the traveled way of newly constructed, reconstructed or heavily traveled streets.

F. Permit – Form and Validity. Permits must be written on a form prescribed by the director of public works which are on file at the City Hall. No permit shall be valid unless signed by the director of public works or his authorized representative.

G. Term of Permit – Beginning of Work. The permittee shall begin the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter within seven calendar days from the date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not begun accordingly, then the permit shall become void.

H. Term of Permit – Completion of Work. The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this ordinance within 14 days from the date of issuance unless a different time limit is specified in the permit. Should the permittee be unable to complete the work before the permit expires, a time extension may be granted. It shall be the permittee’s responsibility to notify the city in writing of the reason for the delay. If a time extension is justified, the extension will be noted on the permit. Failure to obtain an extension shall require the permittee to make application for a new permit. Any work done without a valid permit will require a special field investigation fee. If at any time the director of public works finds that the delay in the prosecution of completion of the work or use authorized is due to lack of diligence on the part of the permittee, he may cancel the permit and restore the right-of-way or watercourse to its former condition. The permittee shall reimburse the city for all expenses incurred by the director of public works in restoring the right-of-way or watercourse.

I. Display of Permit. The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to this chapter at the site of work and the permit must be shown to any authorized representative of the director of public works or law enforcement officer on demand.

J. Nonassignment. Permits shall be issued only to the person making application therefor and may not be assigned to another person or location by the permittee. If any permittee assigns his permit to another person or another location, the permit shall become void.

K. Changes in Permit or Work. No changes may be made in the location, dimensions, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the director of public works. No permits shall be required for the continuing use or maintenance of encroachments installed by public utilities, for changes, additions or extensions therein or thereto where such use, maintenance, changes, additions or extensions require no excavation of the right-of-way.

L. Permit Fees. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city cash or certified check in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, any charges for field investigation, and the fee for necessary inspection and restoration, all in accordance with the encroachment permit fee schedule set by the city council as provided in subsection (N) of this section. Although a utility encroachment permit is required, the permit and/or inspection fee may be waived for a public utility or a public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any public street, right-of-way or watercourse.

M. Field Investigation Fee. Whenever any work for which a permit is required under the provisions of this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit or when a permit has expired, a special field investigation shall be made, and a field investigation fee shall be collected in addition to any other fees. The payment of the field investigation fee shall not exempt any person from fully complying with the provisions and requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed by law.

N. Permit Fees. All fees required for encroachment permits, field inspections and new street cuts shall be established by city council resolution.

O. New Street Cuts. Cuts into new streets which have been surfaced with asphalt concrete within five years for overlay or reconstruction or streets surfaced with seal coating within two years prior to the excavation shall require a street restoration fee established by city council. (Ord. 17-10 §§ 11, 12; Ord. 07-43 § 1; Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.070 Bonds and insurance.
A. Performance Bond. The city shall require a cash bond of all licensed contractors doing encroachment permit type work. Such cash deposit shall be in the minimum amount noted in the fee schedule and shall be maintained in that amount so long as the contractor is licensed to conduct operations within the city. The difference, if any, between the bond amount and the minimum shall be either a cash bond or surety bond.

B. Condition of Bond. The condition of the performance bond made pursuant to this chapter shall be that the permittee will diligently and in good faith comply with all provisions of the Benicia Municipal Code, city standards and specifications, and the terms and conditions of the permit. Failure on the part of the contractor to complete the work noted on the encroachment permit will result in the city restoring the right-of-way to its former condition. All or a portion as necessary of the performance bond will be used to reimburse the city for its expenses.

C. Exclusions. Cash deposits normally will not be required of any public utility or public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public street or right-of-way. Street resurfacing work performed by the city will be reimbursed through regular billing procedures.

D. Insurance Required. When insurance is required under this section, no person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to an encroachment permit under this chapter unless, and until, he/she/it shall have filed and maintained on file with the director of public works a certificate or certificates showing and certifying that such person, firm or corporation carries public liability and property damage insurance, issued by an insurance carrier determined reliable by the director of public works or a reliable self-insured corporation insuring the applicant and the city against loss by reason of injuries to or death of persons, or damage to property, caused by the applicant, its agents, or employees in performing any work under such permit in amounts and with coverages acceptable to the director of public works as long as:

1. The city is named as an additional insured;

2. The applicant’s policy is primary to the city’s;

3. The policy contains a cross-liability clause; and

4. The city shall be notified, in writing, by the carrier 30 days in advance of the policy’s cancellation.

The director of public works, or his/her designee, may require the permittee, as a condition to issuance of the permit, to secure and maintain adequate liability insurance in a form and amount satisfactory to the director. Whether or not such insurance shall be required shall depend on the nature of the encroachment, the work to be performed thereon, and the risks attendant thereto. If insurance is required, certificates thereof, naming the city as an additional insured, must be supplied to the director before issuance of the permit. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.080 Regulations.
A. Liability. The permittee will hold the city and its officers and employees harmless from and will indemnify them against all claims, liability and loss, and in particular from and against all such claims, liability and loss predicated on active or passive negligence of the city resulting directly or indirectly from operations under an issued encroachment permit. This hold harmless obligation shall not terminate during the life of the permit. The permittee shall inform himself as to the existence and location of all underground facilities and protect the same against damage. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director of public works and owner of the utility. If it is necessary to relocate an existing utility, such relocation shall be done by the owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee, unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee, unless other contractual arrangements are made. The permittee shall support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other underground structures affected by excavation work, and shall inform the owner if any damage occurs to such facilities during the conduct of the work. All repairs, including replacement of protective pipe coatings, shall be made by the owner of the damaged facilities, unless other arrangements are made. The expense of repairs of any damage shall be charged to the permittee. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers or employees, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claim.

B. Public Safety. The permittee in the conduct of the work, use or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide, erect, and/or maintain such lights, barriers, warning signs, patrols, watchmen and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling public. If, at any time, the director of public works finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, the city may provide, erect, maintain, relocate, or move such safeguards as are deemed necessary, all at the expense of the permittee. In addition, a field investigation fee shall be paid by the permittee. The warning signs, lights and other safety devices shall conform to the applicable requirements of the vehicle code, the current sign manual issued and in use by the Department of Transportation of the state and the city standard specifications. Alternatively, the director of public works may revoke the permit and require restoration of the right-of-way or watercourse to its former condition at the expense of the permittee as provided in BMC 12.12.280.

C. Maintaining Traffic. The permittee shall give particular attention to facilitating the flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Unless prior written approval is obtained from the director of public works, the permittee may not:

1. Obstruct more than one-half of the area used by vehicles;

2. Obstruct driveway approaches for a period exceeding one hour; or

3. Obstruct between the curb (or the shoulder if there is no curb) and the right-of-way line in such a way as to create a hazardous path for pedestrians.

The use of flagmen is mandatory where the (a) two-way vehicular traffic has less than 24 feet in which to pass; or (b) where vehicular traffic must pass to the left of dividing islands in passing the site of the encroachment.

The permittee may be required to remove excavated material from the site of the encroachment as it is excavated rather than stockpiling it on the street when such removal is necessary to permit traffic to pass freely and safely.

D. Fire Hydrants. Access shall be maintained at all times. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.090 Notices.
A. Notices to City. All notices required by this chapter to be given by the permittee to the director of public works shall be given at his office at the City Hall.

B. Notices to Permittee. Any notice to be given to the permittee shall be deemed to have been received by him upon mailing to the address shown on the permit.

C. Beginning of Work. Before beginning any work which is or includes excavation; construction of concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveway approaches; planting, trimming or removing trees; making, placing or causing an obstruction in the watercourse or traveled way, the permittee shall notify the director of public works 24 hours in advance.

D. Completion of Work. The permittee shall, upon completion of all work authorized in the permit, notify the director of public works. No work shall be deemed to be completed until notification of completion is given pursuant to this section and the work is accepted by the director of public works. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.100 Care of drainage.
If the work, use or encroachment authorized in the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage as directed by the director of public works. Should the permittee fail to properly care for drainage, the director of public works shall notify the permittee to take corrective action; if the permittee fails to complete such corrective action immediately upon receiving said notice, the director of public works shall take such action as may be necessary to correct the drainage at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.110 Proper execution of work.
It shall be incumbent upon the permittee to plan and execute the work or use so as to cause the least inconvenience to the general public and abutting property owners. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.120 Maintenance of encroachment.
For a period of one year after the completion of the work, the permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the street which occurs as the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street which would not have occurred had such work not been done. By the acceptance of the permit the permittee agrees to comply with the above. The permittee shall, upon notice from the director of public works, immediately repair any injury, damage or nuisance in any portion of the right-of-way or watercourse resulting from the work done under the permit. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly or should the exigencies of the injury or damage require repairs or replacements to be made before the permittee can be notified or can respond to the notification, the city may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacements or perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with all the expenses incurred in the performance of the work. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.130 Restoring of street.
A. Obstructions. Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued, or when required by the director of public works, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the right-of-way at the place of work to the same condition existing prior thereto unless otherwise provided in this chapter or in the permit. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, impediments, materials or rubbish caused or placed within or upon the watercourse or the right-of-way of the public street under the permit, and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the watercourse or right-of-way to a safe and usable condition.

B. Repaving by City Crews. Where an excavation is made in a street area that requires repaving with asphaltic paving materials, the applicant shall make the final repair of the street surface. Should the applicant fail to complete the final repair within 14 days, the director of public works shall make the final repair at a fee in accordance with the permit fee schedule.

C. Exceptions. Bonded subdivision work and major public works projects shall be exempt from complying with subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.140 Relocation or removal of encroachments.
If any future construction, reconstruction or maintenance work by the city on a watercourse or right-of-way requires the relocation, removal or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under the watercourse or right-of-way, the permittee owning, controlling or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate, remove or abandon the same at his sole expense; provided, however, that this provision shall apply to and remain in force and effect only so long as a street right-of-way upon which such installations or structures are located shall be used for usual street purposes and not as a freeway, and this provision shall cease to apply when such street shall become a freeway. When removal, relocation or abandonment is required, the director of public works shall give said permittee a written demand specifying the place of relocation or that the installations or encroachment must be removed, relocated or abandoned. If said permittee fails to comply with said instructions, the city may cause the removal, relocation or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.150 Standards and specifications.
The director of public works shall establish such standards and specifications as he may deem necessary for the proper construction, use and maintenance of encroachments. Any work or use done under such permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to said standards and specifications. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 2, 1987).

12.12.160 Supervision and inspection.
The director of public works is authorized to make such inspections in person or through authorized subordinates as he may deem necessary in connection with permits issued under this chapter. All work done or used under such permits shall be done under the supervision of and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.170 Storage of materials.
Unless otherwise approved by the director of public works, no material shall be stored within five feet of a public street. All earth materials from trenching or other operations shall be removed from the pavement, traveled way, sidewalk, or shoulder as the trench is backfilled or other work carried forward. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.180 Pipes and conduits.
A. Method of Installation. Installation shall be in conformance with current city standard specifications and details.

B. Minimum Cover. The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits installed within the right-of-way shall be three feet of earth or imported materials, unless otherwise specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of three feet shall be measured from the flow line of the gutter, existing or planned. The director of public works is authorized to permit installation of pipes or conduits where three feet of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structures, or other engineering necessity.

C. Backfill. Unless special instructions are otherwise given by the director of public works, the backfilling of an excavation shall be done as specified in the city standard specifications and details. All backfilling shall be done to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.190 Poles and transmission line carriers.
A. Clearances and Types. Clearances and types in the construction of poles and transmission line carriers shall be in accordance with rules, regulations and orders of the public utilities commission and other public agencies having jurisdiction.

B. Guy Wires. Guy wires shall not be attached to trees or interfere with their growth. Guy wires shall not be below the minimum elevation above the ground prescribed in the rules, orders and regulations of the public utilities commission.

C. Method of Removing and Replacing. When a pole, brace, stub or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. Where such a pole, brace, stub or similar timber was located in an area paved with concrete, asphalt, or other permanent surfacing, the area occupied shall be trimmed and resurfaced in kind to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.200 Cutting exposed concrete pavement.
Any cuts made in exposed concrete sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway or paving shall be defined by a saw cut to a depth of not less than one-third the thickness of said concrete, to a maximum of one and one-half inches. All cuts in concrete shall be made to the nearest score line unless otherwise permitted by the director of public works. The director of public works may require removal of additional concrete when necessary to present a suitable appearance upon restoration. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.210 Aids to visibility.
When the location or position of a pole or other obstruction makes accentuation of its visibility to vehicular traffic necessary, the director of public works may require that the pole or other obstruction be painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the public utilities commission or the Department of Transportation of the state at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.220 Movements of vehicles or objects.
A. Permit. Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or objects of weight or dimension or characteristic (prohibited by law without a permit) is moved on any public right-of-way, a permit to do so must first be granted by the director of public works as set forth in specifications established by the director of public works or as otherwise required by him. Special permits shall be issued to subdividers.

B. Authorization by Permit. When authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight in excess of that permitted by law, the permittee shall comply with the general law regulating traffic over a public street, including posted signs or notices which limit speed or direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure or the width or height that may be moved thereon or thereover or otherwise restrict or control travel on a public street. The permittee shall at all times conform to and abide by the practice and procedure necessary to make safe and convenient the travel of the general public, and to keep safe and preserve the public highway over and on which movement is being made. Any violation of this section shall cancel the permit issued to the permittee.

C. Written Notice of Movement by Permittee. Prior to commencing any move for which a permit is granted pursuant to this chapter the permittee shall give at least 48 hours’ written notice to all police and fire department authorities having jurisdiction. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.230 Mailboxes.
All mailboxes must be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States postal service, but no box shall be so placed within the road right-of-way as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public. A permit is not required for the placing of individual mailboxes. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.240 Hedges, fences or shrubbery.
A. Planting or Erection. No hedge, fence, shrub or similar structure shall be planted, erected or maintained in a watercourse or right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct the watercourse or right-of-way. No hedge, shrub or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure shall be maintained across any existing walkway in a sidewalk area or shoulder. No encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs or denies such pedestrian or other lawful travel within the limits of the right-of-way of a public street, or which impairs adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

B. Maintenance. At the discretion of the director of public works, any permittee who is permitted to encroach upon a right-of-way or watercourse may be required to erect and maintain landscaping in the encroached upon right-of-way or watercourse of a nature and a description determined by the director of public works. If the encroachment is not maintained as specified in this chapter, the director of public works may direct that the permittee or property owner remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way or watercourse to its former condition at the expense of the permittee or property owner.

C. Lawns. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, any person may plant and maintain a lawn of any grass, of a type not prohibited by other law within the right-of-way of a public street without a written permit. However, the lawn shall not extend into the traveled way of the public street nor into drainage ditches, gutters or other drainage facilities. The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful travel. The city may use the planted area for any purpose whatever, and may issue a permit to any applicant to go thereon to perform work or otherwise encroach pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn is damaged or disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, it will be removed and replaced by the permittee unless the permit specifically states otherwise. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.250 Irrigation systems.
No portion of any irrigation system shall extend above the level of the surrounding ground or pavement. No irrigation system shall be installed in such a way as to direct sprays or streams of water into or over adjacent street, sidewalk or driveway areas. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.260 Preservation of monuments.
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public street or right-of-way, property subdivision or a precise survey point or reference point shall not be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission from the director of public works to do so, said permission to be granted in conformance with requirements as set forth in specifications established by the director of public works. Replacement of removed or disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.270 Maps of facilities.
Each permittee installing, constructing or maintaining underground facilities such as pipes, wires, conduits or similar structures under a permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall maintain accurate and complete maps of the location, depth, size and character of such facilities, and shall furnish at no cost to the city copies of said maps to the director of public works upon his demand. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.280 Revocation of permit.
A. Any encroachment permit may be revoked at any time at the option of the director of public works, whenever:

1. It appears to the director that the continuing allowance of the encroachment, whether because of changed conditions or otherwise, interferes with full, adequate or safe public use of the right-of-way or watercourse involved; and/or

2. The permittee fails to comply with or violates any city ordinance, city standards, safety regulations, or any condition of the issuance of the permit.

B. Upon revocation of the permit, the permittee shall immediately restore the public right-of-way or watercourse to a condition as required by the director of public works. If the restoration is not completed within the time specified by the director of public works, the city may take any and all necessary action so required to restore the right-of-way or watercourse. Any and all costs incurred by the city for enforcement of this section shall be at the expense of the permittee. Costs incurred by the city will be deducted from any deposits and/or bonds posted by the permittee and, if necessary, recovered by legal action.

C. Notice of the revocation of the permit shall be by registered mail, addressed to the post office address of the permittee, or by personal service of such notice upon the permittee. The time required for removal of the encroachment shall be specified in the notice.

D. It is unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to place, erect or maintain or to permit the placing, erection, maintenance or existence of an encroachment upon, over or under the right-of-way or watercourse after his/her permit has expired, or after his/her permit has been revoked, and the time specified in the notice from the city for removal of the same has expired. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.290 Imposing penalties for violations.
Where any act is prohibited in this chapter, the doing of said act is declared herewith to be unlawful and will constitute a misdemeanor. Where the doing of any act is required in this chapter, the failure to do that act is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor. Chapter 1.08 BMC, General Penalty, covering penalties, shall apply to noncompliance with the sections of this chapter. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

12.12.300 Declaration of public nuisance.
Any encroachment erected, installed, maintained or constructed in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 87-16 N.S. § 3, 1987).

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to prevent encroachment and obstruction of city streets, see Government Code § 38775.


Chapter 12.16
REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS1
Sections:

12.16.010    Title.

12.16.020    Definitions.

12.16.030    Necessity – Order by council.

12.16.040    Investigation and report by administrator.

12.16.050    Dispute with administrator’s report – Planning commission hearing.

12.16.060    Required work – Action by administrator.

12.16.070    Required work – Notice.

12.16.080    Required work – Procedure.

12.16.090    Statement of charges.

12.16.100    Record by administrator.

12.16.110    Appeals.

12.16.120    Charges as lien against property.

12.16.130    Lien and installment terms – Notice.

12.16.140    Notice – Proof of publication, posting or mailing.

12.16.150    Unpaid charges – Assessment and collection.

12.16.160    Refunds.

12.16.170    Payment under protest.

12.16.180    Legality of charges.

12.16.190    Bond required.

12.16.200    Permit required.

12.16.210    Removal and disposal of earth.

12.16.220    Restoration requirements.

12.16.230    General specifications.

12.16.240    Driveway specifications.

12.16.250    Inspection and enforcement.

12.16.260    Repealed.

12.16.270    Traffic restriction – Penalty.

12.16.280    Monthly payroll by superintendent of streets.

12.16.290    Statutory requirements.

12.16.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and designated as the “curb and sidewalk area ordinance.” (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 27, 1954).

12.16.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms are defined.

A. “Administrator” means the person designated by the council to administer this chapter.

B. “City” means the city of Benicia.

C. “Council” means the council of the city.

D. “Owner” means any person, firm, or corporation listed as the owner of real property on the tax rolls of the city, or their agent or representative.

E. “Sidewalk area” is that portion of public streets between gutter line and property line. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 1, 1954).

12.16.030 Necessity – Order by council.
The council may on its own initiative, or on report or complaint of a resident of the city or of the street superintendent stating that conditions exist in any curb, sidewalk area or alley in the city which require repairs or construction, in order to protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city, or to protect the investment made in improvements by the city, order the administrator to make a complete study of the situation and report his findings to the council at the next regular meeting of the council following the order. (Ord. 640-B M.C. § 1, 1965; Ord. 640-A M.C. § 2, 1954).

12.16.040 Investigation and report by administrator.
The administrator shall investigate the situation, interview owners, and meet with the street superintendent and devise a plan incorporating the joint findings of such interview and meetings. The administrator shall estimate work necessary, together with the estimated cost thereof, and submit to the council a report on the status, feasibility, need and cost with a recommendation for disposition of the project or matter. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 3, 1954).

12.16.050 Dispute with administrator’s report – Planning commission hearing.
A. The council shall consider the report of the administrator and, in the event a dispute between the owners and the administrator exists, submit the report to the planning commission with the request that the commission hold a public hearing with the owners involved and the administrator being notified to be present at the hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the address of owners as listed on tax rolls 10 days prior to the hearing, Sundays and holidays to be excluded. The commission shall consider the matter and listen to any parties concerned, and submit to the council a recommendation for appropriate action.

B. The council shall then decide a course of action and, by a resolution, direct the administrator to proceed in accordance with its decision. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 4, 1954).

12.16.060 Required work – Action by administrator.
In the event that the council decides that certain repairs or construction are required in any curb, sidewalk area or alley to protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city or the investment made in permanent improvements on any street or alley in the city, the council shall direct the administrator to take steps to prosecute to completion the required works. (Ord. 640-B M.C. § 1, 1965; Ord. 640-A M.C. § 5, 1954).

12.16.070 Required work – Notice.
A. The administrator shall give notice in writing to the owner or owners of property abutting on curbs, sidewalk areas, or alleys where work is required to be done. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE TO (REPAIR) (CONSTRUCT)

The owner of the property described as follows: ___________________, commonly known as __________________, is hereby ordered to (repair) (construct) the _________________ in front of or abutting said property in accordance with specifications outlined in Ordinance No. ____, said specifications being on file in the office of the Administrator, and to commence such work within fifteen (15) days after date hereof, and diligently prosecuted to completion, or appear before the Council at its next regular meeting to be held on _____________, 20___, and show cause why said work should not be done, or why the time therefor should be extended.

If the work herein indicated is not so commenced or an extension therefor granted by the Council, the Administrator shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof, including incidentals, will be made a lien upon said property as provided by law.

Estimated cost of (repair) (construction)
$ ___________________

Dated this day of ___________________, 20___, at Benicia, California.

City of Benicia

By    ______________________________
    Administrator of Ordinance No. 640-A
    M.C.

B. One copy of such notice shall be posted in front of each parcel of property abutting the curb, sidewalk area or alley, and one copy shall be mailed to the address of the owner as listed on the tax rolls of the city. The notice shall be dated, posted and mailed not less than 10 nor more than 12 days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, prior to the next regular council meeting. (Ord. 640-B M.C. § 1, 1965; Ord. 640-A M.C. § 6, 1954).

12.16.080 Required work – Procedure.
Unless the repairs or construction required, as stated in the notice, are commenced within 15 days from the date of notice, or within any extension of time as may be granted by the council, and diligently prosecuted to completion, the administrator shall forthwith proceed with the repairs and construction as specified in the notice. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 7, 1954).

12.16.090 Statement of charges.
Where the administrator proceeds with the repairs or construction as provided in this chapter, he shall, on completion thereof, prepare an itemized statement of all charges in connection therewith and mail the same to the last known address of the owner of the posted property. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 8, 1954).

12.16.100 Record by administrator.
The administrator shall cause to be entered in a permanent record in his office the following:

A. The description of each parcel of property on which a notice to repair or construct has been posted;

B. The name of the owner and his address;

C. The date of report or complaint;

D. The date of council action and resolution number;

E. The date of the planning commission action;

F. The date of posting and notification to repair or construct;

G. The charges incurred by the city, if any, in causing the repair or construction to be made, together with incidental expenses in connection therewith;

H. The method of payment, delinquencies in such payments and penalties for delinquency, if any;

I. The date of mailing the statement of charges for the repairs of construction, if any, to the owner;

J. The date and amount of any payment made thereon. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 9, 1954).

12.16.110 Appeals.
A. Between the first and fifteenth day of January of each year, the administrator shall cause to be published once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice providing:

1. Any person affected or aggrieved by any act or determination of the administrator or the Council made or done pursuant to this Ordinance No. 640-A M.C. during the preceding year ending December 31st, for which charges remain unpaid, may at any time prior to 10 days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, preceding the next regular meeting of the council to be held on ______________, 20___, file a written appeal with the city clerk of the city;

2. Charges made for any repairs or construction by the administrator, and as may be adjusted on appeal by the council, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall become delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the fifth day of March next succeeding the date of publication of this notice, and that a penalty of 10 percent of such delinquent charges, plus the publication fee, shall then be assessed, which penalty shall become part of said charges and collectable in the same manner;

3. A publication fee of $0.50 for each unpaid statement of charges shall be assessed, and such fee shall become part of the charges and collectable in the same manner at the same time. Said fee shall be paid into the city treasury and credited to the general fund of the city.

B. The council shall hear and pass upon all appeals properly and timely filed at its next regular meeting following the filing of the appeal, or as soon after such next regular meeting as is practicable, and its determination thereon shall be final and conclusive.

C. On determination of an appeal, the council shall advise the administrator of its decision, and the administrator shall thereupon cause appropriate corrections and entries to be made in his permanent record and notice of such decision to be mailed to the appealing property owner. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 11, 1954).

12.16.120 Charges as lien against property.
From and after the date of entry of the charges in the permanent record as provided by BMC 12.16.100(G), the charges for repair or construction shall become a lien against the posted property and shall be enforced in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 10, 1954).

12.16.130 Lien and installment terms – Notice.
As an alternative method of enforcing any lien in excess of $25.00, including all penalties and fees assessed, the council at any meeting subsequent to the expiration of the time for appeal as provided in BMC 12.16.110 may direct the administrator to file notice of lien with the county recorder, and may also direct that the lien may be liquidated on the installment basis, specifying a number not to exceed five annual installments, with interest to be charged at the rate of six percent per year of the unpaid balance to run from the date of filing such notice of lien. The notice of lien shall be substantially in the following form:

NOTICE OF LIEN

Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Ordinance No. 640-A M.C. of the City of Benicia, I did, beginning on or about the ____day of _______________, 20____, cause the _______________ in front of, or abutting, the real property hereinafter described to be (repaired) (constructed) and on the ____ day of ______________, 20____, did mail to the registered owner of said property an itemized statement of the charges therefor, and the same has not been paid to this date, or any part thereof; therefore, the City of Benicia does hereby give notice of its lien against the said described real property in the sum of ________ Dollars ($________), representing the total charges, penalties and fees included, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the said charges with interest at the rate of six per centum (6%), per annum from the date hereof has been paid in full and discharged of records.

The real property hereinbefore mentioned is that certain parcel of land lying within the City of Benicia, County of Solano, State of California, described as follows, to-wit:

(Description)

DATED THIS ____ day of __________, 20___, at the City of Benicia.

CITY OF BENICIA

By

Administrator of Ordinance
No. 640-A M.C.

B. On the date of filing such notice of lien, the administrator shall also cause to be mailed to the owner of the described real property a copy of such notice, together with a letter setting forth the installment terms as set by the council and the following information:

In the event of failure to meet any installment payment as herein provided pursuant to written directions of the council before the fifteenth day of August in the year due, an additional penalty of 10 percent of the total assessed charges remaining unpaid shall be added thereto and become a part thereof, and the whole shall become due and payable immediately.

C. The council shall give such directions to the administrator in writing and shall also cause a copy thereof to be filed with the clerk of the city. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 12, 1954).

12.16.140 Notice – Proof of publication, posting or mailing.
Proof of publication, posting or mailing of any notice, order, or determination provided for in this chapter shall be made by affidavit of the printer of the newspaper in which published, his foreman or principal clerk, or the person posting or mailing the notice, order or determination, annexed to a copy of such order, notice or determination, published, posted or mailed, as the case may be, and specifying the time where or at which the same was published, posted or mailed, as the case may be. It shall be the duty of the administrator to keep among the official records of his office the affidavit of publication, posting or mailing provided for in this section, and no error in the name or address and no failure to receive a copy of the notices mailed as provided in this section shall affect in any manner the validity of the procedure or of any lien imposed hereunder. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 14, 1954).

12.16.150 Unpaid charges – Assessment and collection.
On the fifteenth day of August of each year, the administrator shall deliver to the tax collector an abstract of all charges unpaid, delinquent and due as of said date, showing the property affected and the sum of the charges, including penalties, fees and interest to date, against the same. The tax collector shall thereupon record the amount of such charges on the assessment books for city taxes against the respective parcels, and thereafter the amount so recorded shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time and subject to the same additional penalties and charges as provided for general city taxes. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 13, 1954).

12.16.160 Refunds.
The amount of any charge or any portion of the amount of any charge made a lien on property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:

A. Which has been or shall be paid more than once;

B. Which has been or shall be erroneously or illegally collected;

C. Where an amount in excess of the amount chargeable has been or shall be paid; or

D. Where the amount charged was not chargeable to the person or the property of the person paying the same under the provisions of this chapter by reason of a mistake or clerical error of the officers or employees of the city;

may be refunded to the person entitled thereto by order of the council in the same manner provided by law for the refunding of payment of general city taxes. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 15(a), 1954).

12.16.170 Payment under protest.
At any time after the assessment book for general city taxes has been received by the tax collector, the owner of any property affected by charges herein made a lien on the property may claim that the same is void in whole or in part and may pay the charges under protest, which protest shall be in writing and shall specify whether the whole of the charges is claimed to be void or, if a portion only, what portion, and in either case, the grounds on which such claim is founded. When such charge is so paid under protest, the payment shall in no case be regarded as a voluntary payment, and such owner may, at any time within six months after such payment, file suit to recover the same in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 15(b), 1954).

12.16.180 Legality of charges.
No charge, or any act relating to such charge, or the collection of the same under the provisions of this chapter shall be illegal on account of informality or because the same was not completed within the time required by law. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 16, 1954).

12.16.190 Bond required.
Every person, firm or corporation carrying on the business of laying down, constructing or repairing sidewalks, curbs, walls, driveways or stairs on the public streets of the city, before engaging in such business, must furnish a bond in favor of the city in the sum of $500.00 with two good and sufficient sureties for the faithful compliance with the provisions of this chapter, which bond shall be approved by the administrator and filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 17, 1954).

12.16.200 Permit required.
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to lay down or construct, remove, alter, repair or cause to be laid down or constructed, removed, altered, or repaired any sidewalk, curb, wall, driveway or stairs on the public streets of the city without first having obtained a permit to do so, in writing, from the administrator. The life of any such permit shall be 60 days, and any work done pursuant to the permit must be completed within 60 days from the date of the permit.

B. A person, firm, or corporation desiring to obtain such permit shall file with the administrator written application therefor, which shall set forth the location of the property in front of which the sidewalk, curb, wall or stairs is to be laid down or constructed; the name of the owner of the property; the name of the person by whom, or the name of the firm or corporation by which, the work is to be done; the location and dimensions of the sidewalk or curb; and the materials of which the same is to be constructed. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 18, 1954).

12.16.210 Removal and disposal of earth.
Whenever it is necessary, in laying down, constructing or repairing any sidewalks, curb, wall or stairs on the public streets of the city, to remove any portion of earth for such purpose, it shall be the duty of the person, firm or corporation doing the work, prior to the completion thereof, to dispose of the earth so removed, either by depositing the same on the property of the owner in front of whose property the work is done, or by depositing it upon the property of some one else, whose permission and consent so to do has been first had and obtained, unless other disposition thereof should be ordered by the administrator. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 19, 1954).

12.16.220 Restoration requirements.
It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation engaged in the laying down, constructing or repairing of any sidewalks, curbs, walls, driveways or stairs on the public streets of the city, immediately upon the completion thereof, to remove all tools, equipment, lumber, mortar, lime, cement and other construction materials remaining after the completion of the work, as well as all dirt, rubbish or debris occasioned by the work, and to leave the streets or sidewalks in a condition of thorough cleanliness and make a written report of the same to the administrator. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 20, 1954).

12.16.230 General specifications.
All sidewalks, curbs, alleys, walls, stairs and driveways shall be constructed, altered or repaired in accordance with the permit issued therefor and must fulfill the following specifications:

A. All sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, stairs, walls or other structures in the street area shall be constructed, as hereinafter specified, of class “A” concrete as specified in the current State of California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) “Standard Specifications” unless otherwise approved by the administrator.

B. The minimum width of sidewalks shall be four feet fronting residential property.

C. Sidewalks fronting commercial, industrial, or office property shall be of the width from property line to the curb line, unless otherwise approved in writing by the administrator.

D. A planting strip of at least four feet in width shall be left between the curb and the sidewalk fronting residential property unless otherwise approved in writing by the administrator.

E. The lateral and longitudinal slopes of sidewalks shall be in compliance with the most current city standard plans or Caltrans standard plans, whichever is the most restrictive.

F. The finish surface shall be sufficiently textured to the satisfaction of the administrator.

G. Driveway construction shall conform to the specifications as shown on detail sheets Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, copies of which are on file with the city clerk; the administrator shall furnish a copy of the applicable detail sheet to permittee at the time such permit is issued.

H. Curb and gutter shall be of two types, namely Type “A” and Type “B” as shown on detail sheets Nos. 6 and 7, copies of which are on file with the city clerk; the administrator shall furnish a copy of applicable detail sheet to permittee at the time such permit is issued.

I. Alleys shall be constructed, altered or repaired in accordance with the city regulations and standard specifications for public improvement. (Ord. 17-10 § 14; Ord. 640-B M.C. § 1, 1965; Ord. 640-A M.C. § 22, 1954).

12.16.240 Driveway specifications.
Driveways shall comply with the following regulations:

A. The maximum width of any driveway shall be not more than 20 feet as measured at the curbing.

B. The minimum distance between driveways serving the same lot or parcel of land shall be not less than 18 feet as measured at the curbing.

C. Not to exceed 50 percent of the frontage upon any street of the lot or lots or parcel of land to be served thereby shall be devoted to driveways.

D. No driveway shall be located in the intersection of two streets so as to interfere with sidewalks thereon.

E. No driveway or driveway approach shall be constructed so as to extend beyond the curb line into the gutter or street.

F. No permit shall be issued to remove any curbing unless a concrete driveway between curbing and sidewalk is to be installed.

G. Before any permit is issued to remove any curbing or install any driveway, the person, firm, or corporation owning the property to be served thereby shall sign an agreement with the city to replace any curbing so removed if and when requested to do so by the city council. It is the intention of this subsection to require replacement of curbings when driveways are no longer needed in connection with the property served thereby.

H. All concrete work shall be done in accordance with city specifications in effect at the time of such work.

I. Before any permit shall be issued to remove curbs or install driveways, an inspection fee established by city council resolution shall be paid to the city.

J. All existing driveways not in conformity with the terms of this chapter shall be required to conform thereto not later than six months after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

K. Provided, however, that the council may, in special cases, by resolution, order the issuance of a special permit to construct and maintain driveways in variance with the provisions of subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section. Applications for such special permits shall be made to the planning commission who shall recommend to the council the granting or denial of the same. A fee of $10.00 shall accompany such application for such special permit. No application shall be considered unless the fee shall have been paid. No fee or portion thereof shall be refundable.

L. Provided further, that the council may by resolution exempt any property from the provisions of subsection (J) of this section where practical difficulties exist due to lack of an established grade, or where the expense of establishing such grade would be disproportionate and the enforcement of the subsection would work an undue hardship. Such exemption shall be considered only on the written request of the property owner made to the planning commission, who shall study the request and make its recommendations to the council. A fee of $10.00 shall accompany each application, and no fee or portion thereof shall be refundable. (Ord. 17-10 § 13; Ord. 640-A M.C. § 23, 1954).

12.16.250 Inspection and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the administrator to cause the inspection of all locations on the public streets of the city where sidewalks, curbs, walls, driveways or stairs have been laid down or constructed immediately upon his notification of the completion thereof, and to take all necessary steps for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 21, 1954).

12.16.260 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 640-A M.C. § 24, 1954).

12.16.270 Traffic restriction – Penalty.
A. Whenever any street or portion of street in the city is being improved and the sign “Street Closed” is placed on the street or a portion of the street, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or lead any beast of burden, or propel any vehicle over or across the street or portion of the street; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the contractor actually engaged in the work of the improvement.

B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 113 M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1893).

12.16.280 Monthly payroll by superintendent of streets.
A. It is made the duty of the superintendent of streets, at the end of each month to prepare and submit to the city council at its regular monthly meeting a payroll on which he shall enter the names of all persons employed by him, under direction of the council or the street commissioner, during the preceding month, the number of days worked by each, the rate of wages per day and the amount due each. He shall verify the correctness of such payrolls by his affidavit endorsed thereon.

B. It shall thereafter be the duty of the city clerk to issue warrants for said amounts as in the case of other city employees provided. (Ord. 661 M.C. §§ 1, 2, 1893).

12.16.290 Statutory requirements.
The construction of sidewalks, curbs and alleys in the city shall be carried out pursuant to the provisions and procedures set forth in Chapter 27 of Part 3 of Division 7 of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Added during 1980 codification).

1
    For statutory provisions on maintenance of sidewalks, see Street and Highways Code § 5600 et seq.


Chapter 12.20
STREET IMPROVEMENTS BY RAILWAYS
Sections:

12.20.010  Requirements.

12.20.020  Administration.

12.20.030  Violation.

12.20.010 Requirements.
In all cases where the rails, track, or tracks of any railway corporation cross any open travelled street in the city, the owners or lessees thereof, their agents, officers, directors or managers must, at its or their own expense and within 10 days after having been so notified in writing by the superintendent of streets, commence or cause to be commenced the grading, macadamizing or graveling to the official grade of the city, all that portion of such street or streets, exclusive of sidewalks, as may be included within the exterior lines of the right-of-way of such railway corporation, and prosecute such work diligently and continuously to completion, within 30 days after the service of such notice or within such further time as the city council may by resolution grant. All of the macadamizing shall be of hard stone and gravel and done in a good and workmanlike manner, and any railway corporation must also in like manner and within the same time commence and construct, at its or their own expense, plank sidewalks of the official width and structure, and stone gutters along both sides of the portion of the streets so improved by the corporation or other aforesaid. All of the work shall be under the general direction of and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets. (Ord. 115 M.C. § 1, 1886).

12.20.020 Administration.
The superintendent of streets is authorized and directed to notify the owners, lessees or others as above of any railway corporation whose road may cross any street referred to in this chapter, to comply with all the terms and conditions of this chapter within the time and in the manner specified in this chapter. (Ord. 115 M.C. § 2, 1886).

12.20.030 Violation.
It is a violation of this code for any owner, lessee, agent, officer, director, or manager of any railway corporation operating its road in the city and crossing any street referred to in this chapter, to neglect or refuse to commence and complete the macadamizing, graveling and constructing of sidewalks and gutters as required in this chapter, within the time and in the manner specified. (Ord. 03-9 § 22; Ord. 115 M.C. § 3, 1886).

Chapter 12.24
TREES AND STREET TREES
Sections:

12.24.010    Purpose.

12.24.020    Definitions.

12.24.030    Protected trees.

12.24.040    General requirements – Public tree maintenance and hazardous tree removal.

12.24.050    Heritage trees.

12.24.060    Heritage trees – Maintenance.

12.24.070    Designated protected trees.

12.24.080    Property development.

12.24.090    Protection of trees on property during construction.

12.24.100    Tree pruning.

12.24.110    Permitting process.

12.24.120    Application requirements.

12.24.130    Standards of application review – Tree removal.

12.24.140    Standards of application review – Tree pruning.

12.24.150    Appeals.

12.24.160    Fees.

12.24.170    Tree replacement and mitigation.

12.24.180    Penalties.

12.24.190    Tree fund.

12.24.200    Administration – Tree subcommittee.

12.24.010 Purpose.
The Benicia general plan recognizes the importance of trees for their place in a natural setting and their contribution to community character and environmental health. Significant portions of the city are covered by trees, the conservation, sustainability, protection, maintenance and replanting of which is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The city seeks to protect trees in order to provide urban wildlife habitat, preserve scenic beauty and aesthetic and privacy characteristics, prevent erosion of topsoil, protect against flood hazards and the risk of landslides, counteract pollutants in the air, maintain climatic balance, decrease wind velocities, calm traffic and reduce public costs of installing and maintaining storm water drainage systems. The city has therefore determined that reasonable regulation of the removal, alteration, and planting of certain trees is necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined:

“Applicant” means a property owner requesting permission to remove or prune a tree at a designated site.

“Building footprint” means the two-dimensional configuration of a building’s perimeter boundaries measured on a horizontal plane at grade level.

“Certified arborist” means an individual who has demonstrated knowledge and competency by obtaining a current International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certification, or who is a member of the American Society of Consulting Arborists.

“City arborist” means a city employee that has an International Society of Arboriculture certification and is so designated by the director of the parks and community services department.

“City property tree” means a tree maintained by the city on any property owned in fee by the city of Benicia, which includes trees within city parks, open space, lighting and landscaping districts, street median islands and along First Street (this does not include street trees which are listed as a separate category).

“Collar” means the ring of trunk tissue that surrounds a lateral branch at its point of attachment to the stem.

“Commission” means the parks, recreation and cemetery commission.

“Compaction” means compression of the soil structure by any means that creates an upper layer that is impermeable.

“Conditional replacement tree” means any tree that is planted on public or private property as a condition of mitigation for the removal of any tree(s).

“Construction zone access” means the area of a wooded parcel that is necessary to provide access to existing or future structures located on the parcel, where there exists no feasible means of access that would avoid protected trees. On single-family residential parcels, the portion of the parcel deemed to be the construction zone access shall not exceed 10 feet in width.

“Designated protected tree” means any tree specifically designated by the city to be planted, or protected on public or private property that is subject to city commission or council discretionary development approval, such as a zoning variance, design review, or subdivision review.

“Diameter” of the tree means as measured 48 inches above natural grade.

“Diseased” means an abnormal condition of a tree or part that impairs normal physiological functioning, especially as a result of infection, inherent weakness, or environmental stress.

“Disturbance” means any activity that may damage trees.

“Drip line” means the line enclosing the outermost area from which water would drip from the tree. In cases where the drip line is difficult to determine, the drip line is considered the area that extends out and away from the trunk of the tree in all directions and ends at a distance measured 10 times the diameter of the trunk at 48 inches above grade.

“Drip line area” means the area measured from the trunk of the tree outward to a point at the perimeter of the outermost branch structure of the tree.

“Emergencies” means the condition in which a tree presents an immediate hazard to life or property; it may be removed without a permit on order of the city manager, or a member of the police, fire, or emergency response personnel.

“Hazardous tree” means a tree determined by the city manager, a member of the police, fire or emergency response personnel, or a certified arborist to be an immediate danger to persons or property. (Also see “potentially hazardous tree.”)

“Heritage tree” means any tree or grove of trees within the city boundaries designated by a resolution of the city council due to special qualities or significance and having met the requirements set forth in this chapter.

“Historic tree(s)” means a protected tree or group of trees, which has importance or influence in marking the history and/or events of the city of Benicia and so designated by a resolution of the city council.

“Injure” or “injury” means any act that damages a tree including, but not limited to: cutting; carving; transplanting; neglect; injurious attachment of any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; allowing any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance that is harmful to trees to come into contact with them; setting fire or permitting any fire to burn when such fire or the heat will injure any part of any tree; knocking over any tree; or damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, the operation of heavy equipment, the change of natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk of a tree.

“ISA” means the International Society of Arboriculture.

“Maintenance” means pruning, trimming, mulching, clipping, watering, staking, spraying, propping, fertilizing, bracing, treating disease or injury, and any other acts which promote the life, growth, or health of the city’s trees.

“Mitigation” means any action taken to permanently eliminate or reduce the impact on the environment or community from the loss of a tree or trees.

“Multi-trunked tree” means any tree with more than one trunk at or below 48 inches from natural grade.

“Native tree” means a tree native to northern California, suited to conditions in Benicia.

“Nuisance tree” means a tree that is prone to excessive litter, pollen, pest infestation, is invasive, or has other habits that cause it to be a problem for people.

“Potentially hazardous tree” means a tree that has been determined to be a potential hazard if it (1) harbors a serious disease or infestation threatening the health of other trees, plants or humans; (2) interferes with safe vehicular or pedestrian circulation; or (3) is causing or is likely to cause damage to property.

“Protected tree” means a tree designated by the city of Benicia as having characteristics such as great age, size, type, species, unique form or any other quality of significance to the community.

“Protective tree fencing” means a temporary enclosure erected around a tree to protect the tree and identify the boundary of the tree protection zone (TPZ).

“Registered consulting arborist” means and includes arborists who are registered with the American Association of Consulting Arborists and who typically offer advice but do not perform tree services.

“Relocate” means to remove a tree from the place where it is growing and replant it in another location.

“Replacement value” means the actual cost of replacing the same tree size and canopy removed or destroyed or if irreplaceable, its value as determined pursuant to the “basic value” or “square inch formula” in effect by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers adoption, as amended from time to time, and ensuring such planting results in survival for at least three years.

“Right-of-way” means the area upon which a legal right for a public street exists either as fee ownership or as an easement.

“Single-family residence” means any detached structure designed for occupation by one family. The term “single-family residence” includes mobile home spaces designed to be used for parking a mobile home on a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent basis.

“Street tree” means and includes trees intentionally planted along streets or roadways either within the public right-of-way or within private property adjacent to the roadway to enhance the environment. Street trees shall typically be within 10 feet from face of curb and shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner.

“Topping” means heading back (trimming) of the crown (top of the tree) and/or main leaders.

“Tree” means any live, woody plant with a single perennial woody stem of four inches diameter at 48 inches above natural grade, or a multi-stemmed perennial plant having an aggregate of 12 inches in diameter.

“Tree subcommittee” means a standing subcommittee of the parks, recreation and cemetery commission, as set forth in BMC 12.24.200. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.030 Protected trees.
A. List of Protected Trees. The following trees are protected by the city:

1. All city property trees over eight inches in diameter (as measured 48 inches above soil level).

2. Street trees over eight inches in diameter.

3. All heritage trees.

4. All designated protected trees.

5. All other trees over 12 inches in diameter.

6. California Native Trees. The following native species, which have a trunk diameter of eight inches (25-inch circumference) are protected:

a. Blue oak (Quercus douglasii);

b. Live oak (Quercus agrifolia);

c. Valley/white oak (Quercus lobata);

d. Willow (Salix);

e. Buckeye (Aesculus californica);

f. Box elder (Acer negundo);

g. California Bay (Umbellularia californica);

h. Black walnut (Juglans hindsi).

B. Prohibited Actions to Protected Trees. Pruning, cutting, girdling, poisoning or any other action causing or aiding the death or disfigurement of a protected tree as defined in this chapter is prohibited without a tree removal or pruning permit.

C. Exceptions to Prohibited Actions.

1. Emergencies. The city may take whatever action is needed to protect persons or property in the event of “emergencies” and/or “hazardous trees,” as defined in BMC 12.24.020.

2. Fruit Trees. A fruit or nut tree less than 18 inches in diameter (57 inches circumference) is not considered a protected tree, unless specifically designated by the city. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.040 General requirements – Public tree maintenance and hazardous tree removal.
A. City Property Trees. The city shall maintain city property trees.

1. Planting and Maintenance. The selection, planting and maintenance of trees in all planting strips or planting easements within the city shall be in accordance with provisions of this chapter and the master tree plan.

2. Supervision. The director of parks and community services shall authorize the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in any planting strip, planting easement, public way or place in the city. In order to perform the services listed in this section, the director shall have authority to enter upon any part of the maintenance easement, and where necessary, the properties adjacent thereto. In authorizing a tree removal, the director shall prepare findings based on the factors used for tree removal permits described in BMC 12.24.130.

B. Potential Hazardous Tree Removal. The city will remove or require to be removed, at owner’s expense, any trees or tree limbs that pose an immediate hazard to public safety or property after consultation with a certified arborist. Except in such emergency circumstances, trees that are damaged or injured shall have conditions corrected if feasible, or otherwise shall be removed as soon as conditions permit in accordance with the recommendations of the city arborist. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.050 Heritage trees.
A. Candidate trees for designation as heritage trees may be nominated for review and recommendation to the parks, recreation and cemetery commission. The city shall notify the property owner of the nomination. If the owner consents to the designation, the decision to nominate the tree as a heritage tree shall be submitted to the parks, recreation, and cemetery commission. Upon approval, the parks, recreation and cemetery commission will then send a recommendation to the city council. Upon resolution by the city council, after the holding of a noticed public hearing, a tree may be designated a heritage tree if it meets at least one of the following criteria:

1. Historical significance;

2. Over 30 inches in diameter measured 48 inches above the ground;

3. Unique or rare horticultural specimen;

4. Uniqueness of size or age;

5. Aesthetic value due to symmetry, form, color, or other qualities;

6. An outstanding specimen of a desirable species, especially native oak species;

7. Significance for habitat preservation, including where the tree is one of a group of trees each dependant on the other for survival.

B. The city arborist shall identify each heritage tree with a tag and keep a list and map of all heritage trees.

C. Upon designation, the city shall cause a notice of heritage tree status to be recorded on the property deed at the Solano County recorder.

D. The owner of a heritage tree shall receive a resolution of appreciation from the city of Benicia and may be eligible, based on availability of funding, for free consultation from a certified arborist and assistance with maintenance for the heritage tree.

E. Heritage tree designation can be removed subject to a noticed public hearing and recommendation by the parks, recreation and cemetery commission to the city council. The city council may approve the removal of a heritage tree designation upon a finding of good cause after a noticed public hearing.

F. Removal or alteration of any heritage tree on any property is prohibited without the prior issuance of a permit. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.060 Heritage trees – Maintenance.
A. Property owners shall be responsible for maintenance of heritage trees not in public rights-of-way, consistent with the standards of this chapter.

B. The city may assist with maintenance of heritage trees in the public right-of-way and the costs associated with such maintenance based on availability of funds in the tree fund and the recommendation of the tree subcommittee. Maintenance may include but not be limited to: pruning for tree health, structure, form and for public safety; spraying for pathogens and insects; fertilizing; and managing the root zone for health and vigor. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.070 Designated protected trees.
A. Any tree identified by either a city commission or the city council to be planted or preserved as a specific condition of approval for a project, such as a zoning variance, design review, or subdivision review, is a designated protected tree and may not be removed without a permit.

B. Each designated protected tree that is planted or preserved shall be identified as follows:

1. In the conditions of approval or findings and on the approved plans associated with the action;

2. In the case of new development applications, with a metal tag placed on the tree at the expense of the property owner/applicant, that identified it as a designated protected tree;

3. In the case of new subdivisions, on the parcel map and in the deeds to be recorded for transfer to future property owners;

4. The community development department shall maintain a master list of designated trees and shall share said list with the parks and community services department.

C. A performance bond guaranteeing the health of a designated protected tree for a period of three years following the final occupancy or approval of the project shall be required as a condition of approval of any project involving designated protected tree(s). (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.080 Property development.
A. Any application for a proposed project or other action requiring city planning commission, historic preservation review commission, or council review shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the property owner or authorized agent that discloses whether any protected trees exist on the property, and describing each such tree, its species, size (diameter, canopy, drip line area, height) and location, or including such information on plans submitted in connection with a development application.

B. The community development director may require submittal of supplemental information including photographs.

C. A site sketch shall be submitted with the development application. The sketch shall show the location, diameter at 48 inches above natural grade, species (if known) and canopy extent of all trees on the subject property where the canopy or drip line is within 20 feet of the area to be occupied, utilized, or disturbed by the project.

D. Disclosure of information pursuant to this section shall not be required when the development for which the approval or permit is sought does not involve any change in building footprint or any grading, trenching or paving.

E. The community development director may require, based on the significance of any protected tree(s) and potential impact on them, that a supplemental tree survey be prepared by a certified or registered consulting arborist.

F. A city arborist shall determine in writing (1) all trees that could potentially be affected by the project (directly or indirectly – immediately or in the long term), such as from upslope grading or compaction outside of the drip line; and (2) which trees are required to be preserved. This determination shall be made part of the staff report to the city reviewing body upon its consideration of the application for development, consistent with BMC 12.24.130.

G. Tree Preservation Report. If construction is proposed within the drip line of any protected tree, the community development director may require the applicant to provide a tree preservation report prepared by a certified or registered consulting arborist. The report, based on the tree survey and other relevant information, shall include specific precautions necessary for preservation of those trees during all phases of development (demolition, grading, during construction, landscaping). The tree preservation report shall stipulate a required tree protection zone (TPZ) for trees to be retained, including street trees, protected trees and trees whose canopies are hanging over the project site from adjacent properties. The TPZ shall be fenced as specified in BMC 12.24.090. The final approved tree preservation report shall be included in the building permit set of development plans and referenced on all relevant documentation (civil, demolition, utility, landscape, irrigation) where tree impacts from improvements may occur. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.090 Protection of trees on property during construction.
A. Protective fencing shall be provided for all protected trees in conjunction with property development and construction projects, at the perimeter of the drip line, or as otherwise specified in the tree preservation report, arborist report, or as determined by the community development director.

B. Protective tree fencing shall meet the following specifications:

1. Size and Materials. Based on the recommendation of the city arborist, one of three types of protective fencing may be specified:

a. Orange plastic fencing shall be wrapped around the trunk from the ground to the first branch with two-inch wooden boards bound securely on the outside. Caution shall be used to avoid damaging any bark or branches.

b. Four-foot-high orange plastic fencing mounted on steel “T” posts spaced at intervals of no more than 10 feet.

c. Five- or six-foot-high chain link fencing, mounted on two-inch diameter galvanized steel posts driven into the ground to a depth of at least two feet at no more than 10-foot spacing. For paving area that will not be demolished and when stipulated in a tree preservation plan, posts may be supported by a concrete base.

2. Duration of Fencing. Fencing shall be erected before demolition, grading or construction begins and remain in place until final landscaping is installed. Contractor shall obtain the city arborist’s approval prior to removing a tree protection fence.

C. All development requiring city commission or council review shall comply with the following precautions:

1. Prior to the commencement of construction, install the fence at the drip line, or TPZ when specified by the city arborist, around any tree to be retained that could be affected by the construction, and prohibit any storage of construction materials or other materials or vehicles inside the fence. The drip line shall not be altered in any way so as to increase the encroachment of the construction.

2. Submit for city arborist review verification that all pre-construction conditions have been met (tree fencing, erosion control, pruning, etc.) and are in place. An initial inspection of protective fencing and written verification must be submitted to the city arborist prior to demolition, grading or building permit issuance.

3. Prohibit excavation, grading, drainage and leveling within the drip line of the tree unless approved by the director.

4. Prohibit disposal or depositing of oil, gasoline, chemicals or other harmful materials within the decline of or in drainage channels, swathes or areas that may lead to the drip line of a protected tree.

5. Prohibit the attachment of wires, signs, or ropes to any protected tree.

6. Design utility services and irrigation lines to be located outside of the drip line when feasible (unless the irrigation line is specifically required for the tree).

7. Retain the services of the certified or registered consulting arborist for periodic monitoring of the project site and the health of those trees to be preserved. The certified or consulting arborist shall be present whenever activities occur that pose a potential threat to the health of the trees to be preserved.

8. A city arborist shall be notified if any damage occurs to a protected tree during construction so that proper treatment may be administered.

9. A performance bond guaranteeing the health of any protected tree during construction of the project shall be required as a condition of approval. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.100 Tree pruning.
A. Applicability. Pruning any branch, root or limb of a diameter greater than three inches of any of the following listed protected trees requires a permit pursuant to this chapter:

1. Street tree;

2. Heritage tree; or

3. Designated protected tree.

B. Standards. All pruning of street trees and designated protected trees, including by utility companies, shall be:

1. Performed only when it enhances a tree’s structural strength, health or form, for safety reasons or for utility service.

2. Consistent with the current edition of Best Management Practices Tree Pruning established by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), and any special conditions as determined by the parks and community services director.

C. Heritage Trees. All pruning of heritage trees shall be supervised by a certified arborist or registered consulting arborist.

D. New Development. All protected trees to be retained as part of a new development project shall be cleared of dead wood of a diameter greater than one inch and treated for insects or diseases. For any development that requires a tree preservation report, a certified or registered consulting arborist shall oversee pruning, cabling, fertilizing, and/or any other activities to protect trees on site.

E. Topping, as defined in BMC 12.24.020, of any protected tree is prohibited.

F. Pruning by Utility Companies.

1. All utility companies must contact the parks and community services department at least three working days (except in emergencies) prior to taking any action to prune any tree or trees related to line clearance, and to obtain a tree removal or pruning permit as required by this chapter.

2. Pruning for clearance of utility lines and energized conductors shall be performed in compliance with the current version of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 (Part l) Pruning, Section 0.0 Utility Pruning. Using spikes or gaffs when pruning is prohibited. Such pruning may be inspected by a city arborist to ensure that proper pruning practices are followed. The parks and community services director shall have the authority to stop any tree pruning performed by a utility if such pruning practices are not being followed, or if the city has not been properly notified of the work.

3. Any public utility installing or maintaining any overhead wires or underground pipes or conduits in the vicinity of protected trees shall obtain permission from the parks and community services director before performing any work, including pruning, that may cause injury to a protected tree (e.g., cable TV, fiber optic trenching, gas, water, sewer trench, etc.). (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.110 Permitting process.
A. City Department Responsibilities. The parks and community services director shall have overall responsibility for the implementation of this chapter. The parks and community services director, city arborist, or their designee shall review and issue tree removal and pruning permits. The community development director or designee shall review all tree protection conditions related to actions requiring city planning commission, historic preservation review commission or council approval, in consultation with a city arborist, and make recommendations to the decision-making bodies.

B. All work performed on street trees, pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter, shall be done within a six-month period from the issuance of said permit or within the period specified by the permitting authority.

C. The permitting authority shall make findings consistent with the purposes and intent of this chapter and may place conditions on any permit granted under this section that the permitting authority determines to be necessary.

D. When requested, the tree subcommittee shall provide recommendations to the community development department or city council on tree removal permit or tree planting issues. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.120 Application requirements.
A. Basic Information. Application for a permit to remove or prune a protected tree shall be obtained from the parks and community services department, except when such activity is proposed in conjunction with an action requiring historic preservation review commission or planning commission review, in which case the proposed removal or pruning shall be combined with the associated development application to the community development department. The application shall:

1. Identify the property by street address and assessor’s parcel number on which the tree is located.

2. Inventory and locate all protected trees on the subject property.

3. Describe the location of the tree with reasonable accuracy to facilitate easy identification.

4. State the species of the tree, the approximate height of the tree, and the diameter of the trunk measured at 48 inches above the natural grade.

5. Furnish a statement of the reason for the request.

6. Include the signature of property owner granting permission.

B. Additional information that may be required by a city arborist includes:

1. A perimeter outline of any existing or proposed buildings on the property, and trees on the property.

2. A report by a certified or registered consulting arborist stating:

a. Any reasons for alteration or removal related to the health of a tree; and/or

b. If grading, trenching or filling is proposed under the drip line of an existing tree; and/or

c. If the action involves multiple trees.

C. Public Notice. Within 24 hours following application for a tree removal permit for a protected city property tree or a street tree, the applicant shall place, in the most visible location at each tree to be removed, a public notice sign to be provided by the city stating the following:

This tree is proposed to be removed. Removal may occur seven (7) days from (date of posting). Contact City of Benicia at 746-4285 for more information.

The notice sign shall be no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches with the largest feasible type, and shall be laminated for weather resistance. The sign shall remain posted for seven days from date of posting. Persons who call to comment shall be informed of their right to appeal pursuant to BMC 12.24.150.

D. The parks and community services department shall maintain a list of current tree removal permit applications and make it available to the public upon request.

E. Responsibility for Costs. The cost of providing reports and information shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.130 Standards of application review – Tree removal.
A. When considering an application to remove a tree or trees which are protected by this chapter, the parks and community services director will consider various criteria designed to preserve trees. Such criteria include:

1. The proximity and number of other trees in the vicinity.

2. General plan open space or other city open space plans and policies.

3. The arborist’s report of the tree’s health and structure.

4. Topography, soil conditions and erosion potential.

5. Potential or actual damage to public utilities or streets and sidewalks.

6. If the tree is in danger of falling or is determined to be a fire hazard.

7. Potential or actual damage to private improvements such as building foundation, walls, patios, decks, roofs, retaining walls, etc.

8. The impact on reasonable development of the property or the ability to reasonably accommodate development on another area of the lot.

9. The impact of tree removal on the ability of other protected trees in the vicinity to survive.

10. The value of the tree to the neighborhood in terms of visual effect, wind screening, privacy and/or support of neighboring vegetation.

11. The availability of reasonable measures to correct the condition(s) of the tree, giving rise to the permit application.

B. Based on the above criteria the parks and community services director shall create specific tree preservation standards to be used to determine whether to grant a removal permit of a protected tree. The parks, recreation and cemetery commission shall then adopt said tree preservation standards of review.

C. Trees on the private property of single-family residences, that are not heritage trees or street trees, shall be per se authorized for removal; provided, that a completed permit application with fee is received by the parks and community services department. In all instances, city staff will advise applicants on alternatives to tree removal.

D. An applicant may appeal the decision of the city arborist, as set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC. The appellant body shall use the same standard of review as the city arborist. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.140 Standards of application review – Tree pruning.
A. A city certified arborist shall perform the application review. A tree pruning permit shall be approved, so long as the pruning meets the standards identified in BMC 12.24.100.

B. An applicant may appeal the decision of the city arborist, as discussed in BMC 12.24.150. The appellant body shall use the same standard of review as the city arborist. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.150 Appeals.
A. Any permit applicant may appeal a permit decision of city staff within 10 calendar days of notification of denial.

B. Any citizen may appeal the city staff’s decision to remove or permit removal of a protected city property tree or street tree within seven days from the first day of posting the notice required under BMC 12.24.120(C).

C. The appeal shall be submitted in writing accompanied by the applicable fee and demonstrate one or more of the following:

1. The permit action does not conform to the purpose and intent of this chapter.

2. The permit action is arbitrary and capricious.

3. The permit action creates such a hardship that a reasonable person is unable to continue to use or enjoy property affected by the permit action.

D. The appeal shall adhere to the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC.

E. The parks, recreation and cemetery commission shall sustain or deny the appeal or modify the permit based on the commission’s findings on the above criteria. The commission’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.160 Fees.
Fees for permit applications and tree removal replacement or mitigation shall be set by resolution of the city council. The rate for such fees shall be that which is in effect at the time of the tree removal application. Notwithstanding this provision, a tree replacement fee can be waived for permits regarding hazardous and/or harmful tree(s).

In addition to an administrative processing fee, a tree replacement and/or mitigation fee shall be charged if a tree is permitted to be removed. Notwithstanding this provision, a tree replacement fee can be waived for permits regarding hazardous and harmful trees. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.170 Tree replacement and mitigation.
Any tree removed under a permit shall be required to be replaced or mitigated in conformance with the following standards:

A. Any applicant whose tree has been authorized for removal shall be required to pay the applicable fee as a condition to final approval for tree removal. Fees collected for tree replacement and/or mitigation shall be placed in the tree fund.

B. In some situations, in accordance with BMC 12.24.130, the city arborist may condition the removal of a tree with replacement of a new tree.

C. In case of a tree removal permit pursuant to property development as addressed in BMC 12.24.080, the tree replacement requirement shall be the replacement value of the mature tree, as defined in BMC 12.24.020.

D. The parks and community services director has discretion to reduce replacement or mitigation requirements. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.180 Penalties.
A. Violation of this chapter shall be subject to Chapter 1.08 BMC.

B. A violator shall be liable for all costs associated with the investigation and enforcement of this chapter by the city. In addition, a violator may be required to pay a fee equaling the value of the tree removed or damaged, as evaluated by the formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture. The remedies set forth in this section shall be considered alternative, and shall be deemed in addition to any other remedies available to the city in law or equity. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.190 Tree fund.
There is established a “tree fund” for the purpose of undertaking tree maintenance and planting within city boundaries.

A. Funds may be used to make grants to individuals with a demonstrated financial hardship, to nongovernmental organizations or governmental organizations dedicated to urban forest improvement or otherwise spent to plant and maintain trees in the city.

B. The parks and community services director shall submit an annual report and budget to the city council on the amount of fees collected, and the manner and nature of the expenditure of the fees.

C. The fund shall be administered on an annual basis by the parks and community services director in consultation with the tree subcommittee of the parks, recreation and cemetery commission and with approval of the city council. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

12.24.200 Administration – Tree subcommittee.
A. The tree subcommittee of the parks, recreation and cemetery commission shall be established, consisting of three members, two of whom shall be from the parks, recreation and cemetery commission and one member shall be a Benicia citizen demonstrating an interest in and knowledge about trees and landscaping. The Benicia citizen shall be nominated by any parks, recreation and cemetery commission member and shall be appointed by majority vote of the parks, recreation and cemetery commission.

B. The subcommittee shall be responsible for developing an information, education, and support program to assist home, business, and other property owners, as well as city staff and its representatives understand the benefits of trees, take proper care of trees, and plant trees of the appropriate species in appropriate locations.

C. The subcommittee, with the assistance of the director of parks and community services, and based on availability of funding for the purpose, shall initiate a city-wide heritage tree inventory and create a master tree plan recommending to the council a comprehensive plan of street trees for all streets of the city where planting areas are available and provided for trees. The plan may be reviewed and revisions recommended from time to time by the tree subcommittee to be forwarded for review and approval to the parks, recreation and cemetery commission, and ultimately to the city council. In accordance with the plan, the director shall proceed each year to plant or replace trees to the extent that funds are appropriated for that purpose by the city council.

D. The subcommittee, with the assistance of the director of parks and community services, shall determine criteria for selection of street and park trees, selection of trees for private property, and shall develop a recommended tree list for the city, to be forwarded for review and approval to the parks, recreation and cemetery commission, and ultimately to the city council.

E. The subcommittee shall, on an annual basis, report to the parks, recreation and cemetery commission on the progress of their work.

F. The parks, recreation and cemetery commission is responsible for oversight of the tree fund, based on the recommendations of the tree subcommittee. (Ord. 08-03 § 2).

Chapter 12.28
USE OF CITY PARKS
Sections:

12.28.010    Generally.

12.28.020    Loitering.

12.28.035    Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages.

12.28.040    Commercial use of park facilities without permit unlawful.

12.28.050    Closing hours.

12.28.060    Repealed.

12.28.010 Generally.
The city council finds that an unrestricted use of city parks has led to excessive littering and poses law enforcement problems. It is therefore necessary to adopt regulations limiting use of the park to certain hours and to require that picnicking be limited to specified areas. (Ord. 1211 M.C. § 1, 1968).

12.28.020 Loitering.
It is unlawful for a person to remain in any public park at a time which the park has been declared closed by council resolution. (Ord. 93-18 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 1211 M.C. § 2, 1968).

12.28.035 Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume an alcoholic beverage in a public park or portion of a public park unless:

1. A special event permit has been obtained from the parks and community services department; or

2. A reservation has been obtained from the parks and community services department for the reservable picnic rental areas in Community Park, Civic Center Park including the bocce courts, Jack London Park, Marina Green, Marina Pavilion, and City Park including the gazebo.

A copy of the reservation or special event permit shall be provided to any park attendant or police officer upon demand.

B. The consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages is prohibited on days when school is in session until one hour after dismissal at Benicia Community Park and Jack London Park.

C. Those parks or portions of parks from which alcohol is prohibited shall be clearly designated by a sign. (Ord. 18-12 § 1; Ord. 95-9 N.S.).

12.28.040 Commercial use of park facilities without permit unlawful.
A. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or charitable organization to engage in or to attempt to engage in any business, activity or act for financial compensation including bartering in or on any recreational facility or property owned, operated, or maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, any park, playground, recreational area or parking lot, without a permit issued by the city.

B. Applicability. Subsection (A) of this section is applicable regardless of whether the financial compensation is received directly or indirectly for that portion of a business, activity or act being performed in or on any recreational facility or property owned, operated, or maintained by the city.

C. Permit Fees. The permit fee to be paid for the use of any recreational facility or property owned, operated, or maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, any park, playground, recreational area or parking lot, for the purpose of any business, activity or act for financial compensation shall be prescribed by resolution of the council. (Ord. 13-03 § 1).

12.28.050 Closing hours.
The city council shall establish by council resolution the hours during which each public park owned and/or operated by the city is closed for public use. (Ord. 93-18 N.S. § 2, 1993; Ord. 116 M.C. 1943).

12.28.060 Dogs.
Repealed by Ord. 07-72. (Ord. 97-5; Ord. 78-15; Ord. 76-18 §§ 1 – 3, 1976).

Chapter 12.32
PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS
Sections:

12.32.010  Certain games prohibited.

12.32.020  Repealed.

12.32.010 Certain games prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person or persons to play any game of baseball or football or to throw or kick any baseball, football, or any missile or projectile of any description on any street or alley in the city. (Ord. 209 M.C. § 1, 1899).

12.32.020 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 209 M.C. § 2, 1899).

Chapter 12.36
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES1
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

12.36.010  Definitions.

12.36.020  Exceptions.

12.36.030  Waiver – Circumstances.

12.36.040  Waiver – Procedure.

12.36.050  Waiver – Conditions.

Article II. Requirements for Underground Construction

12.36.060  New residential subdivisions.

12.36.070  Developments other than new subdivisions.

Article III. Underground Utility District

12.36.080  Purpose.

12.36.090  Initiation of proceedings – Hearing.

12.36.100  Hearing – Notice.

12.36.110  Hearing – Generally.

12.36.120  Hearing – Decision by council.

12.36.130  Allocation of responsibility for work.

12.36.140  Responsibility of government agencies.

12.36.150  Creation of district – Notice.

12.36.160  Notice – Mailing procedure.

12.36.170  Compliance – Installation of facilities.

Article IV. Alternate Procedure for Conversion

12.36.180  City responsibility for work.

12.36.190  Survey of property owners.

12.36.200  Report to council.

12.36.210  Notice to property owners.

12.36.220  Notice – Publication, posting and mailing.

12.36.230  Hearing – Action of council.

12.36.240  Work by city – Method.

12.36.250  Authority to enter property.

12.36.260  Cost report – Filing – Notice.

12.36.270  Cost report – Hearing – Action by council.

12.36.280  Special assessments and lien.

12.36.290  Assessment and lien – Notice.

12.36.300  Assessment – Collection.

12.36.310  Applicability.

Article V. Construction Standards

12.36.320  General construction standards.

12.36.330  Compliance with encroachment regulations.

12.36.340  Location of transformers.

Article VI. Prohibitions and Penalties

12.36.350  Maintenance of overhead facilities.

12.36.360  Construction of overhead facilities.

12.36.370  Fifteen-day period as separate offense.

12.36.380  Violation – Penalty.

Article I. General Provisions

12.36.010 Definitions.
In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:

A. "Facility" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances and all other attachments and appurtenances used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

B. "Person" includes an individual, firm, corporation and partnership, and includes utility.

C. "Service" includes but is not limited to the product of an electrical transmission device, such as electrical energy, television and telephone communications, through continuous conductive material.

D. "Underground utility district" means an area in the city within which all facilities are required to be installed underground.

E. "Utility" means a person supplying electric communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 10-201).

12.36.020 Exceptions.
This chapter and a resolution adopted under BMC 12.36.120 does not apply to the following kind of facility:

A. A facility used exclusively for a police and fire alarm box or similar municipal equipment;

B. An overhead wire attached to the exterior surface of a building and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building;

C. A radio antenna, and its associated equipment and supporting structure, used for furnishing communication service;

D. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as a surface-mounted transformer (except as otherwise required in accordance with BMC 12.36.340), a pedestal-mounted terminal box and meter cabinet, and a concealed duct;

E. An overhead wire, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of an underground utility district or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of such portion, when the wire originates in an area from which overhead facilities are not prohibited;

F. A pole or electrolier used exclusively for street lighting;

G. A facility used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

H. A facility used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects;

I. Overhead facilities installed and maintained for a period not exceeding 10 days to provide emergency service, unless the time is extended by the council upon terms and conditions it determines. (Prior code § 10-202).

12.36.030 Waiver – Circumstances.
The council may waive the requirements that facilities be located underground under these circumstances:

A. In an industrial subdivision after recommendation by the planning commission, when the council finds that a waiver is necessary or desirable to obtain the objectives of health, safety and general welfare and is in the public interest;

B. Upon application by a person and a showing to the satisfaction of the city that:

1. Installation underground involves a threat or danger to persons or property and cannot be accomplished feasibly within applicable safety regulations; or

2. Installation underground involves an unnecessary or unusual hardship. (Prior code § 10-203).

12.36.040 Waiver – Procedure.
A person who desires a waiver shall file an application with the city on a form prescribed by it. The application shall set forth reasons why the exception should be granted. The city may require the applicant to provide supporting information, including reports relating to technical and economic aspects of construction and development prepared by a qualified person. (Prior code § 10-204).

12.36.050 Waiver – Conditions.
In granting a waiver of underground requirements under BMC 12.36.030, the council may impose such conditions as it considers necessary or desirable in the public interest. (Prior code § 10-205).

Article II. Requirements for Underground Construction

12.36.060 New residential subdivisions.
The requirements for underground utilities in new residential subdivisions are set forth in the regulations governing subdivisions. (Prior code § 10-211).

12.36.070 Developments other than new subdivisions.
The city council shall fix the requirements for construction of, or conversion to, underground facilities by the creation of underground utility districts as provided in BMC 12.36.080 through 12.36.170. (Prior code § 10-212).

Article III. Underground Utility District

12.36.080 Purpose.
It is the purpose of BMC 12.36.080 through 12.36.170 to provide for the orderly removal of existing overhead facilities and the construction of new underground facilities by providing a procedure by which the council may create an underground utility district upon finding that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires it. (Prior code § 10-221).

12.36.090 Initiation of proceedings – Hearing.
A. The council may initiate proceedings to determine whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the creation of an underground utility district for the purpose of requiring existing overhead distribution facilities along public streets, roads and ways. The council shall consult with each affected utility to determine whether or not undergrounding of utilities is in the general public interest for reasons of public necessity, health, safety or welfare.

B. Proceedings are initiated when the council adopts a resolution calling a public hearing to determine whether or not to create an underground utility district. The resolution shall generally describe the boundaries of the area proposed to be included in the underground utility district. (Prior code § 10-222).

12.36.100 Hearing – Notice.
When the council determines to hold a public hearing, the city shall notify property owners and utilities in the proposed area by mailing notice of the time and place of hearing. The notice shall be at least 10 days before the date of the hearing and shall be addressed to the owner, postage prepaid, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or as known to the city. (Prior code § 10-223).

12.36.110 Hearing – Generally.
The hearing is open to the public and the council may continue it from time to time. At the hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. (Prior code § 10-224).

12.36.120 Hearing – Decision by council.
A. At the close of the public hearing, the council shall determine whether or not the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires underground installation.

B. The decision of the council is final. If the council finds that facilities should be installed underground, the council shall adopt a resolution declaring the formation of the underground utility district and ordering the installation of existing overhead distribution facilities underground. The resolution shall describe the area of the underground utility district and fix a reasonable time within which the work must be done. (Prior code § 10-225).

12.36.130 Allocation of responsibility for work.
A. Utility Responsibility. The utility shall furnish and pay the costs of providing that portion of the underground facilities required to be furnished by it under its rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

B. Property Owner’s Responsibility. The property owner is responsible for providing that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in subsection (A) of this section and the termination facility on or within the structure being served, in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the utility on file with the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. (Prior code § 10-226).

12.36.140 Responsibility of government agencies.
The city and each federal, state and local governmental agency and district is responsible for the removal of its police and fire alarm circuits or other equipment at its own expense from the facilities required to be removed. The responsible agency shall complete this work in sufficient time to enable each utility and property owner to remove the facilities for which they are responsible within the time specified in the resolution ordering removal. (Prior code § 10-227).

12.36.150 Creation of district – Notice.
A. Within 30 days after adoption of the resolution creating the underground utility district and ordering removal, the city shall give notice to each utility affected and each property owner within the area designated in the resolution.

B. The notice shall:

1. State that the council has adopted the resolution creating the underground utility district;

2. Describe the area within the underground utility district;

3. Advise each property owner of the necessity that if he or the person occupying the property desires to continue to receive service, he or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on the premises to receive service;

4. State the time within which the work must be completed. (Prior code §§ 10-228, 10-229).

12.36.160 Notice – Mailing procedure.
The city shall have a copy of the notice and resolution creating the underground utility district, and ordering removal, mailed to each affected utility and to each property owner as known to the city or as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, postage prepaid. (Prior code § 10-230).

12.36.170 Compliance – Installation of facilities.
Each property owner and each utility shall comply with the resolution order and install the facilities for which he is responsible within the time prescribed in the resolution. (Prior code § 10-231).

Article IV. Alternate Procedure for Conversion

12.36.180 City responsibility for work.
If a person other than a utility does not install the facilities for which he is responsible as directed or within the time prescribed, the city may do the work and assess the cost against the property in the manner prescribed in this article. (Prior code § 10-241).

12.36.190 Survey of property owners.
When the time for completing the conversion to underground expires, the city shall make an engineering study and prepare a list of each property owner who has not installed underground the facilities necessary to receive service from the utilities. (Prior code § 10-242).

12.36.200 Report to council.
The list and report prepared under BMC 12.36.190 shall be filed with the council. The council may adopt a resolution directing the institution of proceedings under this article. (Prior code § 10-243).

12.36.210 Notice to property owners.
The city shall have a notice prepared in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO INSTALL FACILITIES UNDERGROUND

NOTICE is given to: _________________

(name) (address)

_____________ ______________

_____________ ______________

that on _________________, 20____, the city council of Benicia adopted a resolution creating an underground utility district and declaring that facilities shall be installed underground and directing that the work be completed no later than ___________. Thereafter, the council did on _________, adopt a resolution directing that proceedings be instituted under BMC 12.36.180 through 12.36.310 by which the city would do the work and assess the cost against the land and that the cost would be a lien upon the property until paid. Reference is made to these resolutions for further particulars.

The city has made an estimate of the cost of doing the work based upon an average installation. The estimated cost is $_____. However, this is an estimate only and no detailed study has been made of the cost for your particular property.

Each property owner having an objection to the proposed estimate of cost for installation of underground facilities is notified to attend the meeting of the city council to be held on _________________, when their objections to this cost estimate will be heard and given due consideration.

(Date)

_________________
Title

(Prior code § 10-244).

12.36.220 Notice – Publication, posting and mailing.
A. The city shall have a copy of the notice posted conspicuously in front of or on the property affected in any manner most likely to give actual notice to the property owner. The city shall also have the notice published once in a newspaper of general circulation circulated in the city and mailed to the property owner at his last known address or as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

B. The posting, publication and mailing shall be complete at least 10 days before the day set for the hearing. (Prior code § 10-245).

12.36.230 Hearing – Action of council.
At the time set for hearing, the council shall hear all objections and may continue the hearing from time to time. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall allow or overrule each or any of the objections, after which it may order the work performed. (Prior code § 10-246).

12.36.240 Work by city – Method.
The city may do the work with its own forces or may let a contract for the work. (Prior code § 10-247).

12.36.250 Authority to enter property.
The city and each authorized agent or employee of the city may enter upon the private property for the purpose of performing the work of installing underground facilities required by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 10-248).

12.36.260 Cost report – Filing – Notice.
A. The public works director shall file an engineer’s report showing the cost of doing the work on each separate parcel within 30 days after the work is completed.

B. Before submitting the report to the council, the council shall give notice of the time and place when it will consider the report and hear protests in the manner provided in BMC 12.36.220 for the giving of notice to install facilities underground. (Prior code § 10-249).

12.36.270 Cost report – Hearing – Action by council.
At the time fixed for considering the report, the council shall hear objections of each property owner liable for the cost of the work. The council may make such modifications as it considers necessary. Following the hearing, the council shall confirm the report. (Prior code § 12-250).

12.36.280 Special assessments and lien.
If the amount fixed in the report is not paid within five days after the council confirms it, the amount of the cost for removing the overhead facilities and installing the underground facilities upon each of the parcels of property listed in the report, as confirmed, is a special assessment against the respective parcel of property and is a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. (Prior code § 10-251).

12.36.290 Assessment and lien – Notice.
The city shall send a notice of lien on each property on which the assessment is not paid to the county assessor together with the request that the assessor enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel of property as it appears on the assessment roll. (Prior code § 10-252).

12.36.300 Assessment – Collection.
The tax collector shall include the amount of the assessment on the next regular bill for taxes levied against the property. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as county taxes are collected. The assessment is subject to the same penalty and the same procedure as in the case of delinquency as provided for county taxes. (Prior code § 10-253).

12.36.310 Applicability.
The laws which govern the levy, collections, enforcement, cancellation and refund of county taxes apply to the special assessment. (Prior code § 10-254).

Article V. Construction Standards

12.36.320 General construction standards.
A person who installs facilities underground shall comply with all applicable building and electrical codes, safety regulations and orders and rules of the Public Utility Commission of the state of California. (Prior code § 10-261).

12.36.330 Compliance with encroachment regulations.
A person who installs facilities underground shall comply with the encroachment regulations of the city. (Prior code § 10-262).

12.36.340 Location of transformers.
Each transformer shall be located in the manner so that it harmonizes with the area surrounding it. The transformer shall be properly landscaped in a manner approved by the city. The council may require the transformer to be flush with or below the official sidewalk or curb grade. (Prior code § 10-263).

Article VI. Prohibitions and Penalties

12.36.350 Maintenance of overhead facilities.
A person who maintains overhead facilities in violation of BMC 12.36.010 through 12.36.340 is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in BMC 12.36.380. (Prior code § 10-271).

12.36.360 Construction of overhead facilities.
A person who constructs, uses, continues to use, or operates overhead facilities, or who neglects to take down and remove them within the time directed by the council, or who otherwise fails to comply with any provisions of BMC 12.36.010 through 12.36.340, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in BMC 12.36.380. (Prior code § 10-272).

12.36.370 Fifteen-day period as separate offense.
Each period of 15 days during which a person violates BMC 12.36.350 or 12.36.360 is a separate violation and is a separate offense. (Prior code § 10-273).

12.36.380 Violation – Penalty.
A person who violates BMC 12.36.350 or 12.36.360 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or both. (Prior code § 10-274).

1 For statutory provisions on conversion of utilities facilities to underground locations, see Streets and Highways Code § 5896.1 et seq. and Government Code § 38793.


Chapter 12.40
MOTORBOAT-FREE ZONE AT NINTH STREET BEACH
Sections:

12.40.010  Definitions.

12.40.020  Motorboats prohibited.

12.40.030  Exception for government boats.

12.40.040  Regulations permitted.

12.40.010 Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the "Benicia-Ninth Street Beach Cove Area" is all that portion of the Carquinez Strait and tidal and submerged lands lying within the boundaries of the city of Benicia, county of Solano, state of California, described as follows: All of Block 36 as shown on the official map of the city of Benicia, drawn by Benjamin W. Barlow and filed in Book 1 of Maps, at page 124, Solano County Records.

B. As used in this chapter, the terms "vessel" or "boat" are as defined in Harbor and Navigation Code Section 651.

C. As used in this chapter, the term "motorboat" is as defined in Harbor and Navigation Code Section 651, and shall include ski boats and jet skis. (Ord. 87-12 N.S. § 1, 1987).

12.40.020 Motorboats prohibited.
Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall operate a motorboat within that portion of the Benicia-Ninth Street Beach Cove Area shown as "Motorboat-Free Zone" on the map attached as Exhibit "A" to the ordinance codified in this chapter, hereby designated as a special use area pursuant to the Harbor and Navigation Code Section 660, and described as follows: All of Block 36 as shown on the official map of the city of Benicia, drawn by Benjamin W. Barlow, and filed in Book 1 of Maps, at page 124, Solano County Records. (Ord. 87-12 N.S. § 1, 1987).

12.40.030 Exception for government boats.
The provisions of BMC 12.40.020 shall not apply to any vessel, boat or motorboat used or operated by or on behalf of the city of Benicia or any other governmental agency, nor during emergency use or operation affecting life or property. (Ord. 87-12 N.S. § 1, 1987).

12.40.040 Regulations permitted.
The city manager and/or his/her designee may promulgate any additional rules and regulations necessary to and consistent with these provisions so as to promote the health and safety, and shall cause appropriate buoys or markers to be placed to mark the special use areas hereby created. Any additional rules and regulations promulgated by the city manager must be submitted to the Department of Boating and Waterways in accordance with Harbors and Navigation Code Sections 660(a) and 662. (Ord. 87-12 N.S. § 1, 1987).

Chapter 12.41
USE OF NINTH STREET BOAT LAUNCH FACILITY FLOATS
Sections:

12.41.010  Launch float docking – Restricted.

12.41.020  Fishing from launch floats prohibited.

12.41.010 Launch float docking – Restricted.
No persons shall moor, dock, or secure in any manner any vessel or personal watercraft capable of being used as a means of transportation on water, for purposes other than the launching or retrieving of the vessel or watercraft at, to, or on the boat launch floats at the Ninth Street boat launch facility in the city, unless otherwise authorized by a city official or peace officer. (Ord. 92-10 N.S. § 1, 1992).

12.41.020 Fishing from launch floats prohibited.
No persons shall fish on or from the boat launch floats at the Ninth Street boat launch facility in the city. (Ord. 92-10 N.S. § 1, 1992).

Chapter 12.44
CURB PAINTING
Sections:

12.44.010  Curb address painting – Unlawful without consent.

12.44.020  Unlawful to alter curb address without consent.

12.44.030  Limitation of curb address signs.

12.44.040  Exceptions.

12.44.010 Curb address painting – Unlawful without consent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, write, or otherwise inscribe on any street, curb, sidewalk or in any portion of the right-of-way, any address or sign which identifies the address of property without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant of the property which would be identified by such address or sign. The written consent shall state the name, street address, telephone number, and business license number of the contractor. (Ord. 02-6).

12.44.020 Unlawful to alter curb address without consent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change, erase or in any manner alter, any street address painted on any curb without the prior consent of the owner of the property identified by such street address. (Ord. 02-6).

12.44.030 Limitation of curb address signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, mark or otherwise inscribe any sign identifying the address of property on any portion of the right-of-way, except on a portion of the curb abutting the property. (Ord. 02-6).

12.44.040 Exceptions.
This chapter is not applicable to the United States, state of California or the city of Benicia, or their contractors, and does not prevent them from painting, writing, or otherwise inscribing on any street, curb or sidewalk public signs of any nature or property identification signs on any right-of-way. For purposes of this section, "public sign" is any sign authorized by the United States, state of California or the city of Benicia of whatever nature; this chapter is not applicable to the owner or occupant of property who desires to paint any street address on a portion of the curb abutting the property for purposes of identifying the street address of the property. (Ord. 02-6).

Chapter 12.48
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
Sections:

12.48.010  Maintenance and repair of sidewalks.

12.48.020  Liability for injuries to public.

12.48.030  Superintendent of streets.

12.48.040  Work performance – Superintendent of streets authority.

12.48.050  Advancement of costs of work.

12.48.060  Notice of cost and hearing by council.

12.48.070  Conference with superintendent of streets.

12.48.080  Hearing by city council.

12.48.090  Chapter constitutes alternative procedure.

12.48.010 Maintenance and repair of sidewalks.
A. Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas and the making, confirming and collecting of assessments for the cost and expenses of said maintenance and repair may be done and the proceedings therefor may be had and taken in accordance with this part and the procedure therefor provided in Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3, of the Streets and Highways Code of the state as the same is now in effect or may hereafter be amended. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of said Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3, of the Streets and Highways Code of the state and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control.

B. The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefor, including a charge for the city of Benicia’s costs of inspection and administration whenever the city awards a contract for such maintenance and repair and including the costs of collection of assessments for the costs of maintenance and repair under subsection (A) of this section or handling of any lien placed on the property due to failure of the property owner to promptly pay such assessments.

C. For the purposes of this chapter, maintenance and repair of sidewalk area shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks, repair and maintenance of curb and gutters, removal and filling or replacement of parking strips, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover and trimming shrubs within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line, including parking strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5614 of the state Streets and Highways Code, the director of public works may, at his or her discretion, and for sufficient cause, extend the period within which required maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas must commence by a period of not to exceed 90 days from the time the notice referred to in said Section 5614 is given. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.020 Liability for injuries to public.
The property owner required by BMC 12.48.010 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and nondangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a nondangerous condition as required by BMC 12.48.010, any person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injury. The property owner shall not be liable for damages resulting from trees that are owned and maintained by the city or designated by council resolution. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.030 Superintendent of streets.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the superintendent of streets of the city of Benicia or his or her authorized representative shall be deemed to mean the director of public works or his or her authorized representative as to any activities conducted by that department pursuant to this part. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.040 Work performance – Superintendent of streets authority.
In performing the work of repairing or constructing any sidewalk as provided in Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, the superintendent of streets may, if the cost of said work does not exceed the amount specified in the Public Contract Code for informal bids under the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act:

A. Procure at least three sealed bids to perform said work, from contractors licensed to undertake the same, and let said work to the lowest responsible bidder at the prices named in his bid; or

B. Order a city work crew to perform said work. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.050 Advancement of costs of work.
The superintendent of streets is authorized and empowered to and may advance from the special assessment revolving fund, any sum or sums necessary to pay the cost of the work of repairing or constructing any sidewalk by a contractor awarded a contract to perform said work by the superintendent of streets under the procedures set forth in this chapter, and may reimburse said special assessment revolving fund for the sum or sums so advanced from any assessment thereafter levied and collected. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.060 Notice of cost and hearing by council.
Upon the completion of the repairs or construction, the superintendent of streets shall cause notice of the cost of the repairs or construction to be given in the manner specified in Chapter 22 (Repair) of Division 7, Part 3, of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California, as the same is now in effect or may hereafter be amended, for the giving of notice to repair or construct. The notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass on the report of the costs of the repair, together with any written objections or protests which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such repair or construction and any other interested persons. The notice shall also describe the procedure to be followed for such written objections or protests. In no case shall the hearing provided for in this section be sooner than 10 days after giving of notice. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.070 Conference with superintendent of streets.
The superintendent of streets may include with the notice of cost and hearing, as specified in BMC 12.48.060, additional notice of a conference with the superintendent of streets. The conference which may be scheduled by the superintendent upon receipt of the written objection or protest, specified in BMC 12.48.060, shall be conducted prior to the council hearing for the purpose of discussion between the property owner and the superintendent of streets of the costs of repair. Upon the conclusion of the conference, the superintendent shall note his conclusions in the report together with any recommendations for adjustment of the costs of repair. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.080 Hearing by city council.
The city council, on the day and hour fixed for hearing, shall hear and pass upon the report of the superintendent, together with any written protests or objections, which have not been withdrawn prior to the hearing, from property owners liable to be assessed for the work of making such repair in accord with the procedure provided in Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

12.48.090 Chapter constitutes alternative procedure.
This chapter constitutes a separate and alternative procedure for performing the work specified herein, and no other provision of this title shall apply to proceedings instituted hereunder. (Ord. 06-06 § 1, 2006).

Chapter 12.52
NEWSRACKS
Sections:

12.52.010    Intent and purpose.

12.52.020    Definitions.

12.52.030    Newsrack permits.

12.52.040    Requirements.

12.52.050    Special requirements for newsracks in the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area.

12.52.060    Removal of newsracks.

12.52.070    Amendment to permit.

12.52.080    Waiting list.

12.52.090    Renewal of permits.

12.52.100    Appeals.

12.52.110    Newsracks on private property.

12.52.010 Intent and purpose.
A. The city council finds that this chapter implements provisions of the general plan and the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan including:

1. General Plan Program 2.12.J “Maintain public parks, streets, and sidewalks located Downtown in a clean and safe condition”;

2. General Plan Goal 2.14 “Enhance Benicia’s small-town atmosphere of pedestrian-friendly streets and neighborhoods”;

3. General Plan Goal 3.1 “Maintain and enhance Benicia’s historic character”; and

4. The Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan concludes that First Street’s relatively narrow cross-section does not allow for generous sidewalk areas that might encourage strolling and outdoor seating (pages 2 – 5).

B. The city council of the city of Benicia hereby finds that newsracks, containers and similar newspaper and vending devices have proliferated and increased in certain areas of the city of Benicia to the extent that in some instances they constitute a threat to public health, safety and welfare by impeding pedestrian traffic and interfering with ingress and egress to and from buildings and vehicles.

C. The city of Benicia finds the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area including First Street is a historic area and is a popular tourist destination with high pedestrian and vehicular traffic volumes. The proliferation of newsracks along First Street interferes unduly with pedestrian and traffic circulation and creates a safety hazard. Due to unique problems in the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area, including the historic lack of sidewalks, it is necessary to specifically limit the number of locations and spaces for newsracks.

D. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way so as to:

1. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;

2. Provide no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any residence or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

3. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and access to locations used for public transportation services;

4. Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, and protect the aesthetics of store window displays, public landscaping and other improvements;

5. Maintain and protect the value of surrounding properties;

6. Reduce exposure to the city from personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and

7. Protect the right to distribute information protected by state and federal constitutions through the use of newsracks.

E. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any newspapers. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.020 Definitions.
“Director” shall mean the director of public works or his or her designee.

“Journal” shall mean a periodical that contains articles written by authors who are experts in a specific field. A journal article is peer reviewed by other experts in the field to assure that the research is reliable and of high quality.

“Magazine” shall mean a periodical that contains articles of broad interest intended for the general public or a particular interest group. A magazine article is usually written by reporters or journalists and does not provide extensive technical depth or scientific detail that a journal article would have.

“Newspaper” shall mean a periodical that is published on a frequent basis such as daily or weekly and contains news stories, feature articles, opinion pieces, and advertisements of interest to the general public.

“Newsracks” shall mean any type of self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser placed upon any public right-of-way for the vending or free distribution of newspapers and other periodicals or other printed material.

“Periodicals” shall mean anything that is published on a regular and continual basis. Periodicals include journals, magazines, and newspapers.

“Public right-of-way” shall mean any public property such as public streets, highways, roadways, sidewalks, parkways or alleys, used or intended for use by the traveling public, whether vehicular or pedestrian, located within the city of Benicia. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.030 Newsrack permits.
A. Permit Required. An encroachment permit issued in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 12.12 BMC shall be required prior to the installation, placement or maintenance of any newsrack, which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way.

B. Existing Newsracks. Owners of newsracks in place as of July 25, 2008, shall have 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to apply for a permit. They shall have priority to retain their current location; provided, that the owner of the rack has applied for a permit in the 60-day period and has complied with the provisions of this chapter. If sufficient space does not exist to accommodate all newsracks sought to be placed at one location without violating the standards set forth in this chapter, and the permit holders are unable to agree among themselves regarding the allocation of spaces, the director of public works shall give priority as follows:

1. First priority shall be publications that are published two or more times a week;

2. Second priority shall be given to publications that are published once per week;

3. Third priority shall be given to publications that are published less than once per week but more than once per month;

4. Fourth priority shall be given to publications that are published monthly or less frequently than monthly;

5. In the event that the above system of prioritization fails to resolve a conflict between two or more publications that are published at the same frequency, historical presence at the location will be the determining factor.

In the event the director of public works is required to utilize the priority system described in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section, he or she shall permit only one rack per publication in a single location; provided, that the Sunday edition of a daily publication shall be considered as a separate publication and shall be in the second category.

C. Application. A written application for a newsrack permit shall be filed with the department of public works, and shall contain the following information:

1. The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the applicant, which shall be the duly-authorized representative of both the publisher and, if applicable, any independent distributor authorized to service the publisher’s newsrack for which the permit is sought;

2. The name, street and mailing address, and telephone number of the distributor, or other responsible person, whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant’s newsrack(s);

3. The number of proposed newsracks and a description of the exact proposed location (including a map or site plan, drawn to scale, with adequate locational information to verify conformance with this chapter) and the proposed means of affixing each proposed newsrack;

4. A description of each proposed newsrack, including its model, dimensions, color, the number of publication spaces it will contain, and whether it contains a coin-operated mechanism;

5. The name and frequency of each publication proposed to be contained in each newsrack;

6. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city and its representatives from all claims, damages, demands, loss, fines or liability to the extent arising out of or in connection with the installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack on public property by or on behalf of any such person, except such injury or harm as may be caused solely and exclusively by the negligence of the city or its authorized representatives; and

7. A statement signed by the applicant that the applicant agrees, upon removal of a newsrack, to repair any damage to the public property caused by the newsrack or its removal.

D. Fee. Each application for a newsrack permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the city council.

E. Issuance and Denial. The director of public works shall issue a newsrack permit within 10 days of the submittal of a complete application and upon a finding the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. An application for a newsrack permit shall not be approved if:

1. The proposed newsrack projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway or public street;

2. The proposed newsrack is to be installed, in whole or in part, in or over any sidewalk or parkway; and

a. The newsrack, in its proposed location, would endanger the safety of persons or property; or

b. The proposed location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other public use; or

c. The proposed newsrack would unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects present at or near said location; or

d. The proposed newsrack would interfere with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific cause of such denial by the director of public works and the right to appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.040 Requirements.
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any sidewalk shall substantially comply with the following:

A. Newsracks located near a curb shall be placed not less than 24 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed adjacent to the rear of the sidewalk shall be placed parallel to any walls and/or fences and at least six inches from the wall and/or fences.

B. Newsracks shall not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any public property without prior approval of the director of public works and to any private property without the consent of the property owner.

C. Newsracks may be attached to one another. Each group of attached newsracks (six maximum) shall be separated by 24 inches or more. The director of public works shall review and approve the number and orientation of newsracks that can be bolted, attached or grouped on a location-by-location basis.

D. Newsracks shall not be placed, installed, used or maintained:

1. Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;

2. Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

3. Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

4. Within three feet of any driveway;

5. Within 42 inches ahead of and 15 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop, measured parallel to the flow of traffic;

6. Within 42 inches of any bench or other seating area;

7. Within the intersection or driveway visibility area, if the newsrack is higher than three feet tall;

8. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than 42 inches;

9. Within 100 feet of another newsrack containing the same newspaper or news periodical except where separated by a street or corner, or except where (a) a newspaper demonstrates that there is insufficient room in one machine for the newspapers which may be sold in one day, or (b) where a newspaper demonstrates that it publishes more than one edition of the newspaper for sale at the same time;

10. Facing another newsrack, divided only by the width of a public sidewalk; and

11. Where the newsrack will interfere with a preexisting use of the adjacent property.

E. No advertising shall be affixed to the newsracks, except:

1. The name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed; and

2. Advertising rack cards contained in card pans which are attached to and located on the front of the newsrack and do not exceed 15 inches in height and 22 inches in length. The rack cards shall be limited to the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.

F. Newsracks shall be kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times, freshly painted, and without stickers or graffiti.

G. Newsracks shall not be bolted to the sidewalk unless prior approval has been obtained from the director of public works.

H. No person, association, firm or corporation shall place, locate or maintain a newsrack on the public right-of-way unless there is on file with the director of public works, in full force and effect at all times, a document issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California evidencing that the permittee or owner is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum coverage of $500,000 for injury or death to one person arising out of the location, placement or operation of the newsrack on the public right-of-way. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.050 Special requirements for newsracks in the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area.
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this chapter, the following rules shall apply to newsracks in the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area:

A. No more than 35 newsracks are permitted in the area.

B. Newsracks shall be located so that they are not located in front of or within 25 feet of the side of any building designated by the city as a historical resource as measured from the front entrance of the building.

C. Each location shall accommodate no more than four newsrack spaces and at no point shall exceed four per each side of a street block.

D. In the event that the newsracks proposed to be placed at any one location violate the provisions of BMC 12.52.040(D) or subsections (A) or (B) of this section, priority shall be given as follows:

1. Within 90 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

a. First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) of general circulation in Solano County that otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.

b. Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one day, but less than five days in a calendar week) of general circulation in Solano County that otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.

c. Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) not of general circulation in Solano County that otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.

d. Fourth priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one day, but less than five days in a calendar week) not of general circulation in Solano County that otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.

e. Fifth priority shall be given to all other newsracks on the basis of first-come, first-served.

In the event that an applicant disagrees with the city's priority category for such publication, it shall have the right to appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

2. Commencing 90 days after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, priority shall be given on a first-come, first-served basis. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.060 Removal of newsracks.
A. Commencing 90 days after the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any newsrack in violation of any provision of this chapter will be deemed nonconforming.

B. In the event that the director of public works determines that a newsrack does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall provide written notice of such determination to the permittee or owner. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the location of the newsrack which is in violation, the intent of the director of public works to remove the nonconforming newsrack in the event a hearing is not requested, and the right of the permittee to request a hearing, before the director of public works, within 15 days from the date of the notice. If the newsrack is one which has not been authorized by the director of public works and ownership is not known, nor apparent after inspection, a notice complying with this section shall be affixed to the newsrack.

C. In the event that a hearing is held pursuant to this section, the director of public works shall render a decision, in writing, within 10 days from the date of the hearing, and the decision shall advise the permittee or owner of his or her right to appeal pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the permittee or owner and shall be considered effective on the date mailed; provided, that the notice is properly addressed and placed in the U.S. mail with first-class postage prepaid.

D. The director of public works may take possession of a newsrack and, upon the expiration of 30 days, dispose of the newsrack as required by law, if:

1. No hearing is requested by the permittee or owner within 15 days as provided in subsection (B) of this section; or

2. The appeal period specified in Chapter 1.44 BMC has expired.

E. The director of public works shall inspect any newsrack reinstalled after removal pursuant to this chapter. The permittee of the newsrack shall be charged a fee for this reinspection as established by resolution of city council.

F. In the event that any newsrack is abandoned, the director of public works may remove it pursuant to the procedures set out in this section. For the purposes of this section, the term “abandonment” shall mean:

1. The condition of the rack and related circumstances indicate it will not be actively used within a reasonable period of time;

2. No prior written notice has been given by the permittee to the director of public works specifying the reason(s) for nonuse; and

3. No publication has been displayed in the newsrack for a period of 15 consecutive days or the same publication has been displayed for more than 35 days. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.070 Amendment to permit.
In the event of a change in any of the information contained in the application, the permittee shall submit such change in writing to the director of public works. A permittee may install and maintain additional newsracks by an amendment to the permit. The rules and procedures of this section shall also apply to the review and approval of any such amendment. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.080 Waiting list.
After the original assignment of spaces within the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area, if application is made to place a newsrack at a location where no space is available, the director of public works shall place the applications on a waiting list. In the event that a space becomes available, the director of public works will determine which applicant shall receive a space according to the priority described in BMC 12.52.050. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.090 Renewal of permits.
At the expiration of each three-year permitting period, a valid permit holder shall be entitled to keep its previously assigned space(s), as long as the permittee files a timely application for renewal according to procedures developed by the director of public works and, if the application is properly completed, the newsrack meets the standards set forth in this chapter and has not caused a public nuisance from litter or graffiti. Remaining available spaces shall be allocated according to the priority described in BMC 12.52.030 and 12.52.050. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.100 Appeals.
Any permittee or owner who is aggrieved by any decision of the director of public works may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

12.52.110 Newsracks on private property.
Newsracks on private property that are within 10 feet of, and visible from, the public right-of-way shall comply with the design and spacing requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 08-06 § 1).

Title 13
PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapters:

Division I. Water

13.04    Definitions

13.08    Water Service

13.09    Installation of Ultra-Low Flow Toilets

13.12    Water Rates and Charges

13.16    Water Billing Requirements

13.20    Water Meters

13.24    Construction and Extensions

13.28    Control of Backflow and Cross-Connection to City Water System

13.32    Violation and Penalty

13.34    Water Wells, Cathodic Protection Wells and Monitoring Wells

13.35    Emergency Water Conservation Plan

13.36    Emergency Outdoor Water Restrictions

Division II. Sewer System

13.40    General Provisions

13.44    Definitions

13.50    Pretreatment and Source Control of Wastewater Disposal or Discharge

13.52    Sewer Rates and Charges

13.56    Sewer Billing Requirements

13.60    Building Sewers and Sewer Laterals

13.64    Construction and Extensions

13.72    Private Sewage Disposal

13.76    Violation and Penalty

Division III. Public Utilities

13.84    Public Telephones

Chapter 13.04
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

13.04.010  Generally.

13.04.020  Applicant.

13.04.030  Consumer.

13.04.040  Cost.

13.04.050  Customer.

13.04.060  Demand.

13.04.070  Director.

13.04.080  Local distribution facility.

13.04.090  Main.

13.04.100  Major distribution facilities.

13.04.110  Off-site.

13.04.120  On-site.

13.04.130  Premises.

13.04.140  System extension.

13.04.150  Water service.

13.04.160  Water service installation.

13.04.170  Water supply facilities.

13.04.180  Water system.

13.04.010 Generally.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases are defined for use in this division. (Prior code § 14-101).

13.04.020 Applicant.
"Applicant" means a person who applies for water service, water service installation, or water system extension. (Prior code § 14-101(1)).

13.04.030 Consumer.
"Consumer" means a person who receives or takes water. (Prior code § 14-101(2)).

13.04.040 Cost.
"Cost" means the actual or estimated value of materials, equipment rentals, personnel services and other expenses and includes taxes, engineering, overhead and contractor’s profit. (Prior code § 14-101(3)).

13.04.050 Customer.
"Customer" means a person who receives water or other services from the water system. (Prior code § 14-101(4)).

13.04.060 Demand.
"Demand" means the rate of delivery of water for a specific period of time. (Prior code § 14-101(5)).

13.04.070 Director.
"Director" means the director of public works or the person designated to perform the responsibilities imposed by this division. (Prior code § 14-101(6)).

13.04.080 Local distribution facility.
"Local distribution facility" means a pipeline of eight-inch and smaller diameter and includes hydrants, water service connections and appurtenances required to serve premises adjacent to these facilities. (Prior code § 14-101(7)).

13.04.090 Main.
"Main" means a transmission or distribution pipeline of the water system. (Prior code § 14-101(8)).

13.04.100 Major distribution facilities.
"Major distribution facilities" mean piping, storage, and control works and appurtenances, and treated water pipelines larger than eight-inch diameter whose functions affect water service to a major portion of a pressure zone, or to an area of at least several square blocks and extends beyond the area owned or controlled by the applicant. (Prior code § 14-101(9)).

13.04.110 Off-site.
"Off-site" refers to facilities located outside the site covered by the applicant for water service. (Prior code § 14-101(10)).

13.04.120 On-site.
"On-site" refers to facilities located within the area owned or controlled by the applicant and within streets or easements immediately adjacent to such area. (Prior code § 14-101(11)).

13.04.130 Premises.
"Premises" means a separate identifiable and transferable parcel of real property. A portion of a parcel having a well-defined boundary, such as a wall, fence, or hedge which prevents the common use of the property by all occupants, is a separate premises. (Prior code § 14-101(12)).

13.04.140 System extension.
"System extension" means the extension of water system facilities to serve an area to which service is not available from existing distribution facilities. (Prior code § 14-101(13)).

13.04.150 Water service.
"Water service" means the delivery or receipt of water. (Prior code § 14-101(14)).

13.04.160 Water service installation.
"Water service installation" means the service connection including service pipes, meter boxes, and appurtenances through which regular water delivery is made. (Prior code § 14-101(15)).

13.04.170 Water supply facilities.
"Water supply facilities" includes the source of supply, pumping, transmission, treatment, and other water supply works whose functions affect water supply to a major portion of the total utility service area. (Prior code § 14-101(16)).

13.04.180 Water system.
"Water system" means the physical plant of the water system, including but not limited to real property reservoirs, treatment plants, pumping stations, transmission and distribution facilities and appurtenances. (Prior code § 14-101(17)).

1 For statutory provisions on municipal water systems, see Government Code § 38730 et seq.


Chapter 13.08
WATER SERVICE
Sections:

Article I. Generally

13.08.010    Water supply – Source and specifications.

13.08.020    Types of service.

Article II. General Water Service

13.08.030    Application – Contents.

13.08.040    Water use without application.

13.08.050    Deposit.

13.08.060    Continuity of service.

13.08.070    Water pressure.

13.08.080    Refusal or limitation of service.

13.08.090    Resale of water.

13.08.100    Discontinuance and restoration of service.

Article III. Special Water Service

13.08.110    Compliance.

13.08.120    Public fire hydrants – Inside city.

13.08.130    Public fire hydrants – Outside city.

13.08.140    Public fire hydrants – Private use.

13.08.150    Private fire hydrants.

13.08.160    Automatic fire sprinkler systems.

13.08.170    Low pressure service.

13.08.180    Temporary service.

13.08.190    Untreated water service.

13.08.200    Special contract service.

13.08.210    Service outside city.

Article I. Generally

13.08.010 Water supply – Source and specifications.
The water served will be water from various sources including the municipal reservoir, the Putah South Canal of the Solano Project, and the North Bay Aqueduct of the State Water Project. Mineral quality of water will vary from time to time and place to place depending upon the source being used. Information on the average mineral quality is available from the director. Water delivered from the potable water system will be water treated by facilities operated under permit from the California Department of Public Health. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-111).

13.08.020 Types of service.
Water service from the city water system is either general water service or special water service. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-114).

Article II. General Water Service

13.08.030 Application – Contents.
A. A person desiring service from the water system shall apply for it. The director shall prescribe the form of the application. The application shall set forth:

1. The signature of the applicant or his authorized representative;

2. The address and location of the premises to be served;

3. The address to which bills are to be mailed;

4. The purpose and use of the water to be consumed, if other than residential;

5. The date upon which the applicant will be ready for service;

6. An estimate of the maximum instantaneous water demand;

7. The applicant’s agreement to comply with this article and all the rules and regulations governing the system;

8. Such other information considered proper by the director.

B. The city is not obligated to provide water service until the application is approved by the director. The applicant is not obligated to take service for any period of time in excess of that upon which the minimum charges for the account are based. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; amended during 2004 republication; prior code § 14-118).

13.08.040 Water use without application.
A person who takes possession of a premises and uses water without applying for water service is liable for the water delivered from the date of the last recorded meter reading. If proper application for service is not made within 24 hours after notification to do so by the director or if accumulated bills for water service are not paid upon presentation, the director may discontinue water service without further notice. Additionally, a tampering fee will be assessed in accordance with BMC 13.16.090. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-117).

13.08.050 Deposit.
Every applicant for water service who rents or leases the premises to be served shall make a cash deposit as a condition of service. The deposit which shall be paid up front is a fee set by resolution of the city council; however, the director may fix a larger cash deposit if, based upon the city’s prior experience with the applicant, the director feels in the reasonable exercise of his discretion that a larger cash deposit is necessary to protect the city from loss which may result from the nonpayment of billings. When service to a customer is discontinued, the deposit for that customer shall be refunded after deducting unpaid charges. Deposit funds in a discontinued account may, at the option of the customer, be applied to deposit requirements of a new account for the same customer. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-119).

13.08.060 Continuity of service.
The city will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous supply of water; however, the city is not liable for interruptions, shortage, or insufficient supply or for loss, inconvenience, or damage occasioned thereby. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-113).

13.08.070 Water pressure.
In general, water will be delivered from the distribution system at gauge pressures ranging from approximately 20 to 100 pounds per square inch; however, the city does not guarantee to maintain a specific pressure or range of pressures. The city is not responsible for inconvenience, loss or damage resulting from variations of pressure. Service to an area where pressure is less than 20 pounds per square inch is considered special service and each such service shall be covered by an agreement. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-112).

13.08.080 Refusal or limitation of service.
A. The director may refuse to furnish water or may discontinue water service to a premises for one or more of the following reasons:

1. To protect the city or the water system or both from fraud and abuse;

2. The requested water services demand may be detrimental or injurious to the water service of other customers;

3. The distribution facilities are inadequate to supply the requested water service demand.

B. The director may limit the total quantity of water furnished to a premises or may establish the time and the demand rates at which water may be taken or will be furnished to a premises, even though a limit or maximum use may not appear on the application or permit for the water service. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-116).

13.08.090 Resale of water.
No person may resell or remeter for the purpose of cost proration or sell water purchased from the city without specific authorization, except for service to temporarily moored vessels for their own use. The resale cost may not exceed the cost of purchase from the city plus the cost of delivery. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-115).

13.08.100 Discontinuance and restoration of service.
A. The city may discontinue water service for nonpayment of a bill 30 days after presentation. The city shall give written notice of its intention to discontinue service for nonpayment at least five days in advance of actual disconnection.

B. The city may discontinue water service without notice:

1. Where evidence of tampering or misuse of water system facilities is found or where apparatus, appliances or conditions are, in the opinion of the director or public health agency, found to be dangerous or injurious. Service may be restored after corrective measures have been taken;

2. When service was obtained by fraudulent means or water is used through an unauthorized connection. Service will be restored when the requirements of the city are complied with and full payment is made to the city for services rendered;

3. For failure to comply with the requirements of these regulations, this article or the rules and regulations governing the system.

C. Water service may be disconnected at the request of the customer, effective not less than two days after receipt by the city of a request for discontinuance. When the request is not received, the customer is required to pay for water service until such time that the city receives the notice or evidence which justifies discontinuance of water service at some other date.

D. Service which is disconnected may be restored upon correction to the satisfaction of the director of the condition causing discontinuance of service, and upon payment of all applicable fees and charges established by city council resolution. (Ord. 17-10 § 15; Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-120).

Article III. Special Water Service

13.08.110 Compliance.
Each applicant for special water service is subject to all the requirements of applicants for general water service, unless otherwise prescribed by the director, and to all special requirements set forth in this article. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-191).

13.08.120 Public fire hydrants – Inside city.
A. The director shall have hydrants for public fire protection installed within the city. Hydrants are a part of local distribution facilities, and their construction is governed by all requirements applicable to local distribution facilities.

B. No person may open or use a public fire hydrant without authorization to do so. A hydrant may be operated only with an approved spanner wrench or special tool. Each hydrant outlet shall be capped when not in use. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-192).

13.08.130 Public fire hydrants – Outside city.
The director shall have hydrants installed for public fire protection on water system extensions outside the city boundaries. Insofar as practicable, such hydrant installation shall be designed to provide the same degree of fire protection as a new system extension inside the city. The director shall require as a condition of approval of the outside fire hydrant installation an agreement from the public fire protection agency within whose jurisdiction the hydrant is located. The agreement shall provide for the location and design of the hydrant installation and provide for the payment of appropriate hydrant fees levied by the city. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-193).

13.08.140 Public fire hydrants – Private use.
A. The director may permit the private use of a public fire hydrant on a temporary basis upon issuance of a permit.

B. The permit shall be exhibited upon the work while water is taken. The permit shall state the period during which water may be taken, and the location of the hydrant which may be used. If the hydrant is outside the city limits, the applicant shall obtain written approval of the fire protection agency having jurisdiction over it.

C. Water taken from a hydrant shall be metered, unless otherwise permitted by the director. Water used from a hydrant shall be billed and paid for at the same rates as for general water service plus 25 percent of the commercial rate. The minimum charge is the same as those applicable to a two-inch meter. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-194).

13.08.150 Private fire hydrants.
A fire hydrant located on private premises and constructed and maintained by the applicant may be connected to the water system upon approval of the director. A connection to a private fire hydrant installation is subject to all requirements governing connections to automatic fire sprinkler systems. A new connection to a private fire hydrant shall be used only for that purpose. An existing connection which serves a fire hydrant and an automatic fire sprinkler installation together may continue in service with the approval of the director. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-195).

13.08.160 Automatic fire sprinkler systems.
A. The city may offer a connection for service to an automatic fire sprinkler system subject to limitations of the ability of the water distribution system to provide the desired service. Unless otherwise ordered by the director, a fire sprinkler connection shall be constructed by the city at the expense of the applicant. The sprinkler connection shall be of at least two-inch diameter. Each sprinkler connection shall have an approved detector check valve furnished by the applicant and a bypass meter installed by the city at the expense of the applicant. Wherever possible, the detector check valve installation shall be located adjacent to the front boundary of the parcel being served.

B. Water furnished through a fire sprinkler connection shall be used only for firefighting purposes and for authorized testing of fire protection facilities. Fire system testing shall be conducted during normal business hours. The water department shall be notified at least one day prior to testing. There is no charge for water taken through the detector check valve and used for extinguishing accidental fire. All water taken through the bypass meter on a fire sprinkler connection shall be charged for at a rate equal to twice the rate for general water service through a meter of the same size as the bypass meter, except that the minimum monthly charge does not apply. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-196).

13.08.170 Low pressure service.
A. Premises located where distribution system pressure corrected to the highest elevation of regular water use or water-using appliances is normally or frequently less than 20 pounds per square inch cannot be adequately served. Such service is considered low pressure service. Low pressure service will be provided only upon approval by the director and upon agreement by the applicant to:

1. Accept substandard service;

2. Make no protest of assessment district or other proceedings whose objective is improvement of the water system; and

3. Make any reapplication or alterations of equipment necessary to utilize an alternative water service connection upon request by the director.

B. The rates and charges for low pressure service are the same as those for general water service. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-199).

13.08.180 Temporary service.
A. The city may provide temporary water service upon approval of the director. Rates and charges for temporary service are the same as those for general service except as otherwise provided. Whenever practical, water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be metered. A permit for a temporary service connection is valid for a period of not more than 120 days after installation. The city may extend the permit upon request. The temporary service shall be discontinued and dismantled or removed upon termination of the permit period or completion of use.

B. The applicant for temporary service shall make a cash deposit before issuance of a permit for a temporary service connection. The cash deposit shall equal the estimated cost of water to be used during the entire period of service.

C. After discontinuance of the temporary service and when the connection is dismantled, the remainder of deposited funds shall be refunded upon request without interest after deduction of unpaid water and construction charges. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-197).

13.08.190 Untreated water service.
The city will provide untreated water from certain water system facilities to the extent that such service has no deleterious effect on operation of the remainder of the water system. Untreated water shall not be used for drinking or other domestic purposes. Untreated water service inside the city shall be provided only to premises which are served by an active potable water service. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-198).

13.08.200 Special contract service.
The city may provide special water service when it is in the public interest to do so. When special service cannot appropriately be provided under this article, the city may provide water as a special contract service. The director shall recommend the terms and conditions of each contract for special contract service to the city council for approval. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-200).

13.08.210 Service outside city.
A. Except as provided in BMC 13.08.200, the city may provide water service to premises outside the city boundaries only upon approval of the director and written agreement by the applicant to make no written protest of annexation proceedings. Service provided outside the city is subject to all rules and regulations applicable to the same service provided inside the city.

B. The rates and charges for service provided outside the city are the rates and charges for similar service inside the city, plus 25 percent of the rates and charges.

C. All other conditions of service outside the city are the same as for service inside the city. (Ord. 12-11 § 1; prior code § 14-201).

Chapter 13.09
INSTALLATION OF ULTRA-LOW FLOW TOILETS
Sections:

13.09.010    Purpose.

13.09.020    Definitions.

13.09.030    Requirement of approved ultra-low flow toilets for new construction.

13.09.040    Exceptions.

13.09.050    Responsibility for enforcement.

13.09.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to conserve water by requiring the installation of ultra-low flow toilets and to provide relief to the city wastewater treatment facility by reducing the amount of wastewater requiring treatment. (Ord. 90-18 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.09.020 Definitions.
A. “Approved ultra-low flow toilet” means a water closet, flush toilet or urinal together with associated flushometer valves, if any, which use no more than 1.6 gallons per flush.

B. “Bathroom” means any room or area within a structure where a flush toilet or urinal exists or is to be constructed.

C. “New construction” means (1) the construction of any previously nonexistent residential, commercial or industrial structure in which a bathroom is required or placed; (2) the remodel of an existing bathroom; (3) the construction of a new bathroom within an existing structure; or (4) the increase in floor area of an existing structure in excess of 25 percent measured from the exterior of all exterior walls. (Ord. 90-18 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.09.030 Requirement of approved ultra-low flow toilets for new construction.
Except as provided in BMC 13.09.040, approved ultra-low flow toilets shall be installed in all new construction within the city and all existing unapproved flush toilets and urinals shall be removed. No building permit shall be issued for new construction which does not provide for the installation of approved ultra-low flow toilets. (Ord. 90-18 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.09.040 Exceptions.
Where application is made to the public works department director in writing by an owner requesting an exception to BMC 13.09.030, the use of standard flush toilets or urinals may be permitted if the director finds in writing based upon substantial evidence that either (A) during the period of construction no approved ultra-low flow toilets are available or (B) the configuration of the building drainage system requires a greater quantity of water than is generated by ultra-low flow toilets to adequately flush the system. (Ord. 90-18 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.09.050 Responsibility for enforcement.
The city building inspection division shall have the responsibility for (A) approving any flush toilet to be installed as required by BMC 13.09.030 and certifying that said toilet is an approved ultra-low flow toilet; (B) approving building permits for new construction which provide for the installation of approved ultra-low flow toilets; and (C) inspecting all new construction to assure that required ultra-low flow toilets have been installed. (Ord. 90-18 N.S. § 1, 1990).

Chapter 13.12
WATER RATES AND CHARGES
Sections:

13.12.010    General water service rates.

13.12.012    Drought penalty.

13.12.014    Expiration of drought penalty.

13.12.020    Repealed.

13.12.030    Repealed.

13.12.040    Exemptions.

13.12.050    Water system capacity fee.

13.12.070    Meter charges.

13.12.010 General water service rates.
A. The rates and charges for water furnished through water meters and any service charge therefor shall be established, and may be amended or revised, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Such rates and charges shall constitute the charges for supplying water service to any customer and shall be collected by the finance department of the city. The city shall establish rates for automatic fire sprinklers, private fire hydrants, untreated water, drought penalties, rate stabilization and other reasonable charges related to water service.

B. 1. Low-Income Discount. To be eligible for the low-income discount, a resident must:

a. Provide low-income verification by providing a copy of a recent PG&E bill noting participation in the PG&E CARE (California Alternate Rates for Energy) program. (Current income guidelines can be found at www.PGE.com/CARE); and

b. Every two years, apply in person in the finance department or designated location.

2. The discount is applicable to residential water service only and is off the general water service.

3. Mobile home parks where the mobile home spaces share common meters may apply for the low-income discount if at least 75 percent of the tenants qualify and the mobile home park owner or designee applies in person at the finance department every two years.

C. Four-Year Phase-Out for Senior Citizens Who Do Not Qualify for the Low-Income Discount. There will be a four-year phase-out of the discount on the general water service (i.e., “water maintenance charge” on the utility bill) for all other seniors that are enrolled in the senior discount rate by December 4, 2012, who do not qualify for the low-income discount, to soften the transition to higher rates. The four-year phase-out discount amounts are shown in the table below. Beginning January 17, 2013, the senior citizen customers will begin paying the full price of volume charge (i.e., “water consumption charge” on the utility bill) at the revised rates. Only customers who meet the qualifications under subsection (B) of this section will be eligible to receive the low-income discount. All other senior citizens that are grandfathered in by December 4, 2012, will be eligible to receive the discounts shown in the table through December 31, 2016. The senior citizen rate will end on January 1, 2017.

Phase-Out of
Senior Citizen Rate
(per unit, per month)

1/17/13 – 6/30/13

7/1/13 – 12/31/13

1/1/14 – 12/31/14

1/1/15 – 12/31/15

1/1/16 – 12/31/16

1/1/17 – 12/31/17

Single-family dwelling discount amount

$11.52

$9.38

$8.18

$6.22

$3.36

$0.00

Multifamily dwelling discount amount

$8.65

$6.43

$5.68

$4.36

$2.37

$0.00

D. The public works director shall fix the minimum monthly charge for a meter larger than six inches. (Ord. 16-05 § 1; Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 00-4; Ord. 96-9 N.S.; Ord. 95-11 N.S.; Ord. 93-15 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 89-4 N.S. § 1, 1989; Ord. 88-16 N.S., 1988; Ord. 87-23 N.S.; Ord. 82-9 N.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. 82-4 N.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. 77-10 N.S. § 1, 1977; Ord. 76-8 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 14-131).

13.12.012 Drought penalty.
There shall be added to the general water service rates prescribed in BMC 13.12.010 a drought penalty as provided in Chapter 13.35 BMC. The drought penalty added herein shall be based upon the water used in excess of that permitted by the conservation stage in effect, as defined by and subject to the exceptions prescribed by Chapter 13.35 BMC. The drought penalty shall be at the rates set out by BMC 13.35.090(C). (Ord. 16-05 § 2; Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 91-3 N.S. § 1, 1991).

13.12.014 Expiration of drought penalty.
The drought penalty added to the general water service rates by BMC 13.12.012 and Chapter 13.35 BMC shall terminate upon resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 16-05 § 3; Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 91-3 N.S. § 2, 1991).

13.12.020 Automatic fire sprinkler and private fire hydrant rates.
Repealed by Ord. 16-05. (Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 88-16 N.S., 1988; Ord. 87-23 N.S.; prior code § 14-132).

13.12.030 Untreated water service.
Repealed by Ord. 16-05. (Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 00-4; Ord. 96-9 N.S.; Ord. 95-11 N.S.; Ord. 93-15 N.S. § 3, 1993; Ord. 88-16 N.S. § 3, 1988; Ord. 87-23 N.S. § 3, 1987; prior code § 14-133).

13.12.040 Exemptions.
An applicant for water service shall pay each of the charges set forth in BMC 13.12.050 through 13.12.070 except where specifically exempt; however, no applicant is required to pay service installation charges or meter installation charges if the applicant performs the work covered by these charges. (Ord. 12-08 § 1; prior code § 14-141).

13.12.050 Water system capacity fee.
An applicant for water service installation to serve a parcel not previously served shall pay a system capacity charge as follows:

A. Residential and commercial/industrial capacity fees are set by resolution of the city council. Residential capacity fees are based on dwellings/units or accessory dwellings. Commercial/industrial capacity fees are based on meter size.

B. Capacity Fee – Automatic Annual Escalation. The base capacity fees stated above shall be increased annually by the 12-month percentage increase noted in the last reported construction cost index for the San Francisco Bay Area found in the Engineering News Record. For example, if the index is reported in December of each year, the increase by which the fee will be escalated each July 1st shall be equal to the cumulative 12-month percentage increase reported during the immediately preceding December. If the Engineering News Record ceases publication, a similar index chosen by the public works director shall be used.

C. The above automatic annual escalation will occur 60 days after adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and on July 1st of each year thereafter unless changed by a vote of the city council upon recommendation of the finance director that projected revenues and expenditures require a different charge for that fiscal year.

D. Increased Water Service. An applicant for water service installation of increased capacity over the existing service at a property shall pay a capacity fee in the amount specified in subsection (A) of this section, whichever is applicable, less any previously paid water capacity charge. An applicant adding a new meter, rather than replacing an existing meter with a larger meter, shall not receive credit for previously paid water service capacity fees.

E. Capacity Fee – Time for Payment.

1. Capacity charges for new or increased water service shall be paid at the time of application for such new or increased service, unless the applicant applies for, and is granted, a fee deferral as provided for in subsection (E)(2) of this section.

2. The person required by this chapter to pay a water capacity fee may apply for a fee deferral. The application shall be reviewed and considered by the public works director, and shall be granted if the applicant’s project meets the criteria for fee deferral established by city council resolution, unless the director finds (a) that the fee is needed for improvements or facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated, and for which the city has adopted a construction schedule or plan, or (b) the fees are needed to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made. The city council resolution shall also establish conditions to be imposed upon the granting of a fee deferral. (Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 99-17; Ord. 97-11; Ord. 96-10; Ord. 95-7 N.S.; Ord. 94-6 N.S. § 1, 1994; Ord. 94-3 N.S. § 1, 1994; Ord. 91-11 N.S. § 1, 1991; Ord. 91-7 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 88-9 N.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 87-22 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 82-16 § 1, 1982; Ord. 77-10 N.S. § 3, 1977; Ord. 76-8 N.S. § 3, 1976; prior code § 14-142).

13.12.070 Meter charges.
A. An applicant for water service installation shall pay a meter installation charge set by resolution of the city council.

B. The fee for water meters shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 16-05 § 6; Ord. 12-08 § 1; Ord. 77-10 N.S. § 4, 1977; Ord. 76-8 N.S. § 4, 1976; prior code § 14-144).

Chapter 13.16
WATER BILLING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

13.16.010    Generally.

13.16.020    Separate meters.

13.16.030    Limited service – Determination of charge.

13.16.040    Payment – Returned checks.

13.16.050    Disputed bills.

13.16.060    Delinquent accounts.

13.16.070    Multiple account – Delinquency at one service location.

13.16.080    Delinquency – Discontinuation of service.

13.16.090    Tampering – Unauthorized use.

13.16.100    Adjustments.

13.16.110    Inspections.

13.16.120    Back billing.

13.16.010 Generally.
A bill for general water service will be rendered bimonthly. A bill for special water service may be rendered monthly or at any lesser frequency which the city chooses. The city shall have the meter read at approximately equal intervals, with meter reading frequency the same as billing frequency. The city shall have special meter readings made for opening or closing billing purposes. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-151).

13.16.020 Separate meters.
Each meter on a customer’s premises is billed separately. The readings of two or more meters may not be combined unless the water department installs two or more meters in place of one for operating convenience or necessity. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-152).

13.16.030 Limited service – Determination of charge.
An opening and closing bill for less than the regular billing period shall be prorated on a daily basis so that the charge to the customer shall reflect the actual number of days of service during the billing period. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 14-154).

13.16.040 Payment – Returned checks.
A bill is due and payable on presentation. The customer shall make payment at the place designated by the city. When payment is made by a check which is returned to the city dishonored by the drawee, a returned check fee set by resolution of the city council shall be added to the bill, which returned check charge shall be in addition to any other charges due. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 14-155).

13.16.050 Disputed bills.
In case of dispute as to payment of a bill previously delivered, the customer shall present the receipted bill, canceled check, or other satisfactory evidence of payment before the city may make an adjustment or correction. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-160).

13.16.060 Delinquent accounts.
A bill is delinquent 30 days after the date of presentation of the bill. When a bill is delinquent, there shall be added a delinquent charge as set by resolution of the city council. If the bill and the delinquent charge are not paid within five days after the delinquent date, the city may discontinue service as provided in BMC 13.08.080. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 14-156).

13.16.070 Multiple account – Delinquency at one service location.
If a customer receives service at more than one service location and the bill for any one of that customer’s accounts becomes delinquent and the city discontinues service, the city may discontinue service at all other locations. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-157).

13.16.080 Delinquency – Discontinuation of service.
When water service is discontinued because of delinquency in payment of a utility bill, the city may not restore the service until all charges including the delinquent charge as provided in BMC 13.16.060 and a turnoff service fee set by resolution of the city council are paid, and a cash deposit is made to reestablish credit in an amount to be fixed by the director. The deposit shall be treated as an application deposit. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 14-158).

13.16.090 Tampering – Unauthorized use.
The definition of “tampering” for purposes of this chapter includes the following: customer manually turning water service back on, customer cutting/removing lock, customer damaging meter, and/or customer replumbing around the meter. For each instance of tampering a penalty will be assessed, and depending on the severity of the issue, time and materials costs to repair the damage to the public property may also be assessed. If following discontinuance of service for delinquency in payment the service is resumed without authorization, the city may remove the meter. In the event that the city removes the meter because of an unauthorized resumption of service, there shall be a tampering fee set by resolution of the city council plus the cost of time and materials required from the city to prevent the unauthorized use of the meter. The tampering fee is in addition to all other charges and deposits and must be paid prior to resumption of service. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 14-159).

13.16.100 Adjustments.
A. A bill may be adjusted allowing for a leak or loss of water only when evidence clearly shows the excessive delivery is due to leaking pipes or fixtures and not wasteful use or the consumer’s acts, omissions, or negligence. The city may make an adjustment only after repairs are made and the city is satisfied that the leak or loss has been eliminated. No adjustment or allowance may be made covering more than two consecutive billing periods including the one in which the adjustment is requested. No more than one adjustment or allowance may be made to the same account for the same premises in any 12-month period.

B. The director shall determine the amount of excess delivery and shall subtract one-half of that amount from the total water delivered. The remaining amount for each billing period shall be charged at the regular rates applicable to the customer’s account. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-161).

13.16.110 Inspections.
After an inspection of the customer’s premises on account of excessive water bills, or upon the request of the customer, or for any other reason, no further inspections may be made for a period of six months, except as ordered by the public works director. Additional inspections will be charged on a per-hour-labor basis according to the fees set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-162).

13.16.120 Back billing.
If a customer uses water for which no bill has been issued, the water department shall install a meter and determine an average bill for a period of 12 months last past or for as much of the past 12 months as the consumer has been occupying or in possession of the premises without paying bills. (Ord. 12-12 § 1; prior code § 14-153).

Chapter 13.20
WATER METERS
Sections:

13.20.010  Size and location.

13.20.020  Determination of type of metering.

13.20.030  Multiple meters.

13.20.040  Change of size.

13.20.050  Change of location.

13.20.060  Testing.

13.20.070  Inoperative meter – Determination of use.

13.20.080  Electrical grounding prohibited.

13.20.010 Size and location.
A. The director shall determine the correct size and layout of metering installation. The minimum size meter is five-eighths-inch, with three-fourths-inch piping connections. The minimum size meter is normally used for single-family dwellings. For each premises for which application is made for water service, the director shall determine the minimum size of the service pipe and meter to be installed. This determination shall be based on the applicable sections of the city’s plumbing and building codes and other applicable matters. If the applicant requests a larger sized meter than that determined to be the minimum, the director may approve it.

B. Wherever possible the meter shall be located on the public right-of-way adjacent to the boundary of the premises being served. Where this is not feasible, the meter shall be located within the parcel being served. The director may require an easement for a meter installation located on private property. The customer shall as a condition of service keep the metering installation uncovered and reasonably accessible for reading and maintenance. (Prior code § 14-171).

13.20.020 Determination of type of metering.
Separate premises shall be served by a separate metering installation. A multiple dwelling unit in the same structure may be served by an individual water meter or through a single master meter if approved by the director. Each separate multiple dwelling structure shall be served separately. The director may permit adjacent commercial and industrial structures on a single parcel of land to be served through a single meter. (Prior code § 14-174).

13.20.030 Multiple meters.
Multiple meters on a single service, installed by the city for its own convenience, are considered for billing purposes as a single meter of a size equivalent in capacity to the sum of the capacities of the individual meters. Multiple meters installed at the request of the customer to meet his needs are considered as individual meters for billing purposes. (Prior code § 14-175).

13.20.040 Change of size.
A person receiving water service may request a change of meter size. The director shall consider the request on the same basis as sizing of a meter for a new service. If the request for meter change is granted, the city shall make the change upon payment by the customer of an amount equal to the charge for installation of a new meter of the requested size or the estimated actual cost of the change, whichever is least. (Prior code § 14-172).

13.20.050 Change of location.
When a customer requests relocation of an existing meter or service connection for the customer’s convenience, the relocation is at the customer’s expense on the basis of the actual cost of relocation. When relocation of an existing meter or service connection is done to protect the property of the water system or the city’s interest, the city shall pay the cost of it. (Prior code § 14-173).

13.20.060 Testing.
A. The city will test a meter upon request of the customer and the deposit of an amount equal to the bimonthly minimum charge for each meter to be tested. A meter will be tested within five working days of a request for testing.

B. If the tested meter is found to indicate underregistration, the city will keep the testing deposit. If the tested meter is found to overregister by more than 2.0 percent, the city shall provide an accurate meter, the testing deposit shall be returned, and the city shall make an adjustment for overcharge for the determined percentage error for a period of one year or the total period of service, whichever is shorter. (Prior code § 14-176).

13.20.070 Inoperative meter – Determination of use.
When the city finds that a meter is not working, the customer shall be charged on the basis of minimum water use by the customer during any equal period of time during the same season of the preceding year. (Prior code § 14-177).

13.20.080 Electrical grounding prohibited.
The city will not permit or provide a continuous grounding circuit through meters or service piping. A customer may not rely on water system facilities for electrical grounding. The city may hold the customer liable for damage to the water system resulting from use of the system as a grounding circuit, whether the use is intentional or not. (Prior code § 14-178).

Chapter 13.24
CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSIONS
Sections:

13.24.010  Supervision.

13.24.020  Standards and specifications.

13.24.030  Extensions.

13.24.040  Extensions in subdivisions.

13.24.050  Major distribution facilities.

13.24.060  Reimbursable cost.

13.24.070  Reimbursement terms and agreement.

13.24.080  Inspection and approval.

13.24.010 Supervision.
All construction work performed on the water system is the responsibility of and under the general supervision of the director. (Prior code § 14-221).

13.24.020 Standards and specifications.
The director shall have prepared appropriate standards and specifications to govern construction of water system facilities. These specifications shall include provisions governing materials, workmanship, testing and warranty of water system facilities. The minimum size water main to be constructed for normal distribution service is six-inch diameter. (Prior code § 14-222).

13.24.030 Extensions.
A. An extension to the water system may be made:

1. As a general city improvement;

2. As an improvement under assessment district proceedings;

3. By application for system extension as part of subdivision improvements; or

4. By application for system extension by the individual applicant.

B. The financing of a water system extension by assessment district proceedings shall be in accordance with assessment district improvement plans.

C. The charges for a water system extension made under application are set forth in BMC 13.12.040 through 13.12.070.

D. For an extension to serve premises not contiguous to existing adequate distribution facilities, the applicant shall advance the estimated cost of the intervening facilities or shall construct such facilities. The city shall reimburse the applicant for a portion of the cost of such improvements to the extent that the extension benefits property other than that belonging to the applicant.

E. The applicant shall pay the applicable charges in advance of construction.

F. The city may construct or may contract for the construction of water system extensions except in a subdivision. A system extension, except meter installation, made as part of a subdivision improvement shall be constructed by the applicant in accordance with city standards and specifications. The city shall make the water meter installation. (Prior code § 14-224).

13.24.040 Extensions in subdivisions.
In addition to the requirements of applicable state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations, an applicant for construction of a water system extension as part of the subdivision improvement shall construct the water system extension as part of the subdivision improvements in accordance with the following:

A. Pay all applicable fees and charges;

B. Enter into a contract for the construction of facilities for which reimbursement is sought and enter into an agreement with the city for reimbursement on a form approved by the city, all before beginning any construction;

C. Have the surveying and staking of alignment and necessary grades performed by a licensed civil engineer or land surveyor;

D. Prepare and submit an accurate "as-constructed" drawing in reproducible form;

E. Submit a statement of the project cost prepared in sufficient detail to be recorded in the water system plant accounts. (Prior code § 14-225).

13.24.050 Major distribution facilities.
Major distribution facilities required to serve a proposed development may, upon approval by the director, be constructed by an applicant for water system extension. The city shall reimburse a portion of the cost of such improvements if it finds that the facilities benefit an area greater than that developed by the applicant. (Prior code § 14-226).

13.24.060 Reimbursable cost.
Reimbursable cost is the actual cost approved by the city of major distribution off-site facilities plus on-site major distribution facilities, less the computed charges for the area to be served under the application, less an excess of computed frontage charges over the actual cost of on-site local distribution mains and appurtenances. For purposes of this computation, the cost of major distribution mains which also serve as local distribution mains shall be taken as the increment of cost over that of an eight-inch diameter main. (Prior code § 14-227).

13.24.070 Reimbursement terms and agreement.
Upon completion and acceptance of facilities for which costs are reimbursable, the city shall provide a reimbursement agreement. The reimbursement agreement shall include a detailed description of the facilities for which costs are reimbursable, an exhibition of cost date and calculation of reimbursable cost, and the terms of reimbursement. The annual reimbursement payment shall equal the frontage charge for direct connections to reimbursable pipelines plus the connection charge for areas benefiting from reimbursable facilities. The director shall make any necessary apportionment of funds among two or more reimbursable facilities. No interest is paid on reimbursable amounts. The term of all reimbursable agreements is 10 years. (Prior code § 14-228).

13.24.080 Inspection and approval.
The director shall provide for the inspection and control of construction work performed on the water system. The director shall make written approval and acceptance of the work before the city may accept it. (Prior code § 14-223).

Chapter 13.28
CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM1
Sections:

13.28.010    Purpose.

13.28.020    Responsibility.

13.28.030    Definitions.

13.28.040    Requirements.

13.28.050    Charges and fees.

13.28.060    Emergency suspensions.

13.28.070    Enforcement – Termination of service.

13.28.080    Enforcement – Show cause hearing.

13.28.090    Enforcement – Civil remedies.

13.28.100    Violations – Misdemeanor

13.28.010 Purpose.
A. To protect the potable water supply of the city of Benicia from the possibility of backflow contamination, or pollution originating from within its customers’ water system(s), as authorized under Section 116800 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code.

B. To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between its customers’ internal potable water system(s), nonpotable water systems or industrial piping systems and the city water system.

C. To provide for an ongoing program of cross-connection control which will systematically prevent the contamination or pollution of the city water system. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.020 Responsibility.
A. The director shall be responsible for the protection of the city water system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants through water service connections. If, in the judgement of said director, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at the city’s water service connection to any customer’s premises for the safety of the city water system, the director shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection to its premises. Within 90 days of the date of the request for installation, the customer shall install such approved assembly, at its own expense, and failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to immediately install such assembly shall constitute grounds for discontinuing city water service to the premises until such assembly is properly installed. Under special circumstances an extension may be granted by the director.

B. The customer shall be responsible at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a certified inspection and operational test made at the time of installation and thereafter at least once per year. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.030 Definitions.
A. Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the customer’s premises other than from the city water system. These auxiliary waters may include water from a noncity potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used waters” such as gray water or “industrial fluids.”

B. Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of the potable water supply system from any source or sources. There are two types of backflow: back-siphonage and back-pressure.

1. Back-Siphonage. The form of backflow caused by the sudden reduction of system pressure which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system.

2. Back-Pressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system caused by a pump, elevation of piping, tank, boiler, or steam and/or pressure above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow.

C. Backflow Preventer. An assembly or means designed to stop contamination or pollution of a potable water system as a result of back-pressure or back-siphonage. The entire backflow prevention assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing organization for backflow prevention assemblies. Unless otherwise approved by the director, the backflow prevention assembly shall be installed directly behind the city water meter. The assembly shall be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing. It will be installed in a location where no part of the assembly will be submerged, with a minimum of 12 inches of clearance above grade, extending not more than 36 inches above grade, and with a minimum of 12 inches of side clearance. Under special circumstances alternative installation schemes may be granted by the director. [Any type of backflow preventer may be used as internal cross-connection protection in lieu of external service line protection, in some instances, as approved by the director.]

1. Air Gap (AG). The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, and in no case less than one inch.

2. Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (RP). An assembly of two independently operating, approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, properly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and relief valves. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the city water system side of the assembly. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the two check valves shall be at least two psi less than the pressure on the city water system side of the assembly. In the case of leakage of either of the check valves the differential relief valve shall open to the atmosphere.

3. Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Assembly (RPDA). An assembly consisting of all the elements of a reduced pressure principle assembly and a low-flow bypass line backflow assembly complete with a low-flow registration meter. The main line and the bypass line backflow assembly shall each consist of two independently operating, approved check valves with tightly closing, rising stem shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. No connection shall be made to the fire line service between the city water service connection and the reduced pressure principle detector assembly.

4. Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). An assembly of two independently operating, approved check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. Double check valve assemblies are used in very low hazard situations, small fire systems, situations that may not allow for drainage of an RP, vertical installations, or special circumstances allowed by the director.

5. Double Check-Detector Check Valve Assembly (DCDC). A complete integral unit consisting of a main line double check valve assembly, and a low flow bypass line double check valve assembly complete with a low flow registration meter. The main line and the bypass line double check valve assembly shall each consist of two independently operating, approved check valves with tightly closing, rising stem, shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. No connection shall be made to the fire line service between the city water service connection and the double check-detector check valve assembly.

6. Pressure or Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers (PVBs/AVBs). Pressure or atmospheric vacuum breakers may only be used under special conditions. Special conditions include, but are not limited to: median strip irrigation systems, internal point-of-use applications, or other circumstances as approved by the director. Refer to the Department of Health Services’ “Policy Statement Regarding the Use of Pressure Style Vacuum Breakers on Median Strip Irrigation Systems.”

D. Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids, stagnant water, waste liquids, or other materials to a degree which creates or may create an actual hazard to the public health through contamination, poisoning, or through the spread of disease.

E. Cross-Connection. An unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a potable water system (city or consumer’s water system) used to supply water and any source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangement, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections. The term “direct cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection which is subject to both back-siphonage and back-pressure. The term “indirect cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection which is subject to back-siphonage only.

F. Cross-Connection, Controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

G. Customer. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of the property (or premises owner) that is supplied potable water by a water service connection.

H. Director. The director of public works for the city or designee.

I. Hazard, Degree Of. The evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable (city) water system is termed as follows:

1. Hazard – Health. See subsection (D) of this section, Contamination.

2. Hazard – Plumbing. A plumbing type of cross-connection in a customer’s water system that may be either a pollution- or a contamination-type hazard that has not been properly protected by a backflow prevention assembly.

3. Hazard – Nonhealth. See subsection (L) of this section, Pollution.

4. Hazard – System. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the city water system or the consumer’s potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted negative effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.

J. Industrial Fluids Systems. Any system containing a fluid or solution which, if introduced into an approved water supply, would constitute a health, plumbing, nonhealth, or system hazard. This may include, but not be limited to: chemical or biological solutions; polluted, stagnant or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and “used waters” originating from the city water system which may no longer be of potable water quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, etc.; animal or vegetable oils; petroleum products; caustic and acid solutions; and other liquid and gaseous fluids used for industrial, firefighting, or other purposes.

K. Person. “Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.

L. Pollution. The presence of any substance (organic, inorganic, or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which may not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.

M. Tenant. The person occupying the premises that may or may not be the property owner.

N. Tester List. The city shall establish a list of backflow assembly testers for which the city has required valid certification; assured equipment accuracy; has reviewed with them the forms, policies, and procedures used in the program; and is reasonably assured that they are able to perform the required tests and repairs. The list is open to all certified testers who participate in the annual tester program review presented by city staff.

O. Water, Gray. Untreated household wastewater which has not come into contact with toilet waste. “Gray water” includes used water from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, and water from clothes-washing machines. Gray water systems are used to irrigate household landscaping.

P. Water, Nonpotable. Water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability.

Q. Water, Potable. Any water which, according to California Department of Health Services regulations, is safe for human consumption. In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the director has final judgement as to its safety and potability.

R. Water Service Connection. The terminal end of a water service connection from the city water system where the city loses sanitary control over the water. The connection may provide potable water for use in an internal or external water supply, fire sprinkler system or landscape watering system. Where a meter is present, the customer’s service connection shall mean the downstream side of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line serving the customer’s water system upstream of any meter or backflow prevention assembly. “Water service connection” also shall include a service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the city water system.

S. Water System.

1. City Water System. The source facilities and the distribution system, including all those facilities under the complete control of the city, up to the point of the city water service connection and/or where the customer’s water system begins.

2. Customer’s System. All piping and facilities on the customer’s side of the city water service connection. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.040 Requirements.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws, the Uniform Plumbing Code, Chapter Six, et seq., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and the provisions of this chapter. If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, inappropriately installed, bypassed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, notification and/or termination proceedings as outlined in BMC 13.28.060 and 13.28.070 shall be initiated against the customer or tenant.

B. The customer’s system shall be open for inspection and testing by a city-authorized backflow assembly tester or authorized representative of the director at all reasonable times to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this chapter, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by making a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state laws, the Uniform Plumbing Code, Chapter Six, et seq., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and the provisions of this chapter.

C. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the downstream side of the water service connection or immediately outside the building being served and in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: (1) an auxiliary water supply, (2) industrial fluids are present, (3) stagnant water, or (4) where any other objectionable substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential health hazard. In some cases the city water system and the customer’s system may also be protected by internal backflow protection assemblies in lieu of external assemblies. Such protection is installed in the customer’s internal piping upstream of the water use that may compromise the city or customer’s water system. Internal assemblies or vacuum breakers also require annual testing or checking to verify their effectiveness.

D. The type of backflow prevention assembly required under subsection (C) of this section shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists or the intricacy of the plumbing or piping arrangements. In the case of premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the city water system, the city water system shall be protected by an air-gap system or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include, but are not limited to, wastewater treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. The type of protection shall meet the requirements outlined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Section 7604, Table 1, et seq.; the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research’s “Manual of Cross-Connection Control,” 9th Edition, et seq.; or the Uniform Plumbing Code, Chapter Six, et seq., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. The reference cited is dependent on the assembly application.

E. The types of protective assemblies minimally required for new uses or replacement of old assemblies under subsection (D) of this section shall meet the requirements outlined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 17, Section 7604, Table 1, et seq., and the Uniform Plumbing Code, Chapter Six, et seq., published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. All other uses not addressed shall be as designated by the director.

F. Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the director. The assembly shall be installed above ground with a 12-inch minimum clearance below the assembly. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the most current standards established by the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and has met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCC & HR) of the University of Southern California established by “Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices No. 69-2” dated March 1969, or the most current issue.

Said AWWA and FCCC & HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the director. Final approval of any assembly or system proposed for installation under the terms of this chapter shall be evidenced by a “Certificate of Approval” issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC & HR Specifications and by presence on the list of approved devices issued by the department of health services.

The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the director to test and certify backflow preventers:

Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research

University of Southern California

Kaprielian Hall 200

Los Angeles, California 90089-2531

Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to the approved list as they are qualified by the director.

G. It shall be the duty of the director at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to see to it that a certified inspection or operational test is made at least once per year. In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough, certified inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by a tester that is certified by AWWA or FCCC & HR and approved by the director. If the customer does not have the test performed in accordance with the director’s schedule and requirements, the director may have the required test performed with the costs borne by the customer. The customer will be notified by the director in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the customer or its representative may witness the tests if it is so desired. Those devices found to be defective shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced, and retested at the expense of the customer. If the customer does not repair, overhaul, replace and/or retest those devices in accordance with the director’s schedule and requirements, the director may discontinue service in accordance with subsection (A) of this section or may perform said work and retest with the costs borne by the customer. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept by the director.

H. The director may exclude from the requirements of these rules, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements of subsection (G) of this section, all presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained. The existing assembly must satisfactorily protect the city’s water system as determined by the director. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the director finds that the continued maintenance of such assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section at the expense of the customer.

I. All existing water service connections which are deemed by the director to be subject to backflow prevention will, upon written notice, have an appropriate backflow prevention assembly installed and inspected within 90 days of said notification. Failure, refusal, or inability to install said assembly(ies) shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the customer or tenant until such assembly(ies) have been properly installed.

J. The director shall establish and maintain a list of certified backflow assembly testers that are known to be qualified. Testers named on the list shall:

1. Maintain current American Water Works Association certification;

2. Perform field testing in accordance with the test procedures outlined in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control;

3. Use a differential pressure gauge that is calibrated annually;

4. Use the forms requested by the city.

K. The director is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable policies with respect to this chapter. All such policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall be effective 30 days after the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.050 Charges and fees.
A. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs, when determined necessary, associated with the program established herein from users of the city’s water system that have backflow assemblies installed. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and fees as set by resolution. Any such charges and fees will be set by separate council resolution. Any such charges and fees under this chapter will be included as part of the customer’s annual notice to test its assembly(ies). All billing requirements as stated in Chapter 13.16 BMC, Billing Requirements, shall apply to said charges and fees.

B. Charges and fees established by city council resolution may include:

1. Fees for reimbursement of costs to administer the city’s cross-connection and backflow prevention program;

2. Fees for inspection procedures;

3. Backflow prevention testing;

4. Fees for filing appeals;

5. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.

C. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. (Ord. 17-10 § 16; Ord. 99-9; Ord. 95-2; Ord. 87-11).

13.28.060 Emergency suspensions.
A. The director may suspend the water service of a customer whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened backflow situation presenting or causing imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or the city water system.

B. Any customer notified of a suspension of water service shall immediately install a backflow assembly or shall stop or eliminate the hazard or unapproved water supply that is cause for concern. In the event of a customer’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the water connection, to prevent or minimize contamination of the city water system. The director shall allow the customer to recommence its use when endangerment has passed. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.070 Enforcement – Termination of service.
Customer’s water services which have a backflow assembly(ies) installed or are required to have an assembly installed must abide by the conditions of this chapter or any applicable state law. Any customer who violates the following conditions of this chapter or applicable state law is subject to water service termination:

A. Failure to test a backflow assembly in a timely manner;

B. Refusal to repair or replace an existing backflow assembly to bring it to operating standards;

C. Refusal to install a backflow assembly to prevent the possible backflow of harmful substances into the city water system. Noncompliant customers will be notified of the proposed termination of their water service and be offered the opportunity to show cause under BMC 13.28.080 why the proposed action should not be taken. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.080 Enforcement – Show cause hearing.
The director may order any customer which causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter or an order issued hereunder to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served upon the customer specifying the time and place of the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the customer show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 99-9).

13.28.090 Enforcement – Civil remedies.
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any customer or tenant who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, or orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 per violation. Such assessments may be billed directly to the person or added to the customer’s cross-connection program charge and the director shall have such other collection remedies as are available to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fees, or fines shall constitute a lien against the customer’s property. Customers or tenants desiring to dispute such enforcement actions (limited to orders or fines) must file a request to the director to reconsider the fine or the applicable enforcement action within 10 days of being notified of the action. The director shall reconvene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the customer or tenant. If the customer is still aggrieved by the director’s decision after reconsideration of the matter, the customer or tenant shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. If the customer is still aggrieved by the city manager’s decision, the customer or tenant shall have the right to appeal to the council, pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. (Ord. 07-45 § 1; Ord. 99-9).

13.28.100 Violations – Misdemeanor.
A. Any customer or person who knowingly makes false statements, representation, or certification in any certification, record, report, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations, or to falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any backflow assembly or test method required under these regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor as outlined in Section 116820 of the California Health and Safety Code.

B. Any customer or person who violates an order of the city council or who wilfully or negligently fails to comply with any provision of the regulations and the orders, rules, and regulations issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor as outlined in Section 116820 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 99-9).

1
Prior legislation: Prior code §§ 14-211 – 14-213.


Chapter 13.32
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Sections:

13.32.010  Violation.

13.32.020  Repealed.

13.32.030  Repealed.

13.32.040  Violation – Nuisance.

13.32.010 Violation.
It is a violation of this code to violate, or fail to comply with, a rule or regulation of the system or a condition of water service or to damage city property used in the operation and maintenance of the water system. (Ord. 03-9 § 26; prior code §§ 14-102, 14-106).

13.32.020 Separate offenses.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Prior code § 14-104).

13.32.030 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Prior code § 14-103).

13.32.040 Violation – Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of a provision of this division is a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such. Each day that the condition continues is a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 14-105).

Chapter 13.34
WATER WELLS, CATHODIC PROTECTION WELLS AND MONITORING WELLS
Sections:

13.34.010  Adoption by reference.

13.34.020  Copies on file.

13.34.030  Amendments.

13.34.040  Enforcement by county.

13.34.050  Acts prohibited.

13.34.060  Repealed.

13.34.070  Fees.

13.34.010 Adoption by reference.
Solano County Ordinance No. 1348 regulating the construction, destruction and inactivation of water, cathodic protection, and monitoring wells is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter, including standards contained in the California Department of Water Resources’ Bulletin 74-81 ("Water Well Standards"), Bulletin 74-1 ("Cathodic Protection Well Standards"), and Bulletin 74-88 ("Monitoring Well Standards") adopted by reference in Solano County Ordinance No. 1348. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.020 Copies on file.
One copy of Solano County Ordinance No. 1348 together with (A) the California Department of Water Resources’ Bulletins adopted by reference therein; and (B) Solano County Resolution No. 89-179 relating to fees and all future amendments and modifications thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.030 Amendments.
Notwithstanding BMC 13.34.010 to the contrary, Solano County Ordinance No. 1348 is amended to read as follows:

A. The definition of "county" found in Solano County Ordinance No. 1348, Section 13.10-101 is amended to read as follows:

County. Application to incorporated Area of the city of Benicia. County shall mean the County of Solano, acting by and through its Board of Supervisors. As used in this chapter, the word "County" shall include the incorporated area within the City of Benicia.

B. The definition of "person" found in Solano County Ordinance No. 1348, Section 13.10-101 is amended to read as follows:

Person. As used in this chapter, the word "person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, general corporation, association or governmental entity. "Governmental entity" as used herein, shall not include any city or local agency exempt from the application of County Ordinance No. 1348 pursuant to state law, and shall include the United States to the extent authorized by federal law.

C. Section 13.10-104(a) is amended to read as follows:

Section 13.10-104(a) Well Sites. No well shall be located any closer to the items or areas hereinbelow indicated than the distance specified, except on written approval of the program manager. Monitoring and cathodic protection wells may be located within easements and may be exempted from property line setbacks. Water wells may be located in public utility easements, and provided that written permission is obtained from the utility. Water wells may not be located within public or private road easements. Other than property lines, hazards are to be located downslope from the well if possible, with a minimum of the following distances. Where special hazards are involved, these distances shall be increased.

 

Property line (unsewered area)

25 feet*

 

Septic Tanks

100 feet

 

Leachfields

100 feet

 

Sewer Lines

50 feet

 

Stream, ditch or drainage canal

100 feet

 

Subsurface leaching system

100 feet

 

Animal or fowl enclosure

100 feet

 

Underground storage tanks containing hazardous substances

100 feet

 

 

 

*

A variance to reduce the property line setback distance to not less than 10 feet may be granted by the program manager to prevent unnecessary hardship or injustice in instances such as where parcel size and water availability would otherwise prevent development.

(Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.040 Enforcement by county.
The city authorizes the county department of environmental management, division of environmental health, or any successor agency within the county to administer the issuance of permits, undertake inspections and otherwise administer and enforce Solano County Ordinance No. 1348 as adopted and amended herein within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.050 Acts prohibited.
A. It is unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, destroy, or inactivate any well unless such person has (1) obtained a permit issued by the county for the specific work to be performed; or (2) in the case of an emergency, fully complied with the provisions of this chapter relating to emergencies.

B. It is unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, destroy, or inactivate any well unless such construction, reconstruction, destruction, or inactivation is in accordance with the standards set forth in Solano County Ordinance No. 1348. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.060 Penalties.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.34.070 Fees.
The fees and charges established by the county board of supervisors in Solano County Resolution No. 89-179 relating to Solano County Ordinance No. 1348, and which may be modified hereafter by said board from time to time, are likewise adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though set forth in full. Said fees and charges shall apply to any person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 90-4 N.S. § 1, 1990).

Chapter 13.35
EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
Sections:

13.35.010    Scope.

13.35.020    Purpose.

13.35.030    Definitions.

13.35.040    Authorization.

13.35.050    Application.

13.35.060    Water conservation stages.

13.35.070    Mandatory conservation phase implementation.

13.35.080    Duration of conservation stages.

13.35.090    Drought penalty.

13.35.100    Drought surcharge.

13.35.110    Exceptions and application procedures for exceptions.

13.35.120    Violation – Enforcement.

13.35.130    Violation – Additional remedy.

13.35.010 Scope.
There is established a city emergency water conservation plan. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:

During periods of water shortages, the public health and welfare requires that the water resources available to the city be put to maximum beneficial use to the extent to which they are capable, and that the waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of such water is to be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the interests of the people of the city and for the public welfare. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.030 Definitions.
“Base year” means a water year selected by the city manager for purposes of calculating the baseline amount.

Baseline Amount.

– For residential customers, the average gallons per day of water used by that customer class during the base year.

– For industrial, commercial or municipal customers, the average amount of water used by that customer during the corresponding bimonthly billing period of the base year.

“City” means the city of Benicia acting by and through the public works and community development department as operator of the city water system.

“Customer” means any person, whether within or without the geographic boundaries of the city of Benicia, who uses water supplied by the city.

“Director” means the director of public works and community development for the city or designee.

“GPD” means gallons per day.

“HCF” means 100 cubic feet, where a cubic foot is 7.48 gallons.

“Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or governmental entity. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.040 Authorization.
The city manager or his designee, upon the recommendation of the director, is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter upon their determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.050 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and property served by the city. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.060 Water conservation stages.
No customer of the city shall knowingly make, cause, use, or permit the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage in effect pursuant to action taken by the city manager, or his designee, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. When a conservation stage is declared, the city manager shall select the appropriate base year based on the recommendation of the director. Baseline water use amounts for all conservation stages are listed in the table below for ease of reference.

Baseline Amounts for Water Use Penalties 

Conservation Stage

Residential

Commercial/Industrial/
Municipal

Landscape Irrigation (dedicated meter)

1-Voluntary

Voluntary conservation

Voluntary conservation

Voluntary conservation

2-Water Alert

10% reduction from base year use

(Penalty assessed when customer uses >90% of base year use.)

(City manager to select appropriate base year.)

10% reduction from base year use

(Penalty assessed when customer uses >90% of base year use.)

(City manager to select base year.)

25% reduction from base year use

(Penalty assessed when customer uses >75% of base year use.)

(City manager to select base year.)

3-Water Warning

25% reduction from base year use

(>75% of base year use)

15% reduction from base year use

(>85% of base use)

30% reduction from base year use

(>70% of base use)

4-Water Emergency

35% reduction from base year use

(>65% of base year use)

30% reduction from base year use

(>70% of base use)

40% reduction from base year use

(>60% of base use)

5-Water Crisis

50% reduction from base year use

(>50% of base year use)

50% reduction from base year use

(>50% of base use)

50% reduction from base year use

(>50% of base use)

A. Stage 1 – Voluntary Conservation.

1. Customers of the city are requested to voluntarily limit the amount of water used to that amount absolutely necessary for health, business, and irrigation.

2. In addition to the voluntary water use reductions of subsection (A)(1) of this section, and in compliance with BMC 13.35.070, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:

a. The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:

i. Allowing water to run off unused to a gutter, ditch, or drain;

ii. Failing to repair a controllable leak;

iii. Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas, unless the concrete foundation is in the process of curing during construction, and except to alleviate immediate fire hazards, or for the protection of health and safety;

iv. Utilizing a hand-held hose without an automatic shut-off nozzle;

v. Irrigating during rain.

b. The following water use prohibitions apply to new development only:

i. Single pass-through cooling water systems;

ii. Commercial car washes and laundries without recirculating water systems;

iii. Decorative fountains without recirculating water systems.

B. Stage 2 – Mandatory Compliance – Water Alert.

1. No residential customer shall make, cause, use, or commence the use of water received from the city for any purpose in an amount in excess of 90 percent of the baseline amount. Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

2. No industrial, commercial or municipal customer shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received for any purpose in an amount in excess of 90 percent of the baseline amount. In addition to the above allotment, for meters that strictly serve landscaping the allotment shall be 75 percent of the baseline amount. New services or services without a base year history shall be allotted on comparable customer usage.

Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

3. In addition to the above mandatory water use reductions of subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, and in compliance with BMC 13.35.070, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:

a. Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting and other activities necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Benicia;

b. Lawn watering and landscape irrigation restricted to only when necessary and only between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.;

c. Vehicle washing must be done using a bucket or hand-held hose with an automatic shut-off nozzle, or take place at a commercial car wash;

d. Restaurant drinking water shall be served only upon request;

e. Non-potable water shall be used for construction purposes unless the user presents a reasonable health and safety issue to the public works and community development director;

f. All “waste of water” elements as defined in Stage 1 shall remain in effect in Stage 2.

C. Stage 3 – Mandatory Compliance – Water Warning.

1. No residential customer shall make, cause, use, or commence the use of water received from the city for any purpose in an amount in excess of 75 percent of the baseline amount. Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

2. No industrial, commercial or municipal customer shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received for any purpose in an amount in excess of 85 percent of the baseline amount. In addition to the above allotment, for meters that strictly serve landscaping the allotment shall be 70 percent of the baseline amount. New services or services without a base year history shall be allotted on comparable customer usage.

Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

3. In addition to the mandatory water use reductions of subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section, and in compliance with BMC 13.35.070, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:

a. Landscape watering shall be limited to Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays for odd numbered addresses; and Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays for even numbered addresses; with no watering on Sundays; and

b. All elements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect in Stage 3.

D. Stage 4 – Mandatory Compliance – Water Emergency.

1. No residential customer shall make, cause, or commence the use of water received from the city for any purpose in an amount in excess of 65 percent of the baseline amount. Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

2. No industrial, commercial or municipal customer shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received for any purpose in an amount in excess of 70 percent of the baseline amount. In addition to the above allotment, for meters that strictly serve landscaping the allotment shall be 60 percent of the baseline amount. New services or services without a base year history shall be allotted on comparable customer usage.

Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

3. In addition to the mandatory water use reductions of subsections (D)(1) and (2) of this section, and in compliance with BMC 13.35.070, the following restrictions shall apply to all persons:

a. Automatic timers shall be turned “off” on automatic sprinkler systems and watering shall occur manually on designated days except where provided for in subsection (D)(3)(b) of this section. Micro irrigation systems (i.e., drip systems) may be used;

b. Use of automatic sprinkler systems with timers in use shall be restricted to areas actively used by the public, e.g., park and school grounds; and

c. All elements of Stage 3 shall be in effect in Stage 4.

E. Stage 5 – Mandatory Compliance – Water Crisis.

1. No residential customer shall make, cause, use, or commence the use of water received from the city for any purpose in an amount in excess of 50 percent of the baseline amount. Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

2. No industrial, commercial or municipal customer shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received for any purpose in an amount in excess of 50 percent of the baseline amount. In addition to the above allotment, for meters that strictly serve landscaping, the allotment shall be 50 percent of the baseline amount. New services or services without a base year history shall be allotted on comparable customer usage.

Water used in excess of this amount shall be subject to a drought penalty as set forth in BMC 13.35.090. The customer of record may request an increase in the baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110.

3. In addition to the mandatory water use reductions of subsections (E)(1) and (2) of this section, and in compliance with BMC 13.35.070, all elements of Stage 4 shall remain in effect in Stage 5 except that BMC 13.35.110(A) does not apply in this stage. The customer of record may still apply for exceptions as outlined in BMC 13.35.110, but the reason for applying for an exception cannot be based on economic hardship. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-5 N.S. §§ 1, 3, 1991; Ord. 91-2 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.070 Mandatory conservation phase implementation.
A. The public works and community development department shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by its customers and shall recommend to the city manager the extent of the conservation required in order for the department to prudently plan for and supply water to its customers. Thereafter, the city manager may order that the appropriate phase of water conservation be implemented in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. Said order shall be made by public announcement and shall be published a minimum of one time in a daily newspaper of general circulation and shall continue to be published on a weekly basis until such time as all restrictions are removed. Said order shall become effective immediately upon the first publication.

B. Conservation Stages. The various stages of water conservation shall be implemented upon authorization by the city manager. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-5 N.S. § 2, 1991; Ord 91-2 N.S. § 3, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.080 Duration of conservation stages.
Stage 1 shall be effective upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the restrictive provisions of Stage 1 as set forth in BMC 13.35.060 shall apply to all water consumption on and after said date. Stage 1 will be rescinded at such time that conditions, as set forth in BMC 13.35.070, indicate a more restrictive stage is necessary. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.090 Drought penalty.
A. Customers will receive prior individual notification of the baseline amount, applicable rates, and the opportunity to request exceptions.

B. Water use beyond the maximum allowed for each water conservation stage shall be subject to a drought penalty pursuant to the schedule set forth in subsection (C) of this section. The customer of record may request an increase in this baseline amount as set forth in BMC 13.35.110. Application forms and instructions will be provided to customers and will also be available at the city water billing office.

C. In addition to the general water service rates, each customer shall pay, during each billing period, a drought penalty for water used in excess of the baseline amount for the declared conservation stage. The drought penalty is as follows:

Excess Water Use Penalties 

Amount of Excess Water Use

Increased Rate for Use in Excess

<=10% higher than baseline for conservation stage

2 times the regular rate

10.01% to 20% higher than baseline for conservation stage

3 times the regular rate

>20% higher than the baseline for conservation stage

4 times the regular rate

For water used up to 10 percent in excess of the baseline amount there shall be a drought penalty equal to two times the applicable volume charge, in addition to the applicable service charge and volume charge;

For water used from 10.01 percent to 20 percent in excess of the baseline amount there shall be a drought penalty of three times the applicable volume charge levied on this excess only, in addition to the drought penalty on the first 10 percent and the applicable service charge and volume charge; and

For water used over 20 percent in excess of the baseline amount, there shall be a drought penalty of four times the applicable volume charge levied only on this excess over 20 percent, in addition to the drought penalties on the first 20 percent and the applicable service charge and volume charge.

D. In addition to the drought penalty, if water usage exceeds the allowed baseline amount, a warning will be issued and enforcement actions may be taken as described in BMC 13.35.120. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-5 N.S. § 4, 1991; Ord. 91-2 N.S. § 1, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

13.35.100 Drought surcharge.
A. A drought surcharge may be imposed by the city council, upon the recommendation of the director, to compensate for a loss of water revenue, and to pay drought-related costs such as the purchase of water incurred by the city as a result of the drought.

B. The drought surcharge amount shall be established by a resolution adopted by the city council at the time of imposition. The drought surcharge is temporary and will be in effect until drought-related costs are recovered and water supply conditions have stabilized and the council terminates the surcharge by adoption of a resolution. (Ord. 14-08 § 1; Ord. 14-07 § 2; Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-5 N.S. § 5, 1991; Ord. 91-2 N.S. § 5, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990. Formerly 13.35.095).

13.35.110 Exceptions and application procedures for exceptions.
A. Any customer of record may apply to the director to increase the amount of water that may be used without exceeding the baseline amount for any one or more of the following reasons:

1. Medical requirements;

2. More than four residents in a single-family residential household. The additional amount allotted shall be 50 gpd per person;

3. Incorrect customer classification based on predominant use;

4. When failure to do so would cause severe economic hardship to the applicant, including, but not limited to, threat of imminent insolvency;

5. When failure to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection, or safety of the applicant or the public;

6. To protect mature trees providing a community benefit.

B. Written applications for such exceptions may be granted by the director based upon clear and convincing evidence that any one or more of the foregoing conditions has been satisfied and it is in the public interest to grant such application.

C. The quantity of water allowed in addition to the baseline amount shall be determined by the director, and shall not exceed that quantity necessary to alleviate the condition which justified granting the application for an exception. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-2 § 4, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990. Formerly 13.35.100).

13.35.120 Violation – Enforcement.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any water customer or account holder to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the administrative rules and regulations promulgated hereunder or to waste any water obtained from or through the distribution facilities of the city, or from any person to engage in wasting water as defined herein. The violation of each specific provision of this chapter, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be enforced accordingly.

A. Violations.

1. For the first violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director shall issue a written notice of the fact of such violation.

2. For the second violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director shall impose a surcharge of $50.00 against the account holder for the property where the violation occurred.

3. For the third violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director shall impose a surcharge of $100.00 against the account holder for the property where the violation occurred.

4. For a fourth and any subsequent violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director or his designee shall impose a surcharge of $250.00 against the account holder for the property where the violation occurred.

Further, the director may:

a. Install a flow restrictor on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a length of time to be determined by the director, but in no event for more than one year; or

b. Disconnect service on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a length of time not to exceed 60 days in length.

5. As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter by any person who has received more than one written warning pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section or against whom the director has imposed a second violation in one consecutive 12-month period is deemed to be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.

B. Time Period for Accounting Violations. Accrued violations will be based on acts of noncompliance occurring within a consecutive 12-month period. Each successive 24-hour period of any violation or failure to comply shall be a separate and distinct violation.

C. Notice of Violation. For each violation, the director shall give notice as follows:

1. Written notice of violation will be sent through the U.S. mail, first-class prepaid, to the address of the account holder as shown on current water billing records or personally served on the account holder. The notice will be considered to have been served upon the account holder either upon depositing the notice in the U.S. mail or when personally served, whichever methodology is utilized.

2. Written notice of violation shall include the date, time, and location of the violation; a description of the violation; provisions of the ordinance violated; a statement of the assessed surcharge or other enforcement action; and the appeal procedures.

D. Right of Appeal. Any account holder provided a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have the right of appeal. A request for hearing must be made in writing and must be received by the director within 10 calendar days from the date of personal or mailed service of the notice of violation. Upon receipt of an appeal and request for hearing, all applicable surcharges and enforcement actions will be suspended until such hearing has been completed and a final determination made.

E. Determination of Appeal. The appeal will be heard and determined by city manager or the designee of the city manager. The city manager shall consider whether the account holder knew or should have known of the violation at the time it occurred and whether the account holder took reasonable action to correct the violation upon notification of said violation. The determination of the city manager will be final and conclusive.

F. Payment of Penalties and Charges. Any surcharge imposed pursuant to this section, or reimbursement of city expenses, shall be added to the account of the account holder for the property where the violation occurred and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service.

G. Reimbursement of City Expenses. If violations result in either installation of a flow restrictor, discontinuation of water service, or injunctive relief sought and obtained by the city pursuant to this chapter, the account holder whose service is affected shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred, including attorney’s fees.

H. Reimbursement from Tenants. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of an account holder to seek reimbursement of a surcharge or other costs from a tenant or other consumer. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 91-5 N.S. § 6, 1991; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990. Formerly 13.35.110).

13.35.130 Violation – Additional remedy.
As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter by any person who has received more than one written warning pursuant to BMC 13.35.120 to refrain from the same or any other violation under this chapter in one calendar year shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 90-19 N.S. § 1, 1990).

Chapter 13.36
EMERGENCY OUTDOOR WATER RESTRICTIONS
Sections:

13.36.010    Findings.

13.36.020    Definitions.

13.36.030    Authorization.

13.36.040    Outdoor conservation of water.

13.36.050    New landscaping.

13.36.060    Violation – Enforcement.

13.36.010 Findings.
The city council finds that:

A. The city of Benicia is facing a serious water shortage.

B. The city’s main water supply source is the State Water Project (SWP).

C. During normal years the SWP supplies approximately 85 percent of the city’s water demand.

D. On April 22, 2014, the California Department of Water Resources announced that city’s water supply allocation from the SWP would be five percent due to exceptionally dry conditions and low water levels in the reservoirs.

E. To prevent waste and ensure reasonable use of water supplied by the city water distribution system, it is necessary to enact certain limitations to promote water conservation by city customers.

F. These limitations are focused on outdoor water use, because at a typical home, more than 50 percent of the water use goes on lawns and outdoor landscaping, and about 30 percent of that is lost due to overwatering and evaporation from wind and sun.

G. Water use limitations are designed to promote the use of drip irrigation and other low volume irrigation methods that reduce outdoor water use by applying water more efficiently than traditional irrigation methods.

H. Reduction of water use through water conservation will protect and promotes the public health, safety, and welfare by conserving a vital resource that is subject to ever increasing demands. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

13.36.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, phrases and terms shall have the following definitions:

“City water” means any water delivered by the city’s water distribution system.

“Director” means the public works director or designee.

“Low volume irrigation” means any irrigation system that applies irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour, and that is designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. This includes but is not limited to properly functioning drip irrigation systems and soaker hoses.

“New landscaping” means any lawn, plant or other landscaping planted after the effective date of this chapter.

“Water customer” means the name of the water account holder who is listed in the city’s utility billing system.

“Water runoff” means water flowing away from the property in any gutter, ditch, or other manner over the surface of the ground due to excessive application of city water. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

13.36.030 Authorization.
The city manager or his or her designee, upon the recommendation of the director, has the authority to develop administrative rules and regulations to implement this chapter. The city manager or his or her designee, upon the recommendation of the director, is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter upon the city manager and director’s determination that such implementation is necessary to protect the public welfare and safety. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

13.36.040 Outdoor conservation of water.
A. Beginning April 1st and extending until October 15th:

1. No person shall use, or cause to be used, any city water for landscape irrigation between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., unless the director provides prior written consent to a different time limitation.

2. Residential and commercial locations bearing a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) shall be permitted to irrigate with city water only on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and locations bearing a street address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8) shall be permitted to irrigate with city water on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, unless the director provides prior written consent to a different irrigation schedule.

3. No landscape irrigation shall be allowed on Sundays.

B. Beginning on October 16th until March 31st all residential and commercial/industrial locations shall be permitted to irrigate with city water one day per week only on Saturday or Sunday, and landscape irrigation shall be prohibited on any other days of the week, unless the director provides prior written consent to a different irrigation pattern.

C. The limitations specified in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall not apply to landscape irrigation using a low volume irrigation system, nor to the irrigation of container plants.

D. This section does not apply to the following categories of use:

1. Watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hose with an automatic shut-off nozzle;

2. Watering for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system; or

3. Maintenance of turf at private schools, day cares, sports fields, playing fields, and other active recreation use areas within public parks, school grounds, and day care facilities; provided, that such irrigation does not exceed four days per week for the period of April 1st and October 15th and two days per week for the period of October 16th to March 31st. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

13.36.050 New landscaping.
Use of water for the irrigation of new landscape installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter cannot be more frequent than four times per week throughout the first year of establishment of the new landscape; provided, that all of the following conditions are met:

A. The newly installed landscape replaces turf grass that was regularly maintained and irrigated;

B. The new landscape consists solely of drought tolerant plants and is consistent with requirements for drought tolerant landscaping established in Solano County water agency’s turf replacement program;

C. The new landscape is irrigated solely by a low volume irrigation system; and

D. Mulch is used around the new landscaping to minimize evaporative losses. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

13.36.060 Violation – Enforcement.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any water customer to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the administrative rules and regulations promulgated hereunder or to waste any water obtained from or through the distribution facilities of the city, or from any person to engage in wasting water as defined herein. The violation of each specific provision of this chapter, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be enforced accordingly.

A. Violations.

1. For the first violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director or his designee shall issue a written notice of the fact of such violation. No penalty will be imposed for first violations. The city recognizes there is a certain amount of public education necessary so first violations are warnings accompanied by city water conservation information.

2. For the second violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director or his designee shall impose a penalty of $50.00 against the water customer for the property where the violation occurred.

3. For the third violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director or his designee shall impose a penalty of $100.00 against the water customer for the property where the violation occurred.

4. For a fourth and any subsequent violation within the preceding 12 calendar months, the director or his designee shall impose a penalty of $250.00 against the water customer for the property where the violation occurred.

Further, the director or his/her designee may:

a. Install a flow restrictor on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a length of time to be determined by the director or his/her designee, but in no event for more than one year; or

b. Disconnect service on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a length of time not to exceed 60 days in length.

c. Reimbursement of City Expenses. If violations result in the installation of a flow restrictor, discontinuation of water service, or injunctive relief sought and obtained by the city pursuant to this chapter, the account holder whose service is affected shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred, including attorney’s fees.

B. Time Period for Accounting Violations. Accrued violations will be based on acts of noncompliance occurring within the preceding 12-month period. Each successive 24-hour period of any violation or failure to comply shall be a separate and distinct violation.

C. Notice of Violation. For each violation, city staff designated by the public works director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall give notice as follows:

1. Written notice of violation may be in the form of a door hanger that is personally attached to the front door or a letter sent through the U.S. mail, first-class prepaid, to the address of the account holder as shown on current water billing records or personally served on the water customer. The notice will be considered to have been served upon the water customer either upon depositing the notice in the U.S. mail or when personally served, whichever methodology is utilized.

2. Written notice of violation shall include the date, time, and location of the violation; a description of the violation; provisions of the ordinance violated; a statement of the assessed penalty or other enforcement action; and the appeal procedures.

D. Right of Appeal. Any water customer provided a notice of violation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have the right of appeal. A request for hearing must be made in writing, mailed or hand-delivered to the city of Benicia, 250 East L Street, Benicia CA 94510, Attn: public works director, and must be received by the director within 10 calendar days from the date of personal or mailed service of the notice of violation. An appeal processing fee of $100.00 (adjusted annually by the Consumer Price Index, All Urban Consumers for the San Francisco region) will be charged for staff’s time.

E. Determination of Appeal. The appeal will be heard and determined by director or the designee of the director within 10 calendar days. The determination of the director will be final and conclusive.

F. Payment of Penalties and Charges. Any penalty imposed pursuant to this section, and/or reimbursement of city expenses, shall be added to the account of the water customer for the property where the violation occurred and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service.

G. Reimbursement from Tenants. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of a water customer to seek reimbursement of a penalty or other costs from a tenant or other consumer. (Ord. 14-04 § 1; Ord. 14-03 § 1).

Chapter 13.40
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

13.40.010    Applicability.

13.40.020    Interference with additional requirements.

13.40.030    Compliance.

13.40.040    Suspension or modification of provisions.

13.40.010 Applicability.
This division shall apply to all sewers and other sewerage facilities, both public and private, constructed or used in the city and to all persons who use or perform work upon the facilities. (Prior code § 7-601).

13.40.020 Interference with additional requirements.
This division shall not be interpreted as to interfere with any additional requirement imposed by any law, ordinance, rule, or regulation or by the county health department. (Prior code § 7-695).

13.40.030 Compliance.
No person may occupy a building, industrial facility or other structure until the owner of the premises complies with all rules and regulations of the city. (Prior code § 7-614).

13.40.040 Suspension or modification of provisions.
A. When a person by reason of special circumstances is of the opinion that a provision of this chapter is unjust or inequitable as applied to his premises, he may make written application to the director, state the special circumstances, cite the provision complained of and request suspension or modification of that provision as applied to his premises. The director shall reply to the application, in writing, with an opinion regarding the merit of the request. The applicant may then submit the same written application to the city council.

B. If the application is approved, the city council may by resolution suspend or modify the provision complained of as applied to the premises, to be effective as of the date of the initial application and continuing during the period of the special circumstances or as specified in the resolution. (Prior code § 7-608).

1
    For statutory provisions on sewerage systems, see Health and Safety Code § 5470 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to construct and maintain drains and sewers, see Government Code § 38900 et seq.


Chapter 13.44
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

13.44.010  Generally.

13.44.020  Applicant.

13.44.030  BOD.

13.44.040  Building.

13.44.050  Building sewer.

13.44.060  Combined sewer.

13.44.070  Contractor.

13.44.080  Cost.

13.44.090  County health department.

13.44.100  Director.

13.44.110  Dwelling unit.

13.44.120  Garbage.

13.44.130  Industrial wastes.

13.44.140  Lateral sewer.

13.44.150  Main sewer.

13.44.160  Natural outlet.

13.44.170  Off-site.

13.44.180  On-site.

13.44.190  Outside sewer.

13.44.200  Permit.

13.44.210  pH.

13.44.220  Plumbing system.

13.44.230  Premises.

13.44.240  Private sewer.

13.44.250  Public sewer.

13.44.260  Sanitary sewer.

13.44.270  Sewage.

13.44.280  Sewage treatment plant.

13.44.290  Sewer.

13.44.300  Sewerage system.

13.44.305  Sewer service unit.

13.44.310  Side sewer.

13.44.320  Single-family residence.

13.44.325  SS.

13.44.330  Storm sewer or storm drain.

13.44.340  Street.

13.44.350  Suspended solids.

13.44.360  System extension.

13.44.370  Trunk sewer.

13.44.380  Watercourse.

13.44.010 Generally.
For the purpose of this division, certain words and phrases are defined in this chapter, and additional terms have the meanings indicated in Chapter 1 of the Uniform Plumbing Code of the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, current edition. (Prior code § 7-602(38)).

13.44.020 Applicant.
"Applicant" means the person applying for sewer service, sewer service connection, or sewer system extension. (Prior code § 7-602(1)).

13.44.030 BOD.
"BOD" (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days of 20 degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. (Prior code § 7-602(2)).

13.44.040 Building.
"Building" is a structure, used for any purpose, which contains sanitary facilities. (Prior code § 7-602(4)).

13.44.050 Building sewer.
"Building sewer" is that portion of a sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of a building or industrial facility and running to the property line or to a private sewer disposal system. (Prior code § 7-602(3)).

13.44.060 Combined sewer.
"Combined sewer" is a sewer receiving both surface and run-off sewage. (Prior code § 7-602(5)).

13.44.070 Contractor.
"Contractor" means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, or association licensed by the state to perform the type of work to be done under the permit. (Prior code § 7-602(6)).

13.44.080 Cost.
"Cost" means the actual or estimated value of materials, equipment rentals, personnel services, and other expenses incurred, including taxes, engineering and overhead. (Prior code § 7-602(7)).

13.44.090 County health department.
"County health department" means the department of public health of Solano County. (Prior code § 7-602(8)).

13.44.100 Director.
"Director" means the director of public works or the person designated to perform the responsibilities imposed by this division. (Prior code § 7-602(9)).

13.44.110 Dwelling unit.
"Dwelling unit" is a place of habitation which includes a place to cook or prepare food, a toilet and sleeping quarters for one person or a small group of persons constituting a family unit. (Prior code § 7-602(10)).

13.44.120 Garbage.
"Garbage" includes solid wastes from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. (Prior code § 7-602(11)).

13.44.130 Industrial wastes.
"Industrial wastes" include the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. (Prior code § 7-602(12)).

13.44.140 Lateral sewer.
"Lateral sewer" is the portion of a sewer lying within a public street or easement connecting a building sewer to the main sewer. (Prior code § 7-602(13)).

13.44.150 Main sewer.
"Main sewer" is a public sewer designated to accommodate more than one lateral sewer. (Prior code § 7-602(14)).

13.44.160 Natural outlet.
"Natural outlet" is an outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. (Prior code § 7-602(15)).

13.44.170 Off-site.
"Off-site" refers to facilities located outside the site covered by the application for sewer service. (Prior code § 7-602(16)).

13.44.180 On-site.
"On-site" refers to facilities located within the area owned or controlled by the applicant for sewer service. (Prior code § 7-602(17)).

13.44.190 Outside sewer.
"Outside sewer" is a sanitary sewer beyond the limits of the city and not subject to the control or jurisdiction of the city. (Prior code § 7-602(18)).

13.44.200 Permit.
"Permit" is any written authorization required under this division or any regulation of the city for the installation of any sewerage works. (Prior code § 7-602(20)).

13.44.210 pH.
"pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. (Prior code § 7-602(19)).

13.44.220 Plumbing system.
"Plumbing system" includes all plumbing fixtures and traps, soil waste, special waste and vent pipes, and all sanitary sewer pipes within a building and extending to the building sewer connection three feet outside the building wall. (Prior code § 7-602(21)).

13.44.230 Premises.
"Premises" is a separate, identifiable and transferable parcel of real property. A portion of a parcel having a well-defined boundary, such as a wall, fence, or hedge which prevents the common use of the property by all occupants, is a separate premises. (Prior code § 7-602(22)).

13.44.240 Private sewer.
"Private sewer" is a sewer serving an independent sewage disposal system, not connected with a public sewer, which accommodates one or more buildings or industries. (Prior code § 7-602(23)).

13.44.250 Public sewer.
"Public sewer" is a sewer lying within a street or easement and which is controlled by or under the jurisdiction of the city. (Prior code § 7-602(24)).

13.44.260 Sanitary sewer.
"Sanitary sewer" is a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm water, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. (Prior code § 7-602(25)).

13.44.270 Sewage.
"Sewage" means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and storm water as may be present. (Prior code § 7-602(26)).

13.44.280 Sewage treatment plant.
"Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. (Prior code § 7-602(27)).

13.44.290 Sewer.
"Sewer" is a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (Prior code § 7-602(28)).

13.44.300 Sewerage system.
"Sewerage system" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. (Prior code § 7-602(29)).

13.44.305 Sewer service unit.
"Sewer service unit" means any dwelling unit or building, commercial establishment, industry or other improvement which discharges a sewage flow equivalent to one dwelling unit. One dwelling unit is assumed to discharge 250 gallons per day, with a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) load of 150 parts per million. (Ord. 80-1 N.S. § 1, 1980; prior code § 7-602(39)).

13.44.310 Side sewer.
"Side sewer" is the sewer line beginning at the foundation wall of any building and terminating at the main sewer and includes the building sewer and lateral sewer together. (Prior code § 7-602(30)).

13.44.320 Single-family residence.
"Single-family residence" means the place of residence for a single family. Property improved for multifamily purposes is described in terms of the number of dwelling units that the facilities provide for single-family usage. (Prior code § 7-602(31)).

13.44.325 SS.
"SS" means suspended solids, a measure of strength of sewage expressed in terms of the quantity of solid material measured in milligrams within a liter of sewage. (Ord. 80-1 N.S. § 1, 1980; prior code § 7-602(40)).

13.44.330 Storm sewer or storm drain.
"Storm sewer" or "storm drain" is a sewer which carries storm water and surface water or groundwater and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. (Prior code § 7-602(32)).

13.44.340 Street.
"Street" means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place, easement, or right-of-way. (Prior code § 7-602(33)).

13.44.350 Suspended solids.
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquid, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. (Prior code § 7-602(34)).

13.44.360 System extension.
"System extension" means extension of public sewage facilities to serve areas to which service is not available from existing sewage collection facilities. (Prior code § 7-602(35)).

13.44.370 Trunk sewer.
"Trunk sewer" is a sewer which receives flow from several main sewers and which is designated as a trunk sewer by the director. (Prior code § 7-602(36)).

13.44.380 Watercourse.
"Watercourse" means a channel in which the flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently, under natural conditions. (Prior code § 7-602(37)).

Chapter 13.50
PRETREATMENT AND SOURCE CONTROL OF WASTEWATER DISPOSAL OR DISCHARGE1
Sections:

13.50.010    Purpose and policy.

13.50.020    Definitions.

13.50.030    Abbreviations.

13.50.040    Prohibited discharge – Certain waters or wastes.

13.50.041    Hazardous waste notification.

13.50.042    Unlawful disposal of wastes.

13.50.043    Prohibited discharge locations.

13.50.044    Treatment of wastes required.

13.50.046    Unlawful disposal facilities.

13.50.050    Federal categorical pretreatment standards.

13.50.070    Pollutant limitations and local limits.

13.50.075    Best management practices (BMPs).

13.50.080    Prohibition against dilution as treatment.

13.50.085    Deny/condition new or increased contributions.

13.50.089    Reports of changed conditions.

13.50.090    Accidental and slug discharges.

13.50.095    Slug discharge control plans.

13.50.100    Charges and fees.

13.50.105    Permit required.

13.50.106    Repealed.

13.50.110    Special discharge permit.

13.50.120    Permit – Application.

13.50.125    General permit.

13.50.130    Permit revocation.

13.50.140    Permit – Modifications.

13.50.150    Permit conditions.

13.50.160    Permit duration.

13.50.165    Permit reissuance.

13.50.170    Permit transfer.

13.50.175    Analytical requirements.

13.50.180    Reporting and sampling requirements for permittee.

13.50.183    Sample collection.

13.50.185    Recordkeeping requirements.

13.50.190    Monitoring requirements.

13.50.200    Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.

13.50.210    Pretreatment.

13.50.215    POTW requirements.

13.50.220    Confidential information.

13.50.230    Emergency suspensions.

13.50.240    Permit – Enforcement – Termination of permit.

13.50.250    Notification of violation.

13.50.251    Notification of violation and repeat sampling.

13.50.252    Enforcement – Administrative orders.

13.50.255    Enforcement – Cease and desist orders.

13.50.260    Enforcement – Show cause hearing.

13.50.265    Enforcement – Consent orders.

13.50.266    Enforcement – Compliance orders – Discontinuance of sewer service.

13.50.270    Enforcement – Legal action.

13.50.275    Enforcement – Injunctive relief.

13.50.280    Violations – Public nuisance.

13.50.285    Enforcement – Civil/criminal remedies – Administrative fines.

13.50.290    Repealed.

13.50.295    Enforcement – Appeal process.

13.50.300    Violations – Misdemeanor.

13.50.310    Penalties – Cumulations.

13.50.315    Enforcement – Liability insurance.

13.50.320    Severability.

13.50.325    Enforcement.

13.50.330    Conflict.

13.50.340    Exceptions – Special agreements.

13.50.360    Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.

13.50.010 Purpose and policy.
A. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect discharges into the wastewater collection and treatment system pursuant to authority conferred by law including, but not limited to, the California Health and Safety Code, Sections 5400 through 5474, the California Government Code, Sections 54725 through 54740.6 and 66000 through 66003, the California Code of Regulations, Title 22, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Division 7), the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq., the Code of Federal Regulations, 40 CFR Parts 400 through 699, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 USC 6901 et seq., and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region, to the city of Benicia.

B. The objectives of this chapter are:

1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system, which may interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;

2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which may pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the municipal wastewater system;

3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system;

4. To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system; and

5. To protect both municipal wastewater personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public.

C. This chapter provides for the regulation of all users of the municipal wastewater system or publicly owned treatment works (POTW). The chapter authorizes the issuance of individual or general wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers’ capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.

D. This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the city POTW shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to a duly authorized city employee. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.020 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereafter designated:

“Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Clean Water Act, formerly known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.

“Approval authority” means the director of the California State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) Division of Water Quality NPDES Unit which conducts an approved state pretreatment program.

“Authorized or duly authorized representative of industrial or other user” means:

1. If the user is a corporation:

a. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

2. If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

3. If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

4. The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the facility, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the general and specific prohibitions listed in BMC 13.50.040(A) and (B) (40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

“Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter) but may be converted to organic loading, expressed as pounds per day.

“Building sewer” means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the POTW.

“Bypass” means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.

“Categorical industrial user” (CIU) means any industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.

“Categorical standard” or “categorical pretreatment standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

“Chemical oxygen demand (COD)” is a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.

“City” means the city of Benicia or the city council of Benicia.

“Control authority” means the city of Benicia or the superintendent given that the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.

“Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.

“Daily maximum limit” means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.

“Direct discharge” means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state of California.

“Domestic user” means a user that discharges wastewater from a single or multi-family residence.

“Environmental Protection Agency” or “EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.

“Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a new source.

“Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow volume of the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

“Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.

“Indirect discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.

“Industrial user” or “IU” means a source of indirect discharge.

“Instantaneous limit” means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

“Interference” means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the typical operation of the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, may cause a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.

“Local limit” means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial user facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).

“Medical waste” means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

“Monthly average” means the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.

“Monthly average limit” means the highest allowable average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during that month.

“New source” means:

1. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source, if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:

a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

b. The building, structure, facility, or installation completely replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

c. The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

2. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

3. Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:

a. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

i. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

ii. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.

“National pollution discharge elimination system permit” or “NPDES permit” means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).

“Noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

“Pass-through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government entity, or other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. The masculine gender shall include the feminine; the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.

“pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.

“Pollutant” means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, certain medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

“Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

“Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

“Pretreatment standards” or “standards” means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.

“Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, “POTW” shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city’s POTW.

“POTW treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.

“Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

Significant Industrial User (SIU). Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user is:

1. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or

2. An industrial user that:

a. Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);

b. Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or

c. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

3. The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than an SIU on a finding that the IU never discharges more than 100 gallons per calendar day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:

a. The IU, prior to the city’s finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;

b. The IU annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q) or BMC 13.50.180(E)(2), together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and

c. The IU never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.

4. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in BMC 13.50.040 of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered an SIU.

Significant Noncompliance (SNC). The federal regulations establish criteria for publishing that significant noncompliance is one or more of the following:

1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in BMC 13.50.040;

2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined by BMC 13.50.040, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

3. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in this chapter (daily maximum, monthly average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);

4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

5. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

6. Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and

8. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

“Slug load” or “slug discharge” means any pollutant release (of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge) in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or upset of the sewerage system operations, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

“State” means the state of California.

“Standard industrial classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the 1987 SIC Manual and “North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)” means classification pursuant to the 2007 NAICS Manual, both issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

“Storm water” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.

“Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. This term also refers to the total filterable residue test.

“Superintendent” means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or his duly authorized representative.

“Toxic pollutant” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.

“User” means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater in the city’s POTW.

“Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.

“Waters of the state” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.030 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:

Act

–

Clean Water Act

BOD

–

Biochemical Oxygen Demand

BMC

–

Benicia Municipal Code

BMP

–

Pest Management Practices

BMR

–

Baseline Monitoring Report

CFR

–

Code of Federal Regulations

CIU

–

Categorical Industrial User

COD

–

Chemical Oxygen Demand

CWA

–

Clean Water Act

EPA

–

Environmental Protection Agency

gpd

–

gallons per day

IU

–

Industrial User

l

–

Liter

ug/l

–

Micrograms per liter

mg/l

–

Milligrams per liter

NAICS

–

North American Industrial Classification System (1997)

NPDES

–

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

NSCIU

–

Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User

POTW

–

Publicly Owned Treatment Works

RCRA

–

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

SIC

–

Standard Industrial Classification (replaced by NAICS)

SIU

–

Significant Industrial User

SNC

–

Significant Noncompliance

SWDA

–

Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.

TSS

–

Total Suspended Solids

U.S.C.

–

United States Code

(Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.040 Prohibited discharge – Certain waters or wastes.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which interferes with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall not contribute the following substances to any POTW.

1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 26.1.21. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;

2. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes;

3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 nor more than 11.0 or other wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW;

4. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quality, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A “toxic pollutant” shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act;

5. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for life maintenance and repair;

6. Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged into the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;

7. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit requirements or the receiving water quality standards;

8. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;

9. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit);

10. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which may cause interference, pass-through, or process upset to the POTW. The user shall notify the POTW immediately, upon discovery, of any slug loading. If subject pollutants are released, the user must prove it lacked any knowledge that such a discharge would cause interference. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or qualities of pollutants that cause interference within the POTW;

11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;

12. Surface water, storm water or seepage, and cooling water or unpolluted process water unless specifically approved by the superintendent;

13. Discharge of wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the POTW’s effluent to fail toxicity tests;

14. Any wastewater which has any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause damage to the city’s sewer system or causes a hazard to service personnel, maintenance personnel or human life or creates a public nuisance;

15. Discharges which create a fire or explosion hazard including waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius);

16. Any amounts of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin in amounts that cause interference or pass-through, or form persistent water emulsions;

17. Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations that would cause, or contribute to cause, obstruction to the flow in the POTW or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities; or

18. Discharges that result in toxic gases, fumes, or vapors in a quantity capable of causing worker health and safety problems.

B. When the superintendent determines that a user(s) is contributing to the POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the superintendent shall: (a) advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and (b) develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.041 Hazardous waste notification.
All industrial users are required to notify the EPA, the state and the city within 180 days of commencing discharge of listed and characteristic hazardous wastes, the constituents of these wastes, and anticipated discharges of such wastes over a calendar month and over one year. The federal regulations do not apply to discharges of less than 15 kilograms per month of hazardous wastes unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes. Additionally, notification is not necessary if pollutants are already reported in periodic self-monitoring reports. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under BMC 13.50.089. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.042 Unlawful disposal of wastes.
It is unlawful for a person to place or deposit in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.043 Prohibited discharge locations.
It is unlawful for a user, except city personnel involved in maintenance functions of the sewerage system, to discharge any wastewater directly into a manhole or other opening in a sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless approved by the superintendent upon written application by the user and payment of any applicable fees and charges established herein. No user shall circumvent or obviate the intent or purpose of this chapter by discharging, or causing to be discharged, into any storm drain, storm water channel, storm water drainage system facility, or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe, public street, or waterway leading to such drain, channel, facility, or natural watercourse any material, waste, or wastewater, not including unpolluted water, which is prohibited or restricted as to its discharge into the public sewer system. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.044 Treatment of wastes required.
It is unlawful to discharge on land or to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment is provided in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.046 Unlawful disposal facilities.
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage, except as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful to discharge trucked or hauled wastes to the sanitary sewers except at points designated by the city. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.050 Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.

A. Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with subsections (E) and (F) of this section.

B. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentrations for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.

C. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).

D. A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the following subsections of this section:

1. Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a net basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of subsection (D)(2) of this section are met.

2. Criteria.

a. Either (i) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters.

b. Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in the user’s effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.

c. Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this section.

d. Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW discharges. The city may waive this requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will result.

E. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the city. The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in subsections (E)(1)(a) through (e) of this section.

1. To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must:

a. Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;

b. Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;

c. Provide sufficient information to establish the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data from a continuous effluent flow-monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;

d. Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge; and,

e. Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request for equivalent mass limits.

2. An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:

a. Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;

b. Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow-monitoring device;

c. Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify the superintendent whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20 percent from its baseline production rates determined in subsection (E)(1)(c) of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the city will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

d. Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to subsection (E)(1)(a) of this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.

3. When developing equivalent mass limits, the city:

a. Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;

b. Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

c. May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as for treatment pursuant to BMC 13.50.080. The industrial user must also be in compliance with the regulations regarding the prohibition of bypass.

F. The superintendent may convert the mass limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the superintendent. In addition, the superintendent will document how the equivalent limits were derived for any changes from concentration to mass limits, or vice versa, and make this information publicly available (see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(7)).

G. Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical pretreatment standard from which the equivalent limitations were derived.

H. Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for calculating daily maximum discharge limitations and a second limit for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both average and the maximum equivalent limitations.

I. Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the superintendent within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the superintendent of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.070 Pollutant limitations and local limits.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with the POTW, constitute a hazard to human or animal, degrade water quality, cause a violation in discharge requirements, or create a hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW. The city may from time to time by resolution set local limits on other pollutants or on users to control mass emissions. These local limits will be reviewed by the city as deemed necessary by the superintendent. State requirements and limitations of discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those set forth or promulgated pursuant to these regulations. When IUs discharge in excess of a local limit, they are subject to enforcement actions. The superintendent may develop BMPs, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits or general permits, in order to achieve compliance with local limits and the requirements of BMC 13.50.040. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.075 Best management practices (BMPs).
The superintendent may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to achieve compliance with local limits and the requirements of BMC 13.50.040. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.080 Prohibition against dilution as treatment.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.085 Deny/condition new or increased contributions.
The city may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.089 Reports of changed condition.
Each user must notify the superintendent of any changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 14 days before the change.

A. The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under BMC 13.50.105, 13.50.120 and 13.50.125.

B. The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit or general permit under BMC 13.50.165 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit or general permit under BMC 13.50.140 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.090 Accidental and slug discharges.
Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense.

A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems to the POTW, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. The notification shall include location and time of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

B. Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this regulation or other applicable law.

C. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer any such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.

D. Significant industrial users shall notify the superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.095 Slug discharge control plans.
The superintendent will evaluate whether each SIU or IU is required to develop and implement a slug discharge plan within one year of becoming an SIU. If the city decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:

A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.

B. Description of stored chemicals.

C. Procedures for immediately notifying the city of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days.

D. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.100 Charges and fees.
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city’s POTW for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be established by city council resolution.

A. Such charges and fees may include:

1. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program;

2. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;

3. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;

4. Fees for permit applications;

5. Fees for filing appeals;

6. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.

B. These fees relate solely to the matter covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. (Ord. 17-10 § 17; Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.105 Permit required.
To provide for the maximum public benefit for the use of the city POTW, written authorization to use said facilities is required. This written authorization shall be in the form of an individual or general wastewater discharge permit. No vested right shall be given by issuance of permits provided for in this section.

A. Wastewater Discharge Permit Types. Wastewater discharge permits will be issued in one of four forms dependent on the type of discharger, volume, and discharge characteristics. The four discharge permit types are:

1. Tier 1 wastewater discharge permits are issued to:

a. Any user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards.

2. Tier 2 wastewater discharge permits are issued to:

a. Any user having a process waste stream greater than 25,000 gallons per day;

b. Any user that has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the POTW or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

3. Tier 3 wastewater discharge permits are issued to:

a. Any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards that does not discharge industrial waste and only discharges domestic waste into the sewerage system;

b. Any user discharging wastewater other than domestic waste only;

c. Any user that implements best management practices as an alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of, certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits;

d. Any group of users discharging nondomestic waste (general permits).

4. Temporary wastewater discharge permits are issued to:

a. Any user discharging wastewater temporarily from industrial or other operations;

b. Any user who has a discharge of unpolluted water whereby no alternative method of disposal is available.

B. No user requiring a permit shall discharge wastewater without obtaining a wastewater discharge permit.

C. All users proposing to discharge directly or indirectly into the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit by filing an application pursuant to BMC 13.50.120 and paying the applicable fees pursuant to Chapter 13.52 BMC.

D. All permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by the city. Wastewater discharge permit conditions shall be enforced by the city in accordance with this chapter and applicable state and federal regulations. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.106 Tier 3 permit – Application.
Repealed by Ord. 10-02. (Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.110 Special discharge permit.
A special discharge permit (SDP) is required for a one-time disposal of wastewater to the POTW. The wastewater must comply with local pretreatment standards and be conveyed or transported to the POTW for disposal. An SDP application must be completed for approval along with appropriate fees before permission is granted. A pretreatment charge and volume charge will be assessed to the final bill after the discharge is completed. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.120 Permit – Application.
A. Users seeking to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall complete and file with the city, prior to commencing discharge, an application and survey on the forms prescribed by the city. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation and in sufficient time to allow proper and thorough evaluation, the following information:

1. Name and address of the facility, SIC number(s) and/or NAICS number(s), and a description of the manufacturing process or service activity.

2. Contact information, including the name of the operator and principals/owners (whichever is applicable) of the company; city of Benicia business license.

3. Description of Operations.

a. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;

b. Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;

c. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;

d. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);

e. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;

4. Time and duration of discharges.

5. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.

6. Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Section 2.2C (40 CFR 403.6(e)).

7. Measurement of Pollutants.

a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources.

b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.

c. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.

d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in BMC 13.50.175. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard.

e. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in BMC 13.50.180.

8. Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge based on BMC 13.50.180(C)(4).

9. Any request to be covered by a general permit based on BMC 13.50.125.

10. EPA hazardous waste generator number, if applicable.

11. Any other information as specified.

12. Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, spill containment, clarifiers, pretreatment equipment, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation.

13. Applicants may also be required to submit information related to the applicant’s business operations, processes, and potential discharge as may be requested by the city to properly evaluate the permit application.

B. The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the certification statement in BMC 13.50.180(E). The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. The permit application may be denied if the applicant fails to establish to the city’s satisfaction that adequate pretreatment equipment is included within the applicant’s plans to ensure that the discharge limits will be met or if the applicant has, in the past, demonstrated an inability to comply with applicable discharge limits. (Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.125 General permit.
A. At the discretion of the superintendent, the superintendent may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the POTW if the following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must:

1. Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;

2. Discharge the same types of wastes;

3. Require the same effluent limitations or best management practices;

4. Require the same or similar monitoring; and

5. In the opinion of the superintendent, be more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater discharge permits.

B. To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with BMC 13.50.180(C)(4) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the general permit until after the superintendent has provided written notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance with BMC 13.50.180(C)(4).

C. The superintendent will retain a copy of the general permit, documentation to support the POTW’s determination that a specific SIU meets the criteria in subsection (A)(1) through (5) of this section and applicable state regulations, and a copy of the user’s written request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the general permit.

D. The superintendent may not control an SIU through a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the combined waste stream formula (BMC 13.50.050(C)) or net/gross calculations (BMC 13.50.050(D)). (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.130 Permit revocation.
The superintendent may revoke an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

A. Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

B. Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions pursuant to BMC 13.50.140 (Permit – Modifications);

C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;

E. Tampering with monitoring equipment;

F. Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;

G. Failure to meet effluent limitations or comply with best management practices;

H. Failure to pay fines;

I. Failure to pay sewer charges;

J. Failure to meet compliance schedule;

K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or

M. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or general permit or any provisions of this chapter.

Wastewater discharge permits or general permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual or general wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual or general wastewater discharge permit to that user. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.140 Permit – Modifications.
The city or superintendent may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements or best management practices;

B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the individual or general wastewater discharge permit issuance;

C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;

E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit;

F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

H. To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit; or

I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with BMC 13.50.170 (Permit transfer). (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.150 Permit conditions.
Users issued a wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following:

A. The baseline equivalent dwelling unit assigned the user, unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;

B. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;

C. Limits on average and maximum flow rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;

D. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities, pH control, and/or flow-monitoring systems;

E. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or BMP) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;

F. Requirements for submission of technical reports, production data, waste manifests, or discharge reports (see BMC 13.50.180);

G. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge for a minimum period of three years unless a longer time period is specified by the city, and affording city access thereto;

H. Requirements for advance notification to the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents, including hazardous wastes, or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. It shall be unlawful to introduce new wastewater constituents or to substantially change the volume or character of wastewater constituents released into the wastewater treatment system without prior approval by the city;

I. Requirements for notification of accidental or slug discharges;

J. Installation and maintenance by the user at his own expense of pretreatment facilities necessary to meet the quality limits set forth in this chapter or as the city may require;

K. The installation and maintenance by the user at his own expense of a suitable control manhole in the portion of the side sewer located on private property to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. When required, the manhole must be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed as approved by the city;

L. The installation and maintenance by the user at his own expense of grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, containing grease and excessive amounts of any inflammable waste, and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors or traps shall be of an approved type and capacity and must be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection;

M. The submission to and approval by the city of plans for any of the facilities or equipment required to be installed and maintained by the user. The city approval does not relieve the applicant from demonstrating the successful performance of the facilities or complying with the terms of this part;

N. After commencement of operation of pretreatment facilities, the duty of the user to make periodic reports at his expense setting forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the sewage, industrial waste or other waste, after treatment, may be determined;

O. Submission to and approval by the city of plans, facilities and operating procedures to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials;

P. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter;

Q. A statement of permit duration and nontransferability, applicable effluent limits, applicable monitoring and reporting requirements, and a statement of applicable penalties;

R. Effluent limits, including BMPs, based on applicable pretreatment standards;

S. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law;

T. Requirements to control accidental or slug discharges, if determined by the superintendent to be necessary;

U. The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with BMC 13.50.180(C)(4). (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.160 Permit duration.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in BMC 13.50.150 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.165 Permit reissuance.
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with BMC 13.50.105 and 13.50.120, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.170 Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits and general permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.175 Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 using a state or national certified lab and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties approved by the EPA. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.180 Reporting and sampling requirements for permittee.
A. Compliance Date Report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements as described in subsection (D)(5) and BMC 13.50.120(A)(3) and (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. The compliance reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified in accordance with subsection (E) of this section.

B. Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (D)(7) of this section or BMC 13.50.150(F):

1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation).

2. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.

3. The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.

4. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent.

C. Periodic Compliance Reports.

1. All SIUs (except a nonsignificant categorical user), and any IUs designated by the superintendent, at a frequency determined by the city, shall submit no less than twice per year reports indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. Each report is due to the superintendent within 30 days of the last day of the reporting period, one reporting period representing January through June and the other July through December. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. At the discretion of the superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the superintendent may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.

2. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (C)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis must be performed by a state-certified laboratory using methods approved in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the superintendent or approval authority. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the superintendent or designee.

3. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in BMC 13.50.175, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.

4. The city may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions:

a. The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility; provided, that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.

b. The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit. See BMC 13.50.120(A)(8).

c. In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.

d. The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with BMC 13.50.020(C), and include the certification statement in subsection (E)(1) of this section.

e. Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA-approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.

f. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the superintendent must be included as a condition in the user’s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the superintendent for three years after expiration of the waiver.

g. Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user’s permit by the superintendent, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in subsection (F) of this section that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the industrial user.

h. In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user’s operations, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of subsection (C)(1) of this section, or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the superintendent, and notify the superintendent.

i. This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.

5. The city may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the state, where the industrial user’s total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:

a. The POTW’s value for 0.01 percent of the design dry-weather hydraulic capacity of the POTW, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow-monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches;

b. The POTW’s value for 0.01 percent of the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and

c. The POTW’s value for 0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed in accordance with BMC 13.50.075.

Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined in BMC 13.50.020. In addition, reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the opinion of the superintendent, decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.

D. Baseline Reports. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the superintendent a baseline report (BMR) which contains the information required in 40 CFR 403.12(b), including but not limited to the following.

1. Identifying information including name, address of the facility, operator and owners.

2. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

3. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and SIC/NAICS codes of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user. The description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

4. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). The superintendent may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations.

5. Measurement of Pollutants.

a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

b. The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the superintendent) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a BMP, the user shall submit documentation as required by the superintendent or applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard.

c. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

d. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentration necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the superintendent.

e. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with BMC 13.50.175.

f. The superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.

g. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.

6. Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative as defined in BMC 13.50.020 and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

7. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule must meet the requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(7).

8. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with subsection (E) of this section and signed by an authorized representative as defined in BMC 13.50.020.

E. Statement Required/Data Accuracy Certification.

1. Each report requires a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, as defined in BMC 13.50.020, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

The following certification shall be included in reports to the city:

I have personally examined and am familiar with the information submitted in the attached document, and I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

2. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the superintendent pursuant to BMC 13.50.020 must annually submit the signed certification statement as follows:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from __________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:

(a) The facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial user as described in BMC 13.50.020; (b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.

This compliance certification is based on the following information.

F. Certification of Pollutants Not Present. Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on subsection (C)(4) of this section must certify on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ______ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under Section 13.50.180C.

G. Sampling Requirements. All significant and noncategorical industrial users are required to sample their effluent at least twice a year and submit the results to the city.

H. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.183 Sample Collection.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.

A. Except as indicated in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the POTW, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.

B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in BMC 13.50.180(A) and (D), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the POTW may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by BMC 13.50.180(C), the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.185 Recordkeeping requirements.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established by the city in its chapter, in general permits or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of BMC 13.50.040. Recordkeeping requirements are as follows:

A. Industrial users shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required. Such records shall include for all samples:

1. The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples or chain of custody;

2. The dates analyses were performed;

3. Who performed the analyses;

4. The analytical techniques/methods used; and

5. The results of such analyses.

B. Industrial users are required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any unresolved litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.190 Monitoring requirements.
The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user’s own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.

There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.

Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification by the city. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.200 Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.
The superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

A. Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

B. The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.

C. The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated according to manufacturer’s specification to ensure accuracy.

D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.

E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.210 Pretreatment.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.

All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.215 POTW requirements.
A. The city will notify users of applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

B. The city will inspect and sample the effluent from each SIU at least once per year. The city will evaluate, at least once every two years, whether each SIU needs a plan to control slug discharges.

C. The city will develop and implement an enforcement response plan. The plan must describe how the control authority will investigate noncompliance, the types of escalating enforcement responses, time periods for responses, and the responsible personnel.

D. The city will maintain a list of industrial users that meet the definition of “significant” or “nonsignificant,” identifying the criteria that placed the user on the list, and submit the list periodically to the approval authority indicating which industrial users should not be considered significant. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.220 Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.

When requested by the person furnishing a report, in accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined in 40 CFR 403.14(b), shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.230 Emergency suspensions.
A. The superintendent may suspend the water service, wastewater treatment service, and/or wastewater discharge permit or general permit of a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment or significant violation to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment.

B. Any user notified of a suspension of the water service, wastewater treatment service, and/or the wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in BMC 13.50.240 are initiated against the user.

C. Any user that is responsible in whole or in part for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the superintendent prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.240 Permit – Enforcement – Termination of permit.
Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to water service suspension or permit termination:

A. Violation of permit conditions;

B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

D. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling;

E. Violation of the pretreatment standards and applicable state and federal law.

Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater discharge permit or general permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause or appeal under BMC 13.50.260 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the IU. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.250 Notification of violation.
Whenever the superintendent finds that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, or a wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent or his duly authorized representative may serve upon said user written notice of violation. Within 10 days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 3, 1992; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.251 Notice of violation and repeat sampling.
If sampling performed by a wastewater discharge permittee indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis within five days of becoming aware of the violation and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user’s facility at least once per month, or if the city performs sampling at the user’s facility between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the IU. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.252 Enforcement – Administrative orders.
The superintendent is hereby empowered to issue administrative orders or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user including, but not limited to, installation of pretreatment equipment, or adoption of BMPs, or need for additional operation and maintenance personnel to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Administrative orders shall have the same force and effect as consent orders issued. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.255 Enforcement – Cease and desist orders.
When the superintendent finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:

A. Comply forthwith;

B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 4, 1992).

13.50.260 Enforcement – Show cause hearing.
A. The superintendent may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter or wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued hereunder to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.

B. The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee to:

1. Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;

2. Take the evidence;

3. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon.

C. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.

D. After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge. This order may direct that, following a specified time period, the sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 5, 1992; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.265 Enforcement – Consent orders.
The superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 6, 1992).

13.50.266 Enforcement – Compliance orders – Discontinuance of sewer service.
When the superintendent finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 7, 1992).

13.50.270 Enforcement – Legal action.
If any user discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the superintendent, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Solano County superior court or the municipal court for Solano County. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 8, 1992; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.275 Enforcement – Injunctive relief.
Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the superintendent, through counsel, may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The superintendent shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 9, 1992).

13.50.280 Violations – Public nuisance.
It is prohibited and a public nuisance for any user to violate an order of the city council or willfully or negligently fail to comply with any provision of these regulations, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. The nuisance shall be abated as provided by this code or state law. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. The city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, witness fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated these regulations or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.285 Enforcement – Civil/criminal remedies – Administrative fines.
Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any person who discharges any wastes or pollutants, as defined in California Water Code Section 13050, except as permitted by waste discharge requirements, or who is found to have violated any provision of this chapter or permits and orders issued hereunder, or who refuses to comply with the requirements adopted pursuant to Section 13385 or 13387 of the Water Code, shall be subject to a civil/criminal penalty at least in the amount of $250.00, but not to exceed $25,000, for each day in which such discharge, violation, or refusal occurs. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, witness fees, court costs, court reporter fees, sample collection costs, and all other expenses of litigation incurred by the city and resulting from any action brought against a person found to have violated this part, or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. A lien against the user’s property shall be sought for any unpaid charges, fees, or penalties. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 10, 1992).

13.50.290 Violations – Penalties.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.295 Enforcement – Appeal process.
Users desiring to dispute such fines or enforcement actions (including, but not limited to, notifications of violation, permit revocation, cease and desist orders, and compliance orders) must file a request for the superintendent to reconsider the fine or the applicable enforcement action within 10 days of being notified of the fine or enforcement action. The superintendent shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the user. If the user is still aggrieved by the superintendent’s decision after reconsideration of the matter, the user shall have the right to appeal to the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 11, 1992).

13.50.300 Violations – Misdemeanor.
A. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to these regulations, or wastewater discharge permit or general permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under these regulations, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

B. Any user who violates an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any provision of these regulations and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor.

C. Each person is guilty of a misdemeanor for each and every day during any portion of which the violation(s) set forth in subsection (A) or (B) of this section is committed, continued or permitted by that person. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.310 Penalties – Cumulations.
The penalties set forth above are not exclusive and are cumulative to each other as well as to other penalties under other federal, state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.315 Enforcement – Liability insurance.
The superintendent may decline to reissue a permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 92-1 N.S. § 12, 1992).

13.50.320 Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections or articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.325 Enforcement.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

13.50.330 Conflict.
All other chapters and parts of other chapters inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. Should there be any conflict between this chapter and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR Part 403), the general pretreatment regulations shall control. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.340 Exceptions – Special agreements.
The city may enter into a special agreement with a person or establishment whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to payment and to such terms and conditions as the city may fix. Under no circumstances shall the agreement include any waiver of national categorical pretreatment standards. (Ord. 10-02 § 1; Ord. 91-1 N.S., 1991).

13.50.360 Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance.
The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the IUs which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “SNC” shall be applicable to all SIUs (or any other IU that violates subsections (C), (D) or (H) of this section), and shall mean:

A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in BMC 13.50.040;

B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined by BMC 13.50.040, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in this chapter (daily maximum, monthly average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;

D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

E. Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

F. Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 10-02 § 1).

1
    Prior ordinance history: Ords. 88-13 N.S. and 90-11 N.S.


Chapter 13.52
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES1
Sections:

13.52.010    Applicant – Payment of charges – Exception.

13.52.020    Special sewerage service.

13.52.030    General sewerage service rates.

13.52.040    Sewer capacity fees.

13.52.045    Decision by public works director – Appeal.

13.52.010 Applicant – Payment of charges – Exception.
An applicant for sewerage service shall pay the charges imposed by BMC 13.52.040, except where specifically exempt; however, no applicant is required to pay lateral sewer installation charges or frontage charges if the applicant performs the work covered by these charges. (Ord. 12-09 § 1; prior code § 7-623).

13.52.020 Special sewerage service.
The charges for sewerage service covered by the special contract for discharge of waste as defined in BMC 13.50.340, and for any service not specifically covered by BMC 13.52.010 through 13.52.045, shall be fixed in an applicable agreement for service. (Ord. 12-09 § 1; Ord. 91-14 N.S. § 1, 1991; prior code § 7-622).

13.52.030 General sewerage service rates.
The rates and charges for sewerage service shall be established, and may be amended or revised from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such rates and charges shall constitute the charges for supplying sewerage service to any customer and shall be collected by the finance department of the city.

The basis of sewer service charges prescribed in this chapter is the establishment of a unit cost, hereinafter referred to as an EDU (equivalent dwelling unit), computed to collect for the costs of operating, maintaining, repairing and replacing the collection, treatment and disposal system of the city for a residential dwelling unit. A residential dwelling unit is defined as discharging 200 gallons per day (gpd) of sewage flow (or 250 gpd of water consumed) over a one-year period with strengths for BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of 200 milligrams per liter (mg/l) and SS (suspended solids) of 200 mg/l.

The calculation of EDUs to be assigned to individual users on the sewerage system is based on the EPA-approved formula, and for purposes of this chapter is as follows:

EDU =

gpd

x [Strength Factor]

200

=

gpd

(0.65 +

(0.17)

BOD mg/l

+ (0.18)

SS mg/l

)

200

200

200

Assignment of EDUs to individual sewerage system users shall be made as follows:

A. Minimum EDU Assignment. All residential (single- and multifamily) users connected to the city sewerage system shall be assigned a minimum of 1.00 EDU per dwelling unit.

B. Residential Dwelling Units.

1. Single-Family Units. 1.00 EDU shall be assigned to each dwelling unit identified by the city as single-family.

2. Multifamily Units. This category includes condominiums, duplex, triplex, four-plex, apartment or other residential dwelling units. Each dwelling unit will be assigned 1.00 EDU. For premises with mixed uses (e.g., dwelling units and clubhouses), users will be assigned EDUs according to the residential category (see subsection (A) of this section) or commercial category (see subsection (E) of this section), depending on the major sewer use, as determined by the public works director. Other facilities on the premises that are non-dwelling units but have a sewer hookup shall be assigned EDUs as stated in subsection (E) of this section.

C. Mobile Home or Trailer Court Units. 1.00 EDU shall be assigned to each rental space provided in the mobile home park or trailer court. Other facilities on the premises that require a sewer hookup shall be assigned EDUs as stated in subsection (E) of this section.

D. Hotel or Motel. A hotel or motel shall be assigned a minimum of 0.60 EDU per room without kitchen facilities and 1.00 EDU per room with kitchen facilities. Other facilities on the premises that have a sewer hookup shall be assigned EDUs as stated in subsection (E) of this section. Notwithstanding the minimum EDU assignment of this subsection, users are assigned EDUs as stated in subsection (E) of this section.

E. Commercial/Industrial Premises. Notwithstanding the minimum EDU assignment of subsection (A) of this section, the commercial and industrial users shall be assigned as follows:

Customer Class

BOD

TSS

Average Strength Factor (mg/l)

Average Strength Factor (mg/l)

Commercial and Industrial – Low User

75

100

Commercial and Industrial – Medium User

150

175

Commercial and Industrial – High User

375

400

1. Mixed Uses. This category includes units such as “live-work” quarters and other units with mixed residential/commercial uses. For purposes of this chapter, users in this category are classified as commercial/industrial users. Strength factor and EDUs shall be assigned by the director of public works in accordance with the EPA formula stated in this section. In some cases, strength factor shall be determined by the director of public works based on the chemical oxygen demand or other appropriate constituents of the user’s sewer discharge where the constituent selected would more accurately measure the strength of the discharge.

2. Low Strength Pretreated Sewage. For certain industrial users who pretreat their process water discharge to a level close to or better than drinking water, the user classification shall be determined by the director of public works.

F. Inquiry Regarding Assignment of EDUs. Inquiries regarding the assignment of EDUs must be submitted to the city in writing before changes in EDU assignment will be considered. The director of public works shall have the authority to make appropriate adjustments in EDUs. (Ord. 16-06 § 1; Ord. 12-09 § 1; Ord. 03-11 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 99-15; Ord. 99-8; Ord. 95-12 N.S.; Ord. 95-8 N.S.; Ord. 95-1 N.S.; Ord. 93-16 N.S. § 1, 1993; Ord. 91-14 N.S. § 2, 1991; Ord. 91-8 N.S. § 1, 1991; Ord. 90-8 N.S. § 1, 1990; Ord. 89-13 N.S. § 1, 1989; Ord. 89-5 N.S. § 1, 1989; Ord. 88-11 N.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 86-5 N.S. § 1, 1986; Ord. 85-13 N.S. § 1, 1985; Ord. 80-10 N.S. § 1, 1980; Ord. 80-1 § 2, 1980; Ord. 76-9 N.S. § 1, 1976; prior code § 7-621).

13.52.040 Sewer capacity fees.
An applicant for sewerage service shall pay a capacity fee (formerly called connection fee) based on equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) as defined in BMC 13.52.030. The purpose of levying the capacity fee is for new connections to buy into existing capacity. The fee recovers costs for future projects and replacements or upgrades to existing facilities to serve both existing and new customers.

A. The base sewer capacity fee for residential dwelling units, residential accessory dwellings, and nonresidential dwelling units is set by resolution of the city council per EDU. The minimum sewer capacity fee for a commercial/industrial building is a fee set by resolution of the city council. For dwelling units, mobile homes, and hotels or motels, the EDU assignment shall be as stated in BMC 13.52.030. For accessory dwelling units, as defined by BMC 17.70.060, the EDU assignment shall be 0.5. For nonresidential premises, the capacity fee, based on the EPA-approved formula, is determined by multiplying the assigned EDUs per 1,000 square feet shown on the table that follows, by the size of the facility (in 1,000-square-foot units), by the base sewer capacity fee. For user categories not listed on the table, the number of EDUs will be determined by the director of public works in accordance with the

EPA-approved formula described in BMC 13.52.030.

User Category

EDUs/1,000 sq.ft.

Office

0.5633

Warehouse

0.0442

Store, Dry Light Industrial

0.3571

Restaurant

1.9407

Bars, Night Clubs

1.0214

Church, Hall

0.1786

Private School

0.5633

Delicatessen (No Cooking)

0.7857

Medical Clinic, Hospital

1.1477

Market with Garbage Disposal

1.3339

Auto Steam Cleaning

0.6743

B. The following conditions apply to the application for sewerage system service:

1. Minimum Sewer Capacity Fee. For each building, or building unit within a multiple-unit residential, commercial, industrial, or other complex, for which a building permit or permits is/are to be issued, the minimum sewer capacity fee shall be the base sewer capacity fee as stated in subsection (A) of this section.

2. Classification of shell structures which have no determined use when connecting to the sewer system shall be classified at the discretion of the director of public works based upon building permit data, applicable zoning, and plans of the developer. Subsequent modifications to such structures or changes in the usage or operations of any existing structure will result in reclassification and the assessment of an additional incremental capacity fee. No refunding of previously paid sewer capacity fees will be made where modifications are made to any structure which places it in a classification with a lower capacity fee rate.

3. Prescribed capacity fees apply only to the particular uses listed; where mixed uses are contained in the same structure, the director of public works will calculate a composite capacity fee based on the pro rata proportion of building square footage assigned to each user classification.

C. Capacity Fee – Automatic Annual Escalation. The base capacity fees stated above shall be increased annually by the 12-month percentage increase noted in the last reported construction cost index for the San Francisco Bay Area found in the Engineering News Record. For example, if the index is reported in December of each year, the increase by which the fee will be escalated each July 1st shall be equal to the cumulative 12-month percentage increase reported during the immediately preceding December. If the Engineering News Record ceases publication, a similar index chosen by the public works director shall be used.

D. Sewer capacity fees levied and collected shall be placed in the sewer capacity fund.

E. Capacity Fee – Time for Payment.

1. Capacity charges for new or increased sewer service shall be paid at the time of application for such new or increased service, unless the applicant applies for, and is granted, a fee deferral as provided for in subsection (E)(2) of this section.

2. An applicant for new or increased sewer service required to pay a capacity charge by this chapter may apply for a deferral of the capacity charge. The application shall be reviewed and considered by the public works director, and shall be granted if the applicant’s project meets the criteria for fee deferrals established by city council resolution unless the director finds (a) that the fee is needed for improvements or facilities for which an account has been established and funds appropriated, and for which the city has adopted a construction schedule or plan, or (b) the fee is needed to reimburse the city for expenditures previously made. The city council resolution shall also establish conditions to be imposed upon the granting of a fee deferral. (Ord. 12-09 § 1; Ord. 99-14; Ord. 97-12 N.S.; Ord. 96-11 N.S.; Ord. 95-12 N.S.; Ord. 95-6 N.S.; Ord. 94-5 N.S. § 1, 1994; Ord. 94-3 N.S. § 2, 1994; Ord. 91-13 N.S. § 1; Ord. 90-9 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1990; Ord. 88-10 N.S. § 1, 1988; Ord. 85-14 N.S. § 1, 1985; Ord. 80-1 N.S. § 3, 1980; prior code § 7-624).

13.52.045 Decision by public works director – Appeal.
Decisions of the public works director may be appealed to the city manager in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 12-09 § 1; Ord. 07-46 § 1; Ord. 80-1 N.S. § 5, 1980).

1
Prior legislation: Prior code § 7-625.


Chapter 13.56
SEWER BILLING REQUIREMENTS1
Sections:

13.56.010    Generally.

13.56.020    Separate services.

13.56.030    Payment – Returned checks.

13.56.040    Disputed bills.

13.56.050    Delinquent accounts.

13.56.060    Multiple account – Delinquency at one service location.

13.56.070    Delinquency – Discontinuation of service.

13.56.010 Generally.
A bill for general sewerage service is rendered bimonthly. A bill for sewerage services rendered under special contract may be rendered monthly or at any less frequency which the city chooses. An opening and closing bill for less than the regular billing period shall be prorated on a daily basis so that the charge to the customer shall reflect the actual number of days of service during said billing period. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; prior Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 7-631).

13.56.020 Separate services.
Each sewer connection to a customer’s premises shall be billed separately unless the city, for its own operating convenience or necessity, installs two or more laterals in place of one. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; prior code § 7-632).

13.56.030 Payment – Returned checks.
A bill is due and payable on presentation. The customer shall make payment at the place designated by the city. When payment is made by a check which is returned to the city dishonored by the drawee, a returned check fee set by resolution of the city council shall be added to the bill, which returned check charge shall be in addition to any other charges due. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 7-633).

13.56.040 Disputed bills.
In case of dispute as to payment of a bill previously delivered, the customer shall present the receipted bill, canceled check or other satisfactory evidence of payment before the city may make an adjustment or correction. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; prior code § 7-638).

13.56.050 Delinquent accounts.
A bill is delinquent 30 days after the date of presentation of the bill. When a bill is delinquent there shall be added a delinquent charge set by resolution of the city council. If the bill and the delinquent charge are not paid within five days after the delinquent date, the city may discontinue service. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 7-634).

13.56.060 Multiple account – Delinquency at one service location.
If a customer receives service at more than one service location, and the bill for any one of that customer’s accounts becomes delinquent and service is discontinued, the city may discontinue service at all other locations. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; prior code § 7-635).

13.56.070 Delinquency – Discontinuation of service.
When service is discontinued because of delinquency in payment of a utility bill, the city may not restore the service until all charges including the delinquent charge as provided in BMC 13.56.050 and a turnoff service fee set by resolution of the city council are paid, and a cash deposit is made to reestablish credit in an amount fixed by the director. The deposit shall be treated as an application deposit. (Ord. 12-10 § 1; Ord. 90-7 N.S., 1990; prior code § 7-636).

1
Prior legislation: Prior code § 7-637.


Chapter 13.60
BUILDING SEWERS AND SEWER LATERALS
Sections:

13.60.001  Connection required.

13.60.010  Permit required.

13.60.020  Design and construction requirements.

13.60.030  Connection to public sewer.

13.60.040  Testing.

13.60.050  Maintenance generally.

13.60.060  Separate side sewers.

13.60.070  Use of old building sewers.

13.60.080  Cleanouts.

13.60.090  Elevation of sewers.

13.60.001 Connection required.
A. The owner of a building within the city is required at his expense to connect the building to the proper public sewer in accordance with this division within 90 days after notice of the director to do so, if a public sewer is within 300 feet of a single building or, in the case of several buildings, within 200 additional feet distant for every additional building. Distance is measured along the route of the required sewer extension as determined by the director.

B. The owner of a berthing facility serving temporarily moored vessels containing sewage holding tanks shall, within 120 days after notice of the director to do so, provide approved sewage receiving facilities and connection to the city sewer system. (Ord. 88-13 N.S. § 1, 1988; prior code § 7-615; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.010 Permit required.
No person may construct a building sewer or lateral sewer or make a connection with a public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city and paying all fees and connection charges. (Prior code § 7-641; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.020 Design and construction requirements.
The design and construction of a building sewer and lateral sewer shall be in accordance with the requirements of the plumbing code in effect at the time and in accordance with city standard specifications. A lateral sewer shall be at least of four-inch diameter and shall be equal in size or larger than the connected building sewer. (Prior code § 7-642; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.030 Connection to public sewer.
The connection of the lateral sewer into the public sewer shall be made in accordance with city standard specifications and at the applicant’s expense. The connection to the public sewer shall be made under the supervision, direction and control of the director. The applicant is responsible for the repair of damage to the public sewer in conformance with city standard specifications. (Prior code § 7-647; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.040 Testing.
The building sewer and lateral sewer shall be tested in accordance with city standard specifications. (Prior code § 7-648; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.050 Maintenance generally.
A. The owner shall maintain the building sewer and all other sewage facilities located on his property. The city shall maintain lateral sewers if all of the following conditions are met:

1. The lateral is constructed in accordance with city requirements and is approved by the city for maintenance;

2. There is an approved cleanout located within five feet of the property boundary and the cleanout is accessible;

3. Normal maintenance work can be conducted without moving or damaging private property.

B. Where these conditions do not exist, the owner of the property served by the lateral sewer shall maintain it. In no event is the city responsible for damage or inconvenience resulting from stoppage or other malfunction of a side sewer. (Prior code § 7-649; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.060 Separate side sewers.
Separate premises shall be served by a separate side sewer. Multiple dwelling units in the same structure may be served by a single side sewer if approved by the director. Each separate multiple dwelling structure shall be served separately. The director may permit adjacent commercial and industrial structures located on a single parcel of land and served under a single account to be served by a single side sewer. Upon the subdivision and sale of a portion of the parcel, the portion not directly connected to the public sewer shall be separately connected to a public sewer. It is unlawful for the owner or occupant to continue to use or maintain the indirect connection. (Prior code § 7-643; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.070 Use of old building sewers.
An old building sewer may be used in connection with the new buildings only when the city finds upon examination and test that it meets the requirements of the city. (Prior code § 7-644; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.080 Cleanouts.
The owners shall provide a cleanout in the building sewer in accordance with the plumbing code in effect at the time and city standard specifications. The owner shall maintain the cleanouts watertight. In locations that the director designates, the owner shall install an approved pressure relief connection on each building sewer adjacent to its connection with the lateral sewer. (Prior code § 7-645; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

13.60.090 Elevation of sewers.
In a building in which the building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building sewer shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the director and then discharged to the public sewer at the expense of the owner. (Prior code § 7-646; Ord. 1260 M.C.).

Chapter 13.64
CONSTRUCTION AND EXTENSIONS
Sections:

13.64.010    Permit required.

13.64.020    Design and construction standards.

13.64.030    Subdivisions.

13.64.040    Rights-of-way and easements.

13.64.050    As-constructed drawings.

13.64.060    Extensions.

13.64.070    Extension as subdivision improvement.

13.64.080    Reimbursable cost.

13.64.090    Reimbursement terms and agreement.

13.64.100    Completion of sewerage works – Acceptance by city.

13.64.010 Permit required.
No person may construct, extend or connect to a public sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the city, paying all fees and connection charges and meeting all other requirements imposed by the city. This requirement does not apply to a contractor constructing sewers and appurtenances under contract entered into with the city. (Prior code § 7-651).

13.64.020 Design and construction standards.
The director shall prescribe standard specifications for minimum standards for the design and construction of sewers. Such specifications shall include provisions governing materials, workmanship, testing and warranty of sewerage facilities. The director may permit minor modification or may require higher standards where unusual conditions exist. The minimum size main sewer is six-inch diameter. (Prior code § 7-652).

13.64.030 Subdivisions.
A person who constructs, extends, or connects to a public sewer in a subdivision shall comply with the rules and regulations application to subdivisions. (Prior code § 7-653).

13.64.040 Rights-of-way and easements.
All sewers constructed in rights-of-way or easements shall be conveyed to and owned by the city. (Prior code § 7-654).

13.64.050 As-constructed drawings.
As a condition of final acceptance by the city, three sets of “as-constructed” drawings showing the actual locations of all mains, structures, wyes, laterals, and other changes to construction drawings shall be filed with the city. (Prior code § 7-655).

13.64.060 Extensions.
A. An extension to the sewer system may be made:

1. As a general city improvement;

2. As an improvement under assessment district proceeding;

3. By application for system extension as part of subdivision improvements; or

4. By application for system extension by an individual applicant.

B. The charges for a sewer system extension made under application are set forth in BMC 13.52.040.

C. For an extension made to serve premises not contiguous to an existing adequate main sewer, the applicant may be required to advance the estimated cost of the intervening facilities or shall construct such facilities. The city shall reimburse the applicant for a portion of the cost of such improvements to the extent that the extension benefits property other than that belonging to the applicant.

D. The applicant shall pay the applicable charges in advance of construction.

E. The city may construct or contract for construction of sewer system extensions on public rights-of-way and easements except in a subdivision. A system extension made as part of subdivision improvements or required to serve a new subdivision shall be constructed by the applicant. (Prior code § 7-681).

13.64.070 Extension as subdivision improvement.
In addition to the requirements of applicable state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations, an applicant for construction of a sewer system extension as part of the subdivision improvements shall construct the sewer system extension as part of the subdivision improvements in accordance with the following:

A. Pay all applicable fees and charges;

B. Contract for construction of facilities for which a reimbursement agreement is to be prepared under BMC 13.64.090;

C. Have the surveying and staking of alignment and necessary grades performed by a licensed civil engineer or land surveyor;

D. Prepare and submit accurate “as-constructed” drawings in reproducible form;

E. Submit a statement of the project cost prepared in sufficient detail to be recorded in the sewer system accounts. (Prior code § 7-682).

13.64.080 Reimbursable cost.
Reimbursable cost is the actual cost approved by the city of off-site facilities plus on-site trunk sewers less the computed connection charges for the area to be served under the application. For purposes of this computation, the cost of a trunk sewer which also serves as a main sewer shall be taken as the increment of cost over that of an eight-inch diameter main sewer. (Prior code § 7-683).

13.64.090 Reimbursement terms and agreement.
Upon completion and acceptance of facilities for which costs are reimbursable, the city shall provide a reimbursement agreement approved by the director. The reimbursement agreement shall include a detailed description of the facilities for which costs are reimbursable, an exhibition of cost data and calculation of reimbursable costs, and the terms of reimbursement. Minimum reimbursement shall be equal to the frontage and connection charges levied for service connections to the reimbursable facilities. No interest shall be paid on reimbursable amounts. The term of all reimbursable agreements is 10 years. (Prior code § 7-684).

13.64.100 Completion of sewerage works – Acceptance by city.
Before the city may accept sewerage works by the city and admit sewage into the system, the sewerage works shall be tested to the satisfaction of the director and shall meet all requirements of the city’s specifications. (Prior code § 7-656).

Chapter 13.72
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sections:

13.72.010  Necessity.

13.72.020  Permit requirements.

13.72.030  Operation and maintenance.

13.72.040  Availability of public sewer – Abandonment of facilities.

13.72.010 Necessity.
Where a public sewer is not available within the proximity limits set forth in BMC 13.60.001, the applicant may elect to construct and maintain a private sewage disposal system, approved by the city. (Prior code § 7-691).

13.72.020 Permit requirements.
A. A permit is necessary to construct, reconstruct or alter a private sewage disposal system. The applicant for a permit for construction of a private sewage disposal system shall:

1. Execute an agreement to make no protest of assessment district proceedings or other legal proceedings undertaken for improvement of the public sewerage system;

2. Obtain a permit for construction of a private sewage disposal system from the county department of public health; and

3. Comply with all design criteria and permit provisions of the county health department.

B. No premises to be served by a private sewage disposal system may be occupied until final inspection and approval of the system by the county health department and the director. (Prior code § 7-692).

13.72.030 Operation and maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities in a safe and sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. (Prior code § 7-694).

13.72.040 Availability of public sewer – Abandonment of facilities.
When a public sewer becomes available to property served by a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall make a direct connection to the public sewer in compliance with this division and the rules and regulations of the city. Septic tank, cesspool, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with a suitable material as determined by the director. (Prior code § 7-693).

Chapter 13.76
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Sections:

13.76.010  Violation.

13.76.020  Repealed.

13.76.030  Repealed.

13.76.040  Violation – Nuisance.

13.76.010 Violation.
It is a violation of this code to violate, or fail to comply with, a rule or regulation of the system or a condition of sewer service or to damage city property used in the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. (Ord. 03-9 § 32; prior code §§ 7-603, 7-607).

13.76.020 Separate offenses.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Prior code § 7-605).

13.76.030 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Prior code § 7-604).

13.76.040 Violation – Nuisance.
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of a provision of this division is a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such. Each day that the condition continues is a new and separate offense. (Prior code § 7-606).

Chapter 13.84
PUBLIC TELEPHONES
Sections:

13.84.010  Generally.

13.84.020  Authority of city manager – Permits.

13.84.030  Permit requirements.

13.84.040  Payments to city.

13.84.010 Generally.
It is in the public interest to have public telephones located on public sidewalks in the city at designated locations. When so located as to not unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public, telephones located on public sidewalks will provide a convenience to the public and will facilitate the reporting of fire, accidents and other emergencies. (Ord. 74-2 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-801).

13.84.020 Authority of city manager – Permits.
The city manager is authorized to issue a permit from time to time to the telephone company serving the city ("the permittee") for the installation and maintenance of public telephones on the public sidewalks in the city. The city manager has the authority to approve the number and location of public telephones and shall exercise this authority in a manner which best serves the public interest. (Ord. 74-2 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-802).

13.84.030 Permit requirements.
Each permit issued by the city manager is subject to the following requirements:

A. The installation shall be in a manner approved by the city engineer;

B. The city shall at its expense furnish electrical service for illumination of each installation;

C. The permittee shall maintain the public telephones and associated booths in good repair and safe and sightly condition at the permittee’s expense and to the satisfaction of the city manager;

D. The permittee shall indemnify the city and hold it harmless from loss, claim and judgment for damages to a person or property arising out of the installation, maintenance or presence of the public telephones;

E. The permit is revocable and the permittee shall remove it upon receipt of 30 days’ written notice;

F. The permittee may remove a telephone at any time in its discretion;

G. If a telephone is removed, the permittee shall restore the public property as nearly as practicable to its condition before the installation. (Ord. 74-2 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-803).

13.84.040 Payments to city.
The permittee shall pay to the city an amount equal to 15 percent of the receipts, exclusive of federal communications excise taxes, from the coin receptacle of each telephone installed under this chapter. The permittee shall make payments to the city in the manner prescribed by the city manager but not less frequently than annually. (Ord. 74-2 N.S. § 1, 1974; prior code § 9-804).

Title 14
(Reserved)
Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION1
Chapters:

Division I. Construction Standards and Structure Relocation

15.02    California Residential Code

15.04    California Building Code

15.08    California Mechanical Code

15.12    California Plumbing Code

15.16    California Electrical Code

15.18    California Green Building Standards Code

15.19    California Administrative Code

15.20    California Energy Code

15.21    California Historical Building Code

15.22    California Existing Building Code

15.23    California Referenced Standards Code

15.24    Work/Live Occupancy Code

15.25    International Swimming Pool and Spa Code

15.26    Building Permit Fees and Other Fees

15.27    Conflicts with Other Rules, Laws or Regulations

15.28    Grading and Erosion Control

15.30    Notice of Building Occupancy Prohibitions

15.32    Public Improvement Standards

15.36    Moving Buildings

15.38    Streamlined Permitting for Residential Rooftop Solar

15.39    Streamlined Permitting for (EV) Electric Vehicle Charging Stations

Division II. Flood Damage Prevention

15.40    General Provisions

15.44    Administration

15.48    Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

15.52    Variances

15.56    Appeals

Division III. Seismic Hazards

15.60    Seismic Hazards Identification Program

Division IV. Storm Water

15.64    Storm Water Management and Discharge Control

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate buildings and construction, see Government Code §§ 38601 and 38660; for provisions on the construction of housing, see Health and Safety Code § 17910 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to adopt codes by reference, see Government Code § 50022.1 et seq.


Chapter 15.02
CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:

15.02.010    Adoption by reference.

15.02.020    Copies on file.

15.02.030    Amendments made in the California Residential Code.

15.02.010 Adoption by reference.
The California Residential Building Code, 2016 Edition, including Appendix Chapters H (Patio Covers), J (Existing Buildings and Structures), K (Sound), M (Light Straw-Clay Construction), and S (Strawbale Construction), as published by the International Code Council and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 2.5 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 2; Ord. 13-14 § 3; Ord. 10-05 § 1).

15.02.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Residential Code and appendices as adopted by BMC 15.02.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 3; Ord. 10-05 § 1).

15.02.030 Amendments made in the California Residential Code.
The California Residential Code is amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth as follows (section numbers used below are those of the 2016 California Residential Code):

A. Subsection R101.1 (Title) of Section R100 (General) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Benicia, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”

B. Subsection R102.4.1 (Conflicts) of Section R102 (Applicability) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section R102.4.1-Conflicts. When conflicts occur between the administrative provisions of this code and the adopted provisions of CBC Chapter 1-Scope and Administration, Division II-Administration, the provisions which have greater specificity shall apply. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

C. Section R1007 (Wood burning stoves) is added to Chapter 10 (Chimneys and Fireplaces) of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

Section R1007 Wood burning stoves. Any new wood burning stove appliance must be one of the following:

1. A pellet-fueled wood device;

2. A US EPA Phase II certified device; or

3. A low mass fireplace, masonry heater or other wood burning device of a make and model that meets EPA emission targets and has been approved in writing by the air pollution control officer of the bay area quality management district or the designee thereof.

(Ord. 17-11 § 3; Ord. 13-14 § 3; Ord. 10-05 § 1).

Chapter 15.04
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE1
Sections:

15.04.010    Adoption by reference.

15.04.020    Copies on file.

15.04.030    Amendments made in the California Building Code.

15.04.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, which incorporate the 2015 Edition of the International Building Code, including Appendix Chapters G (Flood Resistive Construction), H (Signs) and I (Patio Covers), as published by the International Code Council and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 2 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter.

Chapter 1, Division II of the 2016 California Building Code is adopted in its entirety as the administrative provision of this division and is applicable to all codes enlisted in this division, unless specifically modified and amended. (Ord. 17-11 § 4; Ord. 13-14 § 4; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-08 § 1).

15.04.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Building Code and appendices as adopted by BMC 15.04.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 4; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-08 § 1).

15.04.030 Amendments made in the California Building Code.
The 2016 California Building Code, Volume 1, is amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth as follows (section numbers used below are those of the 2016 California Building Code):

A. Section 101.1 (Title) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 101.1Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Benicia, herein after referred to as “this code.”

B. Subsection 101.4.3 (Plumbing) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

101.4.3 Plumbing. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliance, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connection to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system.

C. Subsection 101.4.4 (Property maintenance) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

101.4.4 Property maintenance The provisions of Title 8 (Health and Safety) and its chapters shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities, light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.

D. Section 102.6 (Existing structures) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the California Existing Building Code, Title 8 (Health and Safety) of the Benicia Municipal Code or the California Fire Code.

E. Subsection 102.6.2 (Buildings previously occupied) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

102.6.2 Buildings previously occupied. The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, the California Fire Code or Title 8 (Health and Safety) of the Benicia Municipal Code.

F. Section 103.3 (Deputies) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. For the maintenance of existing properties, see Title 8 (Health and Safety) of the Benicia Municipal Code.

G. Subsection 104.8.1 (Liability of City) is added to Section 104.8 (Liability) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) to read as follows:

104.8.1 Liability of City. This Title shall not be construed to impose on the City any liability or responsibility for damage resulting from defective building, plumbing, mechanical or electrical work; nor shall the City, or any official or employee of the city, be held to assume this liability or responsibility because of the inspection authorized under this title. The issuance of a building permit under this title shall not be construed as a determination by the City that the permittee has legally sufficient proprietary rights to perform the work on the property for which the permit has been issued nor shall it be construed as permission or license to enter on, occupy or otherwise utilize private or non-City property without the express consent of the owner or agent in possession thereof.

H. Section 105.5 (Expiration) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay one-half of the full fee for a new permit as adopted by city council resolution.

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time frame required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated and a fee adopted by city council resolution shall be required.

I. Section 107.6 (Standard plans) is added to Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) to read as follows:

107.6 Standard plans. The building official may approve a set of plans for a building or structure as a “standard plan,” provided the applicant has made proper application, submitted complete sets of plans, and paid the plan check fee established by city council resolution. When it is desired to use an approved “standard plan” for an identical structure, three plot plans shall be submitted, and plan-checking fee equal to one-half of the full plan-checking fee established by resolution of the City Council shall be paid at the time application is made for such identical structure. Such duplicate plans shall be compared, stamped, and kept on the job as required by California Building Code section [A] 107.3.1. In case of any deviation whatsoever from this standard plan, complete plans, together with a full plan-checking fee, shall be submitted for the proposed work, as required by California Building Code section [A] 107. Standard plans shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval. This period may be extended by the building official when there is evidence that the plan may be used again. The code in effect when the plan review application is submitted and the plan review fee paid shall be the governing code.

J. Subsection 111.5 (Occupancy violations) is added to Section 111 (Certificate of occupancy) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) to read as follows:

111.5 Occupancy violations. Whenever any building or residential dwelling, structure or equipment regulated by this code is being used contrary to the provisions of this code, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure, building or equipment, or portion thereof vacated by serving notice on any person causing or responsible for the violation. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the building official and shall take all necessary steps to make the structure, building or equipment, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code.

K. Section 113 (Board of appeals) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended to add the following subsections:

113.4 Right to appeal. Statements regarding rights of appeal shall include:

a. That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from notice and order or any action of the building official, fire code official or health officer to the Building Board of Appeals, provided the appeal is made in writing and filed with the building official in accordance with Benicia Municipal Code Section 1.44; and

b. That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

113.4.1 Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.

113.4.2 Summary abatement.

a. If a declared dangerous building is not completely abated by the owner of the property within the time prescribed by the Director of the Community Development Department or authorized agent, city staff may request from City Council the authority and funding to cause the dangerous building to be abated by city personnel or private contract. In furtherance of this section, the Director of the Community Development Department or designated agent is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for the purpose of abating the dangerous building.

b. Where required by state or federal law, a warrant shall be obtained prior to entry onto the premises for the purpose of abating the nuisance, unless written consent to enter is received from the owner or occupant of the premises or warrantless entry is otherwise permissible under state or federal law. Where a warrant is required, notice shall be given to the owner or occupant of the issuance of the warrant twenty-four (24) hours prior to the entry, unless the warrant provides otherwise.

113.4.3 Cost of abatement.

a. The Director of the Community Development Department or designee shall keep an accounting of the costs and expenses of abating such dangerous building, and shall render a statement of such costs to the person or persons receiving the notice and order.

b. Such person or persons receiving the notice and order shall be liable to the City for any and all costs and expenses to the City involved in abating the violation.

c. Costs and expenses as referred to in these Sections shall include but are not limited to, any and all direct costs related to personnel salaries and benefits, operational overhead, fees for experts, consultants or contractors, legal costs or expenses including attorney fees, claims against the City arising as a consequence of the dangerous building and procedures associated with collecting moneys due hereunder.

113.4.4 Assessment of Costs-Lien against property. The total cost of abating a dangerous building shall constitute a special assessment against the premises to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the County Recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.

After such recordation, a copy of the lien may be turned over to the County Assessor, who shall then enter the amount of the lien on the assessment rolls as a special assessment. Thereafter, said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.

113.4.5 Alternative enforcement. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Attorney or District Attorney from commencing with any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a dangerous building under applicable provision of state law as an alternative to the proceedings set forth in this chapter.

L. Section [A] 114 (Unlawful Act) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended to add the following subsection:

114.5 Violation a Public Nuisance. It is declared that any violation of Title 15 (including the CBC, CPC, CMC, CRC, CEC) or other state building codes constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to any other remedies this code provides for enforcement, the city may bring civil suit to enjoin violation of its provisions, or use any other remedy provided by law.

M. Section 115.3 (Unlawful continuance) of Part 1 (Scope and Application) of Division II (Scope and Administration) is amended as follows:

Section 115.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not more than what is prescribed in City of Benicia Municipal Code, Title 1, Chapter 8 (General Penalty) Section 1.08.030 (Penalty).

N. Section 501.2 of Chapter 5 (General building heights and areas) is amended to read as follows:

2. Commercial – Individual units shall be addressed front and back. Minimum numeral size shall be 6" high with a stroke of 1" and shall contrast with the background. Units with entrances on both the front and rear of the building shall have identical addresses at both locations.

3. Industrial – Individual units within a building shall be addressed front and back. Individual buildings shall be marked at a point clearly visible from the street. Minimum numeral size shall be 12" high with a 3" wide stroke and shall contrast with the background. Units with entrances on both the front and rear of the building shall have identical addresses at both locations.

4. Lighting of building addresses – The building address for all new buildings constructed after the date of this ordinance shall be automatically lighted at night.

O. Subsection 1505.15 (Shingles and Shakes) is added to Chapter 15 (Roof Assemblies and Roof Top Structures) to read as follows:

1505.15 Shingles and shakes. All new roof coverings shall be a class B or better roof covering assembly as defined by CBC 1505.

P. Subsection 2509.3 (Gypsum board in showers and water closets) of Chapter 25 (Gypsum board and plaster) is amended by adding the following:

4. Gypsum board in showers and water closets. Paper-backed gypsum board products shall not be used as a backer for tile in showers and bathtub areas.

(Ord. 17-11 § 5; Ord. 16-03 § 1; Ord. 13-14 § 4; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-08 § 1).

1
    Prior legislation: Ords. 87-6, 87-25, 88-15, 93-6, 95-15, 98-2, 99-11, 02-4 and 07-07.


Chapter 15.08
CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:

15.08.010    Adoption by reference.

15.08.020    Copies on file.

15.08.030    Repealed.

15.08.040    Amendments made in the California Mechanical Code.

15.08.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Mechanical Code, which incorporates the 2015 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code, excluding appendix chapters, which incorporates the International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 6; Ord. 13-14 § 5; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-09 § 1; Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

15.08.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Mechanical Code and appendices as adopted by BMC 15.08.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 5; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-09 § 2; Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

15.08.030 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

15.08.040 Amendments made in the California Mechanical Code.
The California Mechanical Code is amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth as follows (section numbers used below are those of the 2016 California Mechanical Code):

A. Subsection 101.3.1 (Conflicts) is added to Section 101.3 (Purpose) of Chapter 1 (Administration), Division II (Administration), to read as follows:

101.3.1 Conflicts. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code or referenced standards specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall prevail.

When conflicts occur between the administrative provisions of this code and the adopted provisions of CBC Chapter 1-Scope and Administration, Division II-Administration, the provisions which have greater specificity shall apply.

Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

(Ord. 17-11 § 7).

Chapter 15.12
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE1
Sections:

15.12.010    Adoption by reference.

15.12.020    Copies on file.

15.12.030    Amendments made in the California Plumbing Code.

15.12.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Plumbing Code, which incorporates the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapter I (Installation Standard for PEX Tubing Systems for Hot-and-Cold-Water Distribution), which incorporates the International Plumbing Code, as published by the International Code Council and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 8; Ord. 13-14 § 6; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-10 § 1).

15.12.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Plumbing Code and appendices as adopted by BMC 15.12.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 6; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-10 § 1).

15.12.030 Amendments made in the California Plumbing Code.
The 2016 California Plumbing Code is amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth below (section numbers used below are those of the 2016 California Plumbing Code):

A. Subsection 101.4 (Conflicts Between Codes) of Section 101 (General) of Chapter 1 (Administration), Division II (Administration), is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

101.4 Conflicts Between Codes. Where the requirements within the jurisdiction of this plumbing code conflict with the requirements of the mechanical code, this code shall prevail. In instances where the code, applicable standards, or the manufacturer’s installation instructions conflict, the more stringent provisions shall prevail. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall prevail.

When conflicts occur between the administrative provisions of this code and the adopted provisions of California Building Code Chapter 1 (Scope and Administration), Division II (Administration), the provisions which have greater specificity shall apply.

Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

B. Chapter 710 (Sanitary drainage) is amended by adding subsection 710.1 (Sewage backwater) to read as follows:

710.1 Sewage backwater. Where a fixture is installed on a floor level that is lower than the next upstream manhole cover of the public or private sewer, serving such drainage piping, such fixtures shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved type of backwater valve or mushroom type device or other fixtures approved by the Building Official. Fixtures on floor levels above such level elevation shall not be discharged through the backwater valve. Cleanouts for drains that pass through a backwater valve shall be clearly identified with a permanent label stating “Backwater Valve Downstream.”

(Ord. 17-11 § 9; Ord. 13-14 § 6; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-10 § 1).

1
    Prior legislation: Ords. 87-6, 95-15, 99-11 and 02-4.


Chapter 15.16
CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:

15.16.010    Adoption by reference.

15.16.020    Copy on file.

15.16.030    Repealed.

15.16.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Electrical Code, which incorporates the 2014 National Electrical Code and the NFPA, as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 3 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 10; Ord. 13-14 § 7; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-11 § 1; Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

15.16.020 Copy on file.
One copy of the California Electrical Code and appendices as adopted by BMC 15.16.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 7; Ord. 10-05 § 1; Ord. 08-11 § 2; Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

15.16.030 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 95-15 N.S.; Ord. 87-6 N.S. § 2, 1987).

Chapter 15.18
CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.18.010    Adoption by reference.

15.18.020    Copies on file.

15.18.030    Amendments made in the California Green Building Standards Code.

15.18.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, including Appendix Chapters A4 (Residential Voluntary Measures) and A5 (Nonresidential Voluntary Measures), as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 11 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 11; Ord. 13-14 § 8; Ord. 10-05 § 1).

15.18.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Green Building Standards Code and appendices, as adopted by BMC 15.18.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 8; Ord. 10-05 § 1).

15.18.030 Amendments made in the California Green Building Standards Code.
The California Green Building Standards Code is amended and changed in the following respects:

A. Section 101.3.2 is added to California Green Building Standards Code to read as follows:

Section 101.3.2 The provisions of this code, except 4.504.2 through and including 4.504.5.1, shall be encouraged for residential room additions of 600 square feet or more.

B. Section 101.3.3 is added to the California Green Building Standards Code to read as follows:

Section 101.3.3 When the total cost of a residential construction project exceeds a valuation threshold of 20,000 dollars or more based on the January 2011 “ENR US20 Cities” average construction cost index, the project is encouraged to comply with one or more of the following for the existing dwelling. The item(s) must be specified on the plans prior to permit issuance, and the work shall constitute at least 2% of the construction cost. The selected item(s) must be complete prior to the final inspection of the permit.

1. Install ceiling insulation to bring thermal resistance value of ceiling insulation to R-30.

Exempt: Those buildings with no attic, or inadequate attic space between roof and ceiling below. Inadequate space is defined as that where the roof slope is less than two and one-half feet in twelve feet, and that there is less than thirty (30) inches of vertical clear height at the roof ridge, measured from the top of the bottom chord of the truss or ceiling joist to the underside of the roof structural members or rafters.

Not Exempt: Houses or units having an attic but no attic access hole. A permanent access hole must be constructed, and R30 or greater insulation installed, including on the access cover.

2. Furnace ducts are sealed at plenum and all joints in air duct system, and ducts insulated to resistance value R3 or greater.

Exempt: Ducts between floors, inside interior walls or otherwise inaccessible without alteration.

3. All exposed hot water pipes insulated to at least a thermal resistance value of R3 in pumped, recirculating domestic forced hot water heating systems.

4. Insulate to at least a thermal resistance of R3 exposed hot and cold water pipes within 5 feet of water heater.

Exempt: Hot water pipes between floors, inside interior walls, or otherwise inaccessible without alteration.

5. Incandescent light bulbs replaced with lamps of at least 25 lumens per watt.

6. Approved weather stripping installed on all exterior doors, including doors to unheated garages, basements, crawl spaces, attics and porches. Weather strip must be permanently affixed; adhesive strip insulation tape does not meet the requirements unless it is screwed or tacked in place every six inches.

7. Approved dampers, doors or other devices to block airflow and reduce heat loss through chimneys.

8. Replace existing windows not affected by the renovation with windows rated with a minimum U-factor of 0.40.

9. Considerations may be made for other energy improvements if approved by the Building Official. Items from the list performed within 6 months of the permit application may also be considered with verification.

(Ord. 13-14 § 8; Ord. 11-08 § 1).

Chapter 15.19
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Sections:

15.19.010    Adoption by reference.

15.19.020    Copies on file.

15.19.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Administrative Code, as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 1 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 12; Ord. 13-14 § 9).

15.19.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Administrative Code as adopted by BMC 15.19.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 9).

Chapter 15.20
CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Sections:

15.20.010    Adoption by reference.

15.20.020    Copies on file.

15.20.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Energy Code, including Appendix Chapter 1-A (Standards and Documents Referenced in the Energy Efficiency Regulations), as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 6 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 13; Ord. 13-14 § 10).

15.20.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Energy Code as adopted by BMC 15.20.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 10).

Chapter 15.21
CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.21.010    Adoption by reference.

15.21.020    Copies on file.

15.21.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Historical Building Code, including Appendix A (Chapter 8-6, Accessibility, Table 1 – Provision Applicability), as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 8 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 14; Ord. 13-14 § 11).

15.21.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Historical Building Code as adopted by BMC 15.21.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 11).

Chapter 15.22
CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:

15.22.010    Adoption by reference.

15.22.020    Copies on file.

15.22.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Existing Building Code, including Appendix Chapters A1 (Seismic Strengthening Provisions for Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings), A3 (Prescriptive Provisions for Seismic Strengthening of Cripple Walls and Sill Plate Anchorage of Light, Wood-Frame Residential Buildings), A4 (Earthquake Risk Reduction in Wood-Frame Residential Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open Front Walls) and Reference Standards in A2 and A6), as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 10 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 15; Ord. 13-14 § 12).

15.22.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Existing Building Code as adopted by BMC 15.22.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 12).

Chapter 15.23
CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Sections:

15.23.010    Adoption by reference.

15.23.020    Copies on file.

15.23.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2016 Edition of the California Reference Standards, as published by the International Code Council, and as adopted by the California Building Standards Commission in Title 24, Part 12 of the California Code of Regulations, is adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 16; Ord. 13-14 § 13).

15.23.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Referenced Standards Code as adopted by BMC 15.23.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 13-14 § 13).

Chapter 15.24
WORK/LIVE OCCUPANCY CODE
Sections:

15.24.010    References to California Building Code.

15.24.020    Copies on file.

15.24.030    Definition of occupancies.

15.24.040    General requirements.

15.24.050    Living space and accessory uses.

15.24.060    H occupancies.

15.24.070    Energy conservation.

15.24.080    Occupancy classification, exiting and area separation.

15.24.090    Mixed uses and other uses in work/live occupancies.

15.24.100    Alternate materials and methods of construction.

15.24.110    Relationship to other code requirements.

15.24.010 References to California Building Code.
Whenever reference is made to the California Building Code herein, it shall refer to the latest edition of the California Building Code, including state of California amendments thereto, and such amendments as may be adopted by the city of Benicia. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11).

15.24.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the California Building Code as adopted by BMC 15.24.010, and all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 08-15 § 1).

15.24.030 Definition of occupancies.
“Art-making,” for the purposes of this chapter, is the activity of creating objects and expressions of form (inert, organic, or synthetic) primarily for purposes of visual contemplation. Art-making activities include creative endeavors in the visual arts. Art-making is an activity undertaken by an artist; it is not a hobby activity.

“Work/live occupancy (W/LO)” is a room or combination of rooms in a building used for both art-making (work) and living purposes by one or more persons maintaining a common household in that space. The residential use of the space is secondary to its primary use as a place of art-making (work). (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.020).

15.24.040 General requirements.
Any building which contains a work/live occupancy shall comply with the California Building Code (CBC), except as provided for herein. Each work/live occupancy shall comply with the standards of habitability set forth in the CBC and other codes and amendments adopted herein. The entire structure containing work/live occupancies shall be equipped with fire sprinklers and fire alarms designed and installed in accordance with the requirements of the International Fire Code, fire marshal and other codes and amendments adopted herein. These requirements may vary depending upon the use, size of structure and location of the structure on the property. Where any building contains a work/live occupancy adjacent to any other units within the building or adjacent to any other building, such units shall be separated by the fire-resistive requirements as required by the CBC and other codes and amendments adopted herein.

All electrical, plumbing and mechanical work in any work/live occupancies shall comply with the requirements of the California Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes and any amendments adopted by the city of Benicia. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.030).

15.24.050 Living space and accessory uses.
Any living area shall be deemed a secondary use under the building code.

Work/live occupancies (W/LO) shall conform with all of the following:

A. The minimum usable floor area of an individual W/LO is 660 square feet.

B. A minimum of two-thirds of the W/LO floor area is designated as the art-making (work) portion and a maximum of one-third is designated as the living portion.

C. The art-making (work) portion of the W/LO is not used for nor arranged for any purpose involving employees, nor for regular access by the general public, nor for purposes other than art-making activities. Up to 25 percent of the art-making (work) portion may be arranged for dual purposes such as meeting, telephoning, drawing, accounting, contemplating, reading, etc. The living portion of the W/LO is used for or arranged for purposes such as sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

D. The maximum number of people who live in an individual W/LO is one person for each 150 square feet of floor area that is designated as a living portion of the space.

Work/live units shall not be classified as, or subject to, the standards applicable to efficiency dwelling units under the CBC. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.040).

15.24.060 H occupancies.
H occupancies, as defined in the California Building Code, are prohibited in any unit containing a work/live occupancy. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.050).

15.24.070 Energy conservation.
Any unit which contains a work/live occupancy shall comply with the energy conservation and disabled access requirements of each applicable occupancy group as defined by the CBC and Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

Any work room or area in any work/live unit which is available for use by clients, employees or the general public shall comply with the accessibility requirements of the California Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes and any amendments adopted by the city of Benicia. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.060).

15.24.080 Occupancy classification, exiting and area separation.
A. Any building which contains one or more work/live occupancies shall satisfy the following requirements:

1. The entire building shall comply with the applicable provisions of the California Building Code for B and R-3 occupancies.

2. The sleeping area of any work/live occupancy shall conform to the bedroom egress requirements of the California Building Code or be provided with at least one exit which has direct, unobstructed access in visual sight of the bedroom.

B. Any building containing three or more work/live units shall comply with the requirements for an R-2 occupancy.

C. Any building containing work/live occupancies shall comply with the most restrictive applicable requirements of this code which pertain to the specific occupancy. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.070).

15.24.090 Mixed uses and other uses in work/live occupancies.
Work areas in work/live occupancies intended for uses other than R-3 or B occupancies shall be classified by the building official in accordance with the California Building Code or amendments made to the code by the city of Benicia. These requirements are not limited to occupancy, separation, allowable area and exits as required by the CBC for a proposed occupancy. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.080).

15.24.100 Alternate materials and methods of construction.
Notwithstanding the specific requirements, provisions and standards imposed by this chapter, the building official may approve alternate materials and/or methods of construction if he or she determines that such proposed alternate materials and/or methods of construction would be equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.090).

15.24.110 Relationship to other code requirements.
Except with respect to those requirements, standards and provisions specifically imposed by this chapter, construction materials and methods of construction shall be governed by and in accordance with the California Building Code (CBC). In the event there is a conflict between any requirement, standard or provision imposed by this chapter and any other provision, standard or requirement of state law, the more restrictive standard shall apply. (Ord. 08-15 § 1; Ord. 02-4 N.S.; Ord. 99-11. Formerly 15.24.100).

Chapter 15.25
INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Sections:

15.25.010    Adoption by reference.

15.25.020    Copies on file.

15.25.030    Amendments to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.

15.25.010 Adoption by reference.
The 2015 Edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code (ISPSC), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 17).

15.25.020 Copies on file.
One copy of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code and all amendments thereto shall be kept in the building official’s office for inspection by the public. (Ord. 17-11 § 17).

15.25.030 Amendments to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
The 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code is amended by the changes, additions, and deletions set forth as follows (section numbers used below are those of the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code):

A. Section 202 (Definitions) of Chapter 2 (Definitions) is amended to add the following definition:

SWIMMING POOL, SPA OR REGULATED BODY OF WATER. A constructed or prefabricated pool, spa, fountain, pond or man-made body of water used for swimming, bathing or wading or as a landscape element, exceeding 18 inches (457 mm) in depth at any point.

B. Section 305.1 (General) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 305.1 General. The provision of this section shall apply to the design and requirement for installation of barriers for swimming pools, spas or regulated body of water of 18 inches in depth at any point, constructed after March 19, 1998. These design controls are intended to provide protection against the potential drowning and near drowning by restricting access to such pools or spas. These requirements provide an integrated level of protection against potential drowning through the use of physical barriers and warning devices. Hot tubs or spas with locking safety covers complying with ASTM-ES 13-89 shall be considered in compliance with Pool Enclosure Requirements.

C. Section 305.2.1 (Barrier height and clearances) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended to read as follows:

Section 305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances. Barrier heights and clearances shall be in accordance with the following:

1. The top of the barrier shall be not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outside of the required barrier.

2. The vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall not exceed 2 inches (51mm) for all grade surfaces, where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool, spa or regulated body of water.

3. Any decorative design work on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool, spa or man-made body of water, such as protrusions, indentations or cutouts, which render the barrier easily climbable by a 5 yr. old are prohibited.

D. Section 305.2.4 (Mesh Fence as a barrier) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended to read as follows:

Section 305.2.4 Mesh Fence as a barrier. Mesh fences, other than chain-link fences in accordance with section 305.2.7, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall comply with the following:

1. The bottom of the mesh fence shall be not more than 1 inch (25 mm) above the deck or installed surface or grade.

2. The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh and grade shall not permit the fence to be lifted more than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking.

3. The fence shall be designed and constructed so that it does not allow passage of a 4-inch (102 mm) sphere under any mesh panel. The maximum vertical clearance from the bottom of the mesh fence and the solid surface shall not be more than 4 inches (102 mm) from grade or decking.

4. An attachment device shall attach each barrier section at a height not lower than 60-inches (1524 mm) above grade. Common attachment devices include, but are not limited to, devices that provide the security equal to or greater than that of a self-closing hook-and-eye type latch incorporating a spring- actuated retaining lever such as a safety gate hook.

5. Where a hinged gate is used with a mesh fence, the gate shall comply with Section 305.3.

6. Patio deck sleeves such as vertical post receptacles that are placed inside the patio surface shall be of a nonconductive material.

7. Mesh fences shall not be installed on top of on-ground residential pools.

E. Section 305.2.7 (Chain link dimensions) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended to add the following minimum wire gauge:

Minimum wire gauge of the chain link shall be not less than 11 gauge.

F. Section 305.3 (Gates) is amended in its entirety to include barrier height and latch height requirements to conform to California State requirements, as follows:

Section 305.3 Gates. Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Sections 305.3.1 through 305.3.3, be no less than 60 inches (1524 mm) in height when measured from grade, equipped with a locking device no less than 60 inches (1524 mm) from grade. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool or spa, shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device and remain locked when not in use.

G. Section 305.3.3 (Latches) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended in its entirety, as follows:

Section 305.3.3 Latches. Self-latching device shall be placed no lower than 60 inches (1524 mm) above ground.

H. Section 305.5 (On-ground residential pool structure as a barrier) of Chapter 3 (General Compliance) is amended to change minimum height as follows:

...the top of the wall is not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter...

...the top of the barrier is not less than 60-inches (1524 mm) above grade for the entire perimeter of the pool...

(Ord. 17-11 § 17).

Chapter 15.26
BUILDING PERMIT FEES AND OTHER FEES1
Sections:

15.26.010    Permit and other fees.

15.26.020    Investigation, investigation fees, and work without a permit.

15.26.030    Refunds.

15.26.040    Reinspections.

15.26.050    Plan review fees.

15.26.010 Permit and other fees.
All permits and inspections required under this title shall be subject to fees established by city council resolution. (Ord. 17-10 § 18).

15.26.020 Investigation, investigation fees, and work without a permit.
Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, an investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee established by city council resolution shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. 17-10 § 18).

15.26.030 Refunds.
The building official may authorize the refunding of permit fees paid when no work has commenced under a permit in accordance with this code or when an applicant wishes to withdraw an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid. Plan review fees collected shall not be subject to refund if plan review has been conducted. An administrative fee established by city council resolution will be assessed for any inspection fee refund request at the discretion of the building official. (Ord. 17-11 § 18; Ord. 17-10 § 18).

15.26.040 Reinspections.
A reinspection fee established by city council resolution may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is scheduled is not complete or when corrections called for previously are not complete. In instances when reinspection fees have been assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be performed until the required fees have been paid. (Ord. 17-10 § 18).

15.26.050 Plan review fees.
When submittal documents are required, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submittal for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be a percent of the building permit fee as established by city council resolution. The plan review fees are in addition to the permit fees.

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at a rate established by city council resolution. (Ord. 17-10 § 18).

1
    Prior legislation: Ords. 87-6 N.S., 91-11, 95-15 N.S., 99-11, 08-16, 10-05 and 13-14.


Chapter 15.27
CONFLICTS WITH OTHER RULES, LAWS OR REGULATIONS
Sections:

15.27.010    Conflicts with other rules, laws or regulations.

15.27.010 Conflicts with other rules, laws or regulations.
In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule or regulation of the state, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standards of safety shall be a violation of this code. (Ord. 17-11 § 19).

Chapter 15.28
GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL1
Sections:

15.28.010    Purpose.

15.28.020    Scope.

15.28.030    Permits required.

15.28.040    Hazards.

15.28.050    Definitions.

15.28.060    Application – Fees.

15.28.070    Application – Contents.

15.28.080    Issuance of permit.

15.28.090    Bonds – Posting required.

15.28.100    Bonds – Term.

15.28.110    Bonds – Failure to complete work.

15.28.120    Permit – Duration/expiration.

15.28.130    Excavating, grading and filling – Regulations.

15.28.140    Erosion control.

15.28.150    Grading inspection.

15.28.160    Completion of work.

15.28.170    Appeal procedures.

15.28.180    Violations – Penalties.

15.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare by regulating grading on public and private property. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.020 Scope.
This section sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes requirements for storm water management during construction for the prevention and control of erosion and sedimentation; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.030 Permits required.
No person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the city engineer except for the following:

A. An excavation below finished grade for basements and footing of a building, retaining wall, swimming pool or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation nor exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than five feet after the completion of such structure.

B. Cemetery graves.

C. Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

D. Excavations for wells or underground storage tanks no greater than 10,000 gallons in size when work is being done under the authority of a valid county well permit and/or city building permit.

E. Excavation for utilities when performed by a public utility.

F. Stockpiling of dirt, rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay of 50 cubic yards or less for a period of 10 days or less.

G. Exploratory excavations of 50 cubic yards or less under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists.

H. An excavation of 200 cubic yards or less which:

1. Is less than two feet in depth, at any one given point; or

2. Does not create a cut slope greater than four feet in height and steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

I. A fill of 200 cubic yards or less which is:

1. Less than two feet in depth and placed on a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical, not intended to support structures, on a single lot or parcel, and does not obstruct a drainage course.

J. Work conducted in any city street, public right-of-way, or easement when the work is being done under the authority of a valid encroachment permit issued by the city engineer.

Grading permit exceptions outlined above apply to grading for a single activity. Subsequent grading activity that occurs within 10 years after initial grading activity resulting in cumulative work exceeding the limitations outlined above shall require a grading permit.

Grading shall also comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.64 BMC, Storm Water Management and Discharge Control. Grading that disturbs one acre or more, regardless of quantity, shall be subject to the state of California general construction permit requirements. (Ord. 06-13 § 1; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.040 Hazards.
Whenever the city engineer determines that any existing excavation, embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life or limb, endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the city engineer shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment so as to eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.050 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the definitions listed hereunder shall be construed as specified as follows:

“As-graded” is the actual surface conditions present on completion of grading.

“Bedrock” is in-place, solid rock.

“Bench” is a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” are schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the city or state. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. BMPs are for construction and post-construction storm water controls.

“Borrow” is earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

“California Building Code (CBC)” refers to the latest edition as adopted by reference by the city of Benicia.

“Certification” shall mean a written engineering or geological opinion concerning the progress and completion of the work.

“City engineer” shall mean the city engineer of the city of Benicia or his authorized representative.

“Civil engineer” is a professional engineer registered in and by the state of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

“Civil engineering” shall mean the application of the knowledge of forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of mankind.

“Compaction” is the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

“Contour rounding” means the rounding of cut and fill slopes in the horizontal plane to blend with existing contours or to provide horizontal variation to eliminate the artificial appearance of slopes.

“Cut” is the mechanical removal of earth material from a slope.

“Earth material” is any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.

“Engineering geologist” shall mean a professional engineering geologist registered in and by the state of California to practice in the field of engineering geology.

“Engineering geology” shall mean the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

“Erosion” is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water and/or ice.

“Excavation” is the mechanical removal of earth material.

“Fill” is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

“Grade” shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface.

1. “Existing grade” is the grade prior to grading.

2. “Rough grade” is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

3. “Finish grade” is the final grade of the site which conforms to the approved plan.

“Grading” is any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

“Key” is a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

“Notice of intent (NOI)” is a form required by the State Water Resources Control Board which consists of a notice of intent to comply with the terms of the General Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Construction Activity (WQ Order No. 2003-2007-DWQ).

“Non-storm water discharge” is any discharge to a storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.

“Sensitive area” is the area less than 200 feet away from a water quality resource including a wetland, stream, pond, lake, river, or bay wherein placement of impervious surfaces shall be avoided.

“Site” is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

“Slope” is an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

“Slope control specialist” is a professional landscape architect or other professional person experienced in erosion control work, retained by the permit applicant and responsible for analysis, plans, specifications, supervision, and certifications regarding slope control planting and related slope or erosion control work, other than grading, for a specified project.

“Soil” is naturally occurring surficial deposits overlying bedrock.

“Soil (geotechnical) engineer” shall mean a professional soil or geotechnical engineer registered in and by the state of California to practice in the field of soil engineering.

“Soil (geotechnical) engineering” shall mean the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

“Storm water” means storm water runoff and surface runoff and drainage. It excludes infiltration and runoff from agricultural land.

“Storm water control plan (SCP)” is a plan to identify sources of sediment and other pollutants that affect the quality of storm water discharges and describes and ensures the implementation of practices to reduce sediment and other pollutants in storm water discharges. The SCP must include BMPs which address prevention and control of erosion and sediment.

“Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” is a plan to identify sources of sediment and other pollutants that affect the quality of storm water discharges and describes and ensures the implementation of practices to reduce sediment and other pollutants in storm water discharges. A SWPPP is required for sites greater than one acre or from a site that results in a land disturbance of less than one acre, but is part of a larger common plan and is part of the State Water Resources Control Board’s General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit or the federal National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge regulations. The SWPPP must include BMPs which address prevention and control of erosion and sediment.

“Terrace” is a relatively level step constructed, in the face of a graded slope surface, for drainage and maintenance purposes.

“Zoning permit” is a permit issued by the planning department pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 17.100 BMC. (Ord. 06-13 §§ 2 – 6; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.060 Application – Fees.
A. Before accepting a set of plans and specifications for checking, the city engineer shall collect a plan-checking fee. The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of plan-checking fees, based upon the volume of the excavation and fill, whichever is greater. The council may, from time to time, amend such schedule of fees by resolution.

B. Before issuing a grading permit, the city engineer shall collect a grading permit fee. The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of grading permit fees, based upon the volume of the excavation and fill, whichever is greater. The council may, from time to time, amend such schedule of fees by resolution.

C. The fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work to that under a valid permit shall be the difference between the fee paid for the original permit and the fee shown for the entire project.

D. If any work requiring a permit is begun without a permit, the permit fees shall be doubled to compensate for the extra work involved in inspecting completed, or partially completed, work. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.070 Application – Contents.
A. Applications for excavating, grading and filling permits shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications 24 inches by 36 inches in size prepared at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet or greater. Unless waived by the city engineer, the plans shall be prepared by an engineer licensed by the state of California. The plans shall include the following unless waived by the city engineer:

1. A vicinity sketch showing roads, adjoining subdivisions and other data to adequately indicate the site location and show its relation to the community.

2. Property lines of the property on which the work is to be performed. The widths, location and identity of all existing easements.

3. Location of any buildings, structures, drainage devices or public improvements within 50 feet of the proposed work.

4. Date, north arrow, scale and accurate contours showing the topography of the existing ground of the proposed site and at least 50 feet beyond its boundary. Indicate source and date of existing contours.

5. Elevations, dimensions, location, extent and the slopes of all proposed grading shown by contours and/or other means. Contours shall be shown at intervals of not more than five feet, and of not more than two feet if slope of land is less than 10 percent.

6. Details of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work.

7. A certificate stating the amount and location of any material to be excavated or filled or to be deposited in areas other than those shown on the plans.

8. Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more, measured 24 inches above existing grade. Any trees or vegetation proposed to be removed shall be so indicated.

9. Schedule of work.

10. A storm water pollution prevention plan for sites of one acre or more and a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) form required for the State Water Resources Control Board’s General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit.

11. A storm water control plan for all sites.

B. All grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards with cuts/fills greater than four feet or when directed by the city engineer shall be designated as “engineered grading.” For “engineered grading” the application shall also contain the following:

1. A map prepared by a civil engineer showing the location of all areas subject to storm water runoff to and from the site and adjacent areas. A complete hydraulic analysis including the location, width, direction and quantity of flow of each watercourse shall accompany the map;

2. A soil engineering report, prepared by a soil engineer, including data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; conclusions; and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria;

3. A geological report, prepared by an engineering geologist, including an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions; and

4. A letter from a civil engineer verifying that he/she has been employed by the applicant and agrees to provide inspection, furnish as-built grading plans and submit the final statement in accordance with BMC 15.28.150 and 15.28.160.

C. For all grading work an erosion control plan shall be submitted to include the placement of structural and nonstructural storm water controls that prevent erosion during construction and post-construction. Erosion control plans for large-scale projects (50 acres or 200 lots, whichever is less), or when directed by the city engineer in sensitive areas, shall be prepared by a hydrologist specializing in erosion control. All erosion control plans shall be approved by the city engineer prior to September 1st, to permit grading work during the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th). For projects commencing after the start of the rainy season, erosion control plans shall be approved by the city engineer two weeks prior to commencing any work. For small projects (one acre or less) to be completed during the summer months (June 1st through October 15th) this requirement may be waived by the city engineer.

D. For projects on sites equal to or greater than one acre, or projects that result in the disturbance of less than one acre and are part of a larger plan of development that disturbs an area of five acres or more, the application shall comply with the requirements of the State Water Resources Control Board’s General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit program. The notice of intent (NOI) form and storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be furnished to the city as part of the application and prior to issuance of any grading permit. (Ord. 06-13 § 7; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.080 Issuance of permit.
A. No permit shall be issued until all of the required data has been submitted for the application, the city engineer and the community development director have approved the plans, and all required fees have been paid.

B. No permit shall be issued prior to the approval of any land use entitlement requirements, such as, but not limited to, zoning permits, tentative map and/or building or site plan review. An environmental assessment shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of CEQA (California Environmental Quality Act), as determined necessary by the community development director in accordance with the city’s current zoning ordinance. Conditions may be imposed by the city to minimize or mitigate any environmental impacts of the proposed work.

C. In the case of subdivisions, the approval to proceed by the city engineer, after having grading plans signed by the community development director and receiving all required grading bonds, grading permit fees, agreements and deeds (if applicable), and after approval of the tentative map by the planning commission or city council, shall constitute the requirements to allow issuance of a grading permit. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.090 Bonds – Posting required.
A permit shall not be issued unless the permittee shall first post with the city engineer a bond executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state as a surety in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the corrective work necessary to clean up and remove all debris, to eliminate all hazards, or to return the land to its natural condition as much as is possible should the project be abandoned. This amount shall be based upon an engineer’s cost estimate furnished by the applicant and approved by the city engineer. In lieu of a surety bond, the applicant may file a cash bond, certificate of deposit, or instrument of credit with the city engineer in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond. Every bond or other surety shall:

1. Comply with all of the provisions of the applicable laws, ordinances, and requirements of the city attorney;

2. Comply with all terms and conditions of the permit for excavation or fill to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

3. Include conditions that the permittee shall complete all of the work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified in the permit. The city engineer may, for sufficient cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the surety upon the bond. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.100 Bonds – Term.
The term of each bond shall begin upon the date of issuance of the grading permit and shall remain in effect until released by the city engineer upon acceptance of completed grading improvements. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.110 Bonds – Failure to complete work.
In the event of failure to complete the work and failure to comply with all of the conditions and terms of the permit, the city engineer may order the work required by the permit to be completed to his satisfaction. The surety executing such bond or deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing any and all such required work to be done. If the work is not completed within the time period specified in BMC 15.28.120, the permittee shall be deemed to have abandoned the project, and the city engineer may, in his discretion, order the land to be returned as much as possible to its natural condition, and the surety shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the governing agency in causing such restoration work to be done. In the case of cash deposit, said deposit, or any unused portion thereof, shall be refunded to the permittee in whatever amount is not necessary to complete the work described. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.120 Permit – Duration/expiration.
If the work authorized by any permit under this chapter is not commenced within six months of the date of issuance, or as otherwise indicated on the face of the permit, or if the work is not completed within two years of the date of issuance, or sooner if indicated on the face of the permit, the permit shall expire and become null and void. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.130 Excavating, grading and filling – Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all excavating, grading and filling:

A. One copy of the approved plan, and specifications, the storm water control plan, if required, storm water pollution prevention plan, and the grading permit shall be kept on the site at all times during the progress of grading work.

B. All grading and noise therefrom, including, but not limited to, warming of motors, shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless other times are specifically authorized in writing by the city engineer for special circumstances.

C. All graded surfaces and materials, whether filled, excavated, transported or stockpiled, shall be wetted, protected, covered or contained in such a manner as to prevent any nuisance from dust, sediment, site runoff, or spillage upon adjoining property or streets. Best management practices incorporating erosion controls and other controls (i.e., dust palliative) shall be applied to the site when directed by the city engineer. Equipment and materials on the site and on hauling routes should be used in such a manner as to avoid excessive dust, site runoff, or spillage upon streets or storm drain inlets. This may include limiting work during windy periods.

D. No grading shall be conducted so as to encroach upon or alter the established gradient and riparian habitat of natural drainage courses except when a valid permit and other necessary approvals are obtained from the appropriate state and federal authorities (i.e., Fish and Wildlife, etc.) and the necessary environmental review and approvals are received from the community development director, planning commission, or city council as the case may be.

E. Whenever any portion of the work requires entry onto adjacent property for any reason, the permit applicant shall obtain a right of entry from the adjacent property owner or his authorized representative in a form acceptable to the city. A copy of such fully executed right of entry shall be filed with the city prior to the issuance of the grading permit and/or approval of the grading plans.

F. Sediment controls and other best management practices shall be constructed on all developments, as determined by the city engineer, to manage runoff into biologically sensitive areas or onto adjacent property and to control sediment during construction until permanent erosion controls have been established. The sediment and silt collected on site shall then be removed and the resulting material hauled from the site or used as topsoil. Additional erosion control measures shall be employed during the rainy season (approximately October 15th through April 15th) as required by the city engineer pursuant to BMC 15.28.140 and Chapter 15.64 BMC, Storm Water Management and Discharge Control. Permanent siltation basins may be required in biologically sensitive areas.

G. Grading shall be designed so that lot lines are at the top of slope and with adequate property line setback from the slope to provide for required vertical slope rounding. The tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set back from property lines of pedestrians and vehicular traffic, required slope rounding, adequate foundation support, required swales, berms and drainage facilities, and applicable zoning requirements. Except for pier-type foundations or other special foundation design, setbacks from property lines shall be not less than as required by Appendix Section 3314 and Figure 18-I-1 of the California Building Code.

H. The permit applicant and grading contractor shall be responsible for the protection of adjacent properties during grading operations. Prior to commencing any grading of the site, the exterior boundaries shall be marked as required by the city engineer. Boundary markers shall be maintained throughout the grading operation. Temporary barriers and/or protective fencing shall be used when necessary to protect adjacent properties.

I. Proper soil stabilization is required for all graded areas. Slopes, both cut and fill, shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

J. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils report, fills shall conform to the following provisions:

1. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, then scarifying surface to provide a bond with new fill.

2. Fill on slopes steeper than 5:1 and higher than five feet shall require benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soil engineer. Bench shall be a minimum width of 10 feet. The area beyond the top of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or an approved drainage facility provided.

3. When fill is placed over a cut, the bench under the top of fill shall be at least 10 feet wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soil engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill.

4. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. No rocks or similar irreducible material with a minimum dimension greater than 12 inches shall be buried or placed in fills. The city engineer may permit placement of larger rock only upon receipt and approval of a method of placement prepared by a soil engineer and under his/her direction. The following conditions shall also apply:

a. Rock disposal areas shall be delineated on grading plan.

b. Rock sizes greater than 12 inches in maximum dimension shall be 10 feet or more below finished grade, measured vertically.

c. Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines.

5. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum 90 percent of maximum density as determined in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. In-place density shall be determined in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer.

K. Slopes, both cut and fill, shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), unless special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings would cause the strict application of the standard to deprive such property of reasonable use. If the above conditions are met, a thorough geological and engineering analysis shall verify that steeper slopes are safe and appropriate erosion control measures are specified.

L. Cut and fill slopes shall be contour-rounded unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from the requirement.

M. Variable slopes shall be used to mitigate environmental and visual impacts of grading unless the city engineer finds special circumstances applicable to the property that would require deviation from this requirement.

N. Terraces at least six feet in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot vertical intervals, subject to maximum height limitations, to control surface drainage and debris on cut or fill slopes. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Swales and ditches or terraces exceeding 200 feet in length shall have a minimum gradient of one percent and must be paved with concrete not less than three inches in thickness. They shall have a minimum depth of one foot at the center and a minimum paved width of 32 inches. A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 15,000 square feet (projected) without discharging into a down drain. These requirements regarding ditches and swales may be modified if recommended by a licensed soil engineer and approved by the city engineer.

O. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practical drainage way approved by the city and/or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Such facilities shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.64 BMC, Storm Water Management and Discharge Control. If drainage facilities discharge on natural ground, riprap and/or energy dissipators shall be constructed. All building sites shall be graded and sloped away from the building foundation with a minimum slope of two percent for a distance of 10 feet on all sides of every building except where yard requirements are less than 20 feet, in which case the soil shall be graded away from the foundation to a minimum of two-tenths of a foot in elevation at a distance not less than one-half the required yard width. The guidance documents referred to in Chapter 15.64 BMC, and city of Benicia engineering standards, shall be referred to in the planning of site grading so that surfaces drain first to planned landscaped areas before discharging to the public storm system.

P. Properly designed trash racks shall be installed on the upstream end of storm drainpipes 18 inches or larger where the pipe accepts drainage from a waterway, which is not to be undergrounded. These racks are to be constructed so as to preclude large debris, small children and pets from entering into the pipe. The city may require the installation of trash racks at other locations as deemed necessary for proper maintenance and safety.

Q. Upon completion of grading, provisions shall be made for the permanent maintenance of planted slopes or permanent erosion control measures. Finished improvements contained within private property shall be the responsibility of that owner for permanent maintenance. Where finished improvements are within a common area, there shall be a provision in the covenants, conditions and restrictions of that development for permanent maintenance. Where finished improvements are to be included in the public right-of-way, then permanent maintenance shall be included within the citywide lighting and landscape maintenance district.

R. No fill material shall be placed, spread or rolled during unfavorable weather conditions as determined by the soil engineer or city engineer. When the work is interrupted by heavy rains, fill operations shall not be resumed until field tests by the soil engineer indicate that the moisture content and density of the fill are satisfactory for resumption of the filling operation.

S. Modification of the specific grading regulations contained in this chapter may be approved or required by the city upon a finding that such modification:

1. Is necessary to preserve existing natural features, such as trees, streams, rolling hill forms, knolls, ridges, significant vegetation or rock outcroppings; or

2. Will reduce the adverse visual impacts of cut and fill operations.

For subdivisions of five or more units, this finding must be made by the planning commission or city council at the time of the approval of the tentative map, site plan, etc. For all other grading where a grading permit is required, the finding must be made by the city engineer in consultation with the permittee and the community development director. (Ord. 17-10 § 19; Ord. 06-13 § 8; Ord. 99-11;Ord. 96-1).

15.28.140 Erosion control and storm water management.
A. All active and passive construction sites projects shall have a best management practices plan and storm water control measures in compliance with BMC 15.64.090. The Benicia Municipal Code requires a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that meets either the requirements of the city of Benicia or the state general construction permit. A storm water control plan shall also be submitted in compliance with BMC 15.64.090(F) that incorporates best management practices of site design, source controls and treatment control.

B. The city may approve grading operations through the rainy season if all of the following conditions are met:

1. Applicant has a storm water control plan approved by the city;

2. A letter from the project geotechnical engineer or certified engineering geologist stating that such grading is acceptable and will not create a hazard to life, limb, property and public welfare;

3. Wet weather BMPs for grading operations are in conformance with approved plans and the SWPPP, have been placed and approved by the city, and are kept continuously in place;

4. Adequate security has been provided to the city.

C. The only BMPs that may be altered are those in direct conflict with the daily construction activity, as long as such BMPs are replaced at the end of the day’s construction activities, the start of a storm event or whichever occurs first.

D. The applicant shall comply with all BMPs and any rules, regulations, standards, ordinances, laws, permits and policies established or issued by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, California Water Quality Control Board, and other regional, state and federal agencies as applicable.

E. The following documents shall be used as guides for the design and suitability of storm water control measures:

1. The city of Benicia general plan;

2. Association of Bay Area Governments Manual of Standards of Erosion and Sediment Control Measures;

3. California Stormwater Quality Association Best Management Practices Handbook;

4. The Erosion and Sediment Control Field Manual prepared by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region;

5. Bay Area Storm Water Management Agencies Association “Start at the Source.”

F. Slopes. The faces of cut and fill slopes over four feet in vertical height shall be prepared, stabilized and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of hydroseeding, jute matting, cribbing, walls, terracing, drainage facilities, approved planting or a combination thereof. If planting is required by the city or as a condition of approval of the tentative map, the planting plan shall be approved by the city’s community development director and by the parks and community services director. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to October 15th. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be minimized with prior approval from the city engineer.

G. Other unprotected graded surfaces exceeding 5,000 square feet in area shall be planted, paved or built upon, or shall be provided with berms, approved drainage facilities or approved erosion control facilities adequate to prevent erosion and to conduct the accumulation of runoff of surface waters to an approved place of discharge.

H. The design, installation and maintenance of all erosion control facilities or methods shall follow the standards and guidelines contained in the latest edition of the California Best Management Practices Handbook for Construction Activity, dated 2003, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Erosion control devices (including straw bales, silt fences, etc.) shall be on the site on or before October 1st. The erosion control facilities shall be installed and in operation in accordance with the approved erosion control plan, storm water management plan or storm water pollution prevention plan on or before October 15th. The following basic design principles and standards shall serve as minimum guidelines to control erosion and reduce sedimentation:

1. Stripping or burning of vegetation, grading, or other soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.

2. Existing natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented where necessary. Site development shall be accomplished so that existing trees can be preserved whenever possible and practical.

3. Exposure of soil to erosion by removal of vegetation shall be limited to the smallest area practicable and for the shortest time practicable. Soil exposure shall not exceed an area in which development can be completed during a single construction season to ensure that soils are stabilized and vegetation is established well in advance of the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th).

4. Facilities shall be constructed to retain sediment produced on-site.

5. Sediment basins, sediment traps, diversions or similar required measures shall be installed well in advance of any clearing or grading, and maintained through any such operations until removal is authorized by the city engineer. Design and size of basins shall be shown on plans and of a capacity to service the watershed affected.

6. Temporary seeding, mulching, or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed erodible areas during development at a minimum of two weeks in advance of the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th).

7. Permanent control structures and final vegetation should be installed as soon as practicable in the development, and a long-range maintenance plan developed and adhered to.

8. Standby crews and straw bales or sandbags stacked at the job site shall be available to the permittee or contractor for emergency work during rainstorms.

9. Velocity check dams in all unpaved street areas and all unpaved graded channels shall be provided at the necessary intervals to control and minimize erosion.

10. All erosion control devices shall be in place at the end of each working day during the rainy season (October 15th through April 15th) and when directed by the city engineer or his authorized representative during the dry season when there is a probability of rain forecasted.

11. All erosion control devices including basins and check dams shall be properly maintained within 24 hours after each storm in order to be prepared to accommodate runoff from the next storm event. This may require basins and check dams to be pumped dry and all debris and silt removed as directed by the soil engineer or city engineer.

12. It is the intent of this chapter to prohibit the abandonment of graded areas or slopes which are not provided with erosion protection and adequate drainage facilities even if all other requirements in this section and this chapter have been provided and approved. (Ord. 06-13 § 9; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.150 Grading inspection.
A. General. All grading operations for which a permit is required, including measures required by Chapter 15.64 BMC, Storm Water Management and Discharge Control, shall be subject to inspection by the city engineer. Special inspection of grading operations and special testing shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section.

B. Grading Designation. All grading in excess of 5,000 cubic yards or with cuts/fills greater than four feet shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as “engineered grading.” Grading involving less than 5,000 cubic yards shall be designated “regular grading.” When the city engineer has cause to believe that hydraulic, geologic or other factors may be involved, the grading operation shall be required to conform to “engineered grading” requirements.

C. Engineered Grading Requirements. For engineered grading it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepares the approved grading plan to incorporate all recommendations from the soil engineering and engineering geology reports into the grading plan. He shall also be responsible for the professional inspection and approval of the grading within his area of technical specialty. This responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, inspection and approval as to the establishment of line, grade and drainage of the development area. The civil engineer shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor, and the city engineer. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of revised plans and the submission of as-built grading plans upon completion of the work.

Soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be required as specified in BMC 15.28.160. During grading, all necessary reports, compaction data and soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations shall be submitted to the civil engineer and the city engineer by the soil engineer and the engineering geologist.

The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes and the design of buttress fills, and where required, incorporating data supplied by the engineering geologist.

The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the adequacy of natural ground for receiving fills and the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other ground water drainage devices. He shall report his findings to the soil engineer and the civil engineer for engineering analysis.

The city engineer shall inspect the project at the various stages of the work requiring approvals and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

D. Regular Grading Requirements. The city engineer, at his discretion, may require inspection and testing by an approved testing agency at the permittee’s expense.

The testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, certification concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills.

E. Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibility under this chapter, the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist or the testing agency finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the person in charge of the grading work and the city engineer. Recommendations for corrective measures, if necessary, shall be submitted.

F. Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of their technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. (Ord. 06-13 § 10; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.160 Completion of work.
A. Final Reports.

1. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the city engineer shall require the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto:

a. An as-built grading plan, including original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns and locations and elevations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities.

b. The grading contractor shall submit a statement that his work was in conformance to said as-built grading plan.

2. For “engineering grading” the following shall also be required:

a. A final soils grading report prepared by the soil engineer including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data and comments on any changes made during grading, and their effect on the recommendations made in the soil engineering investigation report. The soil engineer shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soil engineering report.

b. A geologic grading report prepared by the engineering geologist including a final description of the geology of the site, including any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. The engineering geologist shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soil engineering report.

c. The civil engineer shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan. An as-graded grading plan prepared by the civil engineer on three-mil-thick mylar shall be provided, incorporating original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, location and elevation of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities and other information as contained in the originally approved grading plan.

B. Notification of Completion. The permittee or the permittee’s agent shall notify the city engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices and all erosion control measures, have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the required reports have been submitted.

C. Upon completion of all grading work, receipt of the as-built grading plan and the necessary statements, and upon evidence that all the requirements of this chapter have been satisfactorily complied with, the city engineer shall notify the city building inspection division. Completion of all rough grading work and approval from the city engineer is required prior to issuance of any building permit by the building inspection division. (Ord. 96-1).

15.28.170 Appeal procedures.
Any person under this chapter who may be dissatisfied with the action of the city engineer on the application may file an appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-47 § 1; Ord. 96-1).

15.28.180 Violations – Penalties.
A. The city engineer may issue a stop-work order until violation of any provision of this chapter is corrected. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, a grading operation creates a dangerous or hazardous condition, the city engineer shall require the applicant to immediately abate such condition. If the applicant fails to abate the condition, the applicant’s grading bond shall be called by the city and the cost of corrective work charged to the bond.

B. Where any act is prohibited in this chapter, the doing of said act is declared herewith to be unlawful and will constitute a misdemeanor. Where the doing of any act is required in this chapter, the failure to do that act is declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor. Chapter 1.08 BMC, General Penalty, covering penalties, shall apply to noncompliance with this chapter.

C. In addition to the above and to the criminal provisions provided for in this code, violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city. (Ord. 96-1).

1
    Prior legislation: Ord. 92-13.


Chapter 15.30
NOTICE OF BUILDING OCCUPANCY PROHIBITIONS
Sections:

15.30.010    Intent.

15.30.020    Application.

15.30.030    Definitions.

15.30.040    Posted notifications.

15.30.050    Unlawful to remove notification.

15.30.010 Intent.
This chapter establishes the notification process used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the chief building official and his or her authorized representative to post the appropriate notice or placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. Buildings or structures that become unsafe for occupancy may be due to a large-scale natural event, a single accident, dilapidated property maintenance, or for any of the factors set forth in the building code which make a property uninhabitable and which may cause harm or jeopardize the safety of the occupant. (Ord. 17-11 § 20).

15.30.020 Application.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Benicia. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. (Ord. 17-11 § 20).

15.30.030 Definitions.
“Safety assessment” means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. (Ord. 17-11 § 20).

15.30.040 Posted notifications.
The following is a description of the notifications or placards used by the building official to designate the condition for allowed occupancy of buildings or structures:

A. “Inspected/Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any building or structure where no apparent structural hazard has been found. The notification is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure, but that it is safe to occupy.

B. “Yellow Tag/Restricted Use” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been determined to be unsafe or uninhabitable to the extent where there is a restriction on continued occupancy. The notification shall note the reasons for the restrictions on continued occupancy and what type of occupancy will be allowed.

C. “Red Tag/Unsafe/Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged or has become uninhabitable such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this notification shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the chief building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings with permission from the chief building official. This notification is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The notification shall note the reasons for the complete restriction on any occupancy.

D. All notifications should cite this section, and provide contact information for the appropriate city staff person. (Ord. 17-11 § 20).

15.30.050 Unlawful to remove notification.
Once a notification has been attached to a building or structure, it shall not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the chief building official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, cover or deface a notification posted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 20).

Chapter 15.32
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Sections:

15.32.010    Findings – Purpose.

15.32.020    Adoption.

15.32.030    Revision.

15.32.040    Copies on file.

15.32.010 Findings – Purpose.
The city council finds it necessary that the city adopt regulations and standard specifications for public improvements in the city. The purpose of these regulations and specifications is to provide certain minimum standards for the design, methods of construction, and use of materials for streets, alleys, concrete structures, storm drain facilities, sanitary sewage facilities, water distribution systems and other public improvements hereafter constructed, altered, or repaired within the city; and to provide minimum standards for surveys, preparation of maps, preparation of improvement plans, and monumenting in connection with the aforesaid improvements of the city. (Ord. 677-A M.C. § 2, 1964).

15.32.020 Adoption.
The city engineer shall recommend to the city council regulations and standard specifications for public improvements in the city. The city council, by resolution, may adopt the regulations and specifications in whole or in part with any additions or amendments deemed necessary. These regulations and specifications shall be known as “The City of Benicia Regulations and Standard Specifications for Public Improvements.” (Ord. 677-A M.C. § 3, 1964).

15.32.030 Revision.
The city council, by resolution, may from time to time revise the “City of Benicia Regulations and Standard Specifications for Public Improvements” as the need for such revision arises. The city engineer shall recommend to the city council any changes to the regulations and specifications whenever he deems such changes advisable and an improvement over existing regulations and specifications. (Ord. 677-A M.C. § 4, 1964).

15.32.040 Copies on file.
At least one copy of the “City of Benicia Regulations and Standard Specifications” shall be on file at the office of the city clerk and at the office of the city engineer. These copies shall be available in said offices for examination by the public upon request. (Ord. 677-A M.C. § 5, 1964).

Chapter 15.36
MOVING BUILDINGS1
Sections:

15.36.010    Approved surety defined.

15.36.020    Permit – Required.

15.36.030    Permit – Application.

15.36.040    Permit – Investigation.

15.36.050    Permit – Fee – Application and investigation.

15.36.060    Permit – Fee – Repairs or alterations.

15.36.070    Permit – Bond – Required.

15.36.080    Permit – Bond – Form.

15.36.090    Permit – Bond – Conditions.

15.36.100    Permit – Conditions.

15.36.110    Permit – Issuance.

15.36.120    Moving regulations.

15.36.130    Bond refund.

15.36.140    Default – Notice – Required.

15.36.150    Default – Notice – Contents.

15.36.160    Default – Surety to perform work.

15.36.170    Default – Bond use.

15.36.180    Default – Demolition option.

15.36.190    Appeal – Procedure.

15.36.200    Appeal – Failure to file.

15.36.210    Appeal – Scope of hearing.

15.36.220    Refusal of entry declared misdemeanor.

15.36.230    Prohibited buildings.

15.36.240    Repealed.

15.36.010 Approved surety defined.
“Approved surety” is a surety company which:

A. Is authorized to do business in the state;

B. Has fulfilled all legal obligations pertaining to dealings involving the city; and

C. Has been approved by the building official as a qualified surety company. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-412).

15.36.020 Permit – Required.
No person, firm or corporation shall move onto any premises within the city any building or structure, except a contractor’s tool house, construction building or similar structure which is moved as construction requires, until a surety bond has been posted and a relocation building permit has been secured as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-401).

15.36.030 Permit – Application.
Every application to the building official for a relocation building permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the building official and shall set forth such information as the building official may reasonably require in order to carry out the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-402).

15.36.040 Permit – Investigation.
In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the building official may require plans, photographs or other substantiating data, and may cause to be made any investigation which he believes necessary or helpful. He may refer the matter for further investigation to the board of appeals. After the investigation is completed, if the applicant fails to post the required bond and secure the relocation building permit within 60 days, the application is null and void. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-403).

15.36.050 Permit – Fee – Application and investigation.
The applicant for a relocation building permit shall pay an application and investigation fee of $100.00 to the building official for inspection of the building at its present location and investigation of the proposed site. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-404).

15.36.060 Permit – Fee – Repairs or alterations.
Relocation building permit fees for repairs or alterations to relocated buildings shall be required in accordance with Chapter 15.26 BMC. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-405).

15.36.070 Permit – Bond – Required.
The building official shall not issue a relocation building permit unless the owner shall first post with the building official a bond executed by the said owner, as principal, and by an approved surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety; or deposits a cash bond; or deposits and assigns to the city other approved sureties. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-413).

15.36.080 Permit – Bond – Form.
The surety bond required by this chapter shall:

A. Be in form joint and several;

B. Name the city as obligee;

C. Be in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus 10 percent, of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the conditions of the relocation building permit, such estimate to be as estimated by the building official; and

D. State therein the legal description or address of the property upon which the building or structure is to be relocated. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-414).

15.36.090 Permit – Bond – Conditions.
The surety bond shall provide that:

A. All work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation building permit shall be performed and completed within 120 days from the date of issuance of the permit.

B. The time limit specified may be extended for good and sufficient cause after written request of the principal or surety, either before or after said time limit has expired. The building official shall notify the principal and surety in writing of such time extension and may extend the time limit without consent of the surety.

C. The term of each bond posted pursuant to this section shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the building official of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation building permit.

D. The building official, the surety or duly authorized representative of either shall have access to the premises described in the relocation building permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work.

E. Upon default by the principal, the surety shall be required to perform all conditions set forth in the relocation permit and give the surety right of entry to the premises to perform such conditions.

F. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the relocation building permit, the surety, or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the building official, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, may go upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure, and clear, clean and restore the site.

G. The relocation building permit shall be null and void if the building or structure is not relocated to the proposed site within 60 days after issuance of the permit. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-415).

15.36.100 Permit – Conditions.
The building official, in granting any relocation building permit, may impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper. These terms may include, but are not limited to: the period of time required to complete all work; the requirement of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structures, to the end that the relocation thereof will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or to public welfare or to the property and improvements, or either, in the district, as hereinabove limited, to which it is to be relocated. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-411).

15.36.110 Permit – Issuance.
If the condition of the building or structure, in the judgment of the building official, admits of practicable and effective repair he may issue a relocation building permit to the owner of the property where the building or structure is to be located upon conditions as hereinafter provided; otherwise the permit shall be denied. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-406).

15.36.120 Moving regulations.
A. The route over which the mover proposes to move the structure must be filed with the public works department.

B. The route must be approved by the public works department.

C. The date and time proposed for the movement of the structure shall be approved by the public works department.

D. The mover shall notify the building official, the public works department, the police department, the fire department and all other affected public utilities not less than 24 hours before the move is to be made. Failure to notify will be grounds for revocation of the permit.

E. The permit to move over city streets will be good for a period of three working days from the date the structure enters the city limits. For good cause shown, the director of public works may extend the period of time for moving the structure through the city.

F. The mover shall furnish insurance coverage that shall save, indemnify and hold the city harmless against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the structure being moved.

G. The mover shall furnish liability insurance to cover any damage which may accrue to any city street or other city property during the move.

H. Fees for a permit to move over city streets are as follows:

1. House moving per trip or load:

a. Originating or terminating within the city, $100.00;

b. In transit through the city, $100.00;

2. Single trip on truck or trailer, $100.00. (Ord 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-423).

15.36.130 Bond refund.
When a cash bond has been posted or savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned, and all requirements of the relocation building permit have been completed, the building official shall return the cash or savings and loan certificates or shares to the depositor or to his successors or assigns, and reassign the savings and loan certificates or shares, except any portion thereof that may have been used, cashed, or deducted as provided elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-421).

15.36.140 Default – Notice – Required.
Whenever the principal on the bond defaults in the performance of the conditions required by the relocation building permit, the building official shall give notice in writing to the principal and the surety on the bond. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-416).

15.36.150 Default – Notice – Contents.
The building official in the notice of default shall state the conditions of the bond which have not been complied with and the period of time deemed by him to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-417).

15.36.160 Default – Surety to perform work.
After receipt of a notice of default, the surety, within the time therein specified, shall cause the required work to be performed. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-418).

15.36.170 Default – Bond use.
If a cash bond has been posted, or savings and loan certificates or shares have been deposited and assigned, the building official shall give notice of default, as provided above, to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified, the building official shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding whatever to use the cash deposit or savings and loan certificates or shares, or any portion thereof, to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise, in his discretion. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit or savings and loan certificates or shares, upon the completion of the work shall be returned and reassigned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work plus 10 percent thereof. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-420).

15.36.180 Default – Demolition option.
When any default has occurred on the part of the principal under the provisions of this chapter, the surety, at its option, in lieu of completing the work required may remove or demolish the building or structure and clear, clean and restore the site. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-419).

15.36.190 Appeal – Procedure.
A. If the building official denies the relocation permit for any reason, he shall notify the applicant of this fact. The applicant may appeal to the board of appeals by filing a written appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall be not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing, to each appellant by the secretary of the board either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his address shown on the appeal. Thereafter the findings of said hearing shall be reported to the appellant. (Ord. 07-48 § 1; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-408).

15.36.200 Appeal – Failure to file.
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with this chapter shall constitute a waiver of his right to an administrative hearing. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-409).

15.36.210 Appeal – Scope of hearing.
Only those matters on issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-410).

15.36.220 Refusal of entry declared misdemeanor.
The owner, his representative, successor or assign, or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or from any such premises of any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the city engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation building permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-422).

15.36.230 Prohibited buildings.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the building official shall not issue a relocation building permit for any building or structure which:

A. Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous;

B. Is infested with pests or is unsanitary;

C. If it be a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for such use;

D. Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet from the proposed site;

E. If the proposed use is prohibited by BMC Title 17 or any other land use ordinance;

F. If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by this chapter or any other law or ordinance;

G. Because of age, size, design or architectural treatment, does not substantially conform to the design, plan and construction of the buildings located in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet from the proposed site so that its relocation would be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in said district. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 1, 1978; prior code § 4-407).

15.36.240 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 99-11; Ord. 78-19 N.S. § 3, 1978).

1
    For statutory provisions on moving apartment houses and dwellings, see Health and Safety Code § 17958.9.


Chapter 15.38
STREAMLINED PERMITTING FOR RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR1
Sections:

15.38.010    Definitions.

15.38.020    Purpose.

15.38.030    Applicability.

15.38.040    Solar energy system requirements.

15.38.050    Duties of the building division and building official.

15.38.060    Permit review and inspection requirements.

15.38.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning:

“Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

“Common interest development” means any of the following:

A. A community apartment project.

B. A condominium project.

C. A planned development.

D. A stock cooperative.

“Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

A. Email;

B. The Internet;

C. Facsimile.

“Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

“Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

A. For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding 10 percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally specified and proposed.

B. For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10 percent as originally specified and proposed.

“Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

A. A solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.

B. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city, and all state and city health and safety standards.

“Solar energy system” means either of the following:

A. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

B. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

C. A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

D. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.

“Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

15.38.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

15.38.030 Applicability.
A. This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

B. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

15.38.040 Solar energy system requirements.
A. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city including the Benicia fire department.

B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

D. All solar energy systems shall meet all the eligibility requirements of the adopted checklist to qualify for the expedited plan review process. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

15.38.050 Duties of the building division and building official.
A. All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city of Benicia website.

B. Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

C. An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

D. The building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

E. The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

F. All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, and 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951 and are adopted by resolution. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

15.38.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
A. The building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within 30 days of the adoption of this chapter. The building division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit (the same day for over-the-counter applications or within one to three business days for electronic applications) of receipt of a complete application and meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. A building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission.

B. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

C. If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission.

D. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

E. “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

F. The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

G. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

H. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

I. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and provide a four-hour inspection window.

J. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-06 § 1).

1
    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 15-06 added this chapter as Chapter 15.40. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


Chapter 15.39
STREAMLINED PERMITTING FOR (EV) ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Sections:

15.39.010    Definitions.

15.39.020    Purpose.

15.39.030    Streamlined permitting process.

15.39.040    Permit application processing.

15.39.050    Technical review.

15.39.060    Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.

15.39.010 Definitions.
A. “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

B. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

C. “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

1. Electronic mail or email.

2. The internet.

3. Facsimile. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

15.39.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

15.39.030 Streamlined permitting process.
Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The city’s adopted checklist shall be published on the city’s website. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

15.39.040 Permit application processing.
A. Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have a specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

B. A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the city’s adopted checklist, and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

C. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documentations. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

15.39.050 Technical review.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the building official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.

B. In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

15.39.060 Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
A. Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety and reliability.

B. Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

C. Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

D. Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 18-14 § 1).

Chapter 15.40
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

15.40.010    Statutory authorization.

15.40.020    Findings of fact.

15.40.030    Statement of purpose.

15.40.050    Definitions.

15.40.060    Lands to which this division applies.

15.40.070    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.40.080    Compliance.

15.40.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.40.100    Interpretation.

15.40.110    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.40.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Benicia adopted this Division II. (Ord. 16-02 § 1).

15.40.020 Findings of fact.
A. The flood hazard areas of the city of Benicia are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. These flood losses are caused by structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. In addition, the cumulative effect of structures in areas of special flood hazards increases flood heights and velocities and contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 16-02 § 1).

15.40.030 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood-prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:

A. Protect human life and health;

B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 16-02 § 1).

15.40.050 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this division shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this division its most reasonable application.

“Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this division or a request for a variance.

“Area of shallow flooding” means a designated A, AH or V Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be evident.

Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area (SFHA).”

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).

“Basement” means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

“Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which are not part of the structural support of the building and which are designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any building to which they might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

1. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

2. The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

“Coastal high hazard area” is the area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1 – V30, VE or V.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision which was constructed before May 31, 1977.

“Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading and pouring of concrete pads.

“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (a) the overflow of floodwaters, (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (c) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

“Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

“Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

“Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

“Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

“Historic structure” for floodplain management purposes means any structure that is:

1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.

2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.

3. Individually listed on the California Register of Historic Resources.

4. Individually listed on the local inventory of historic places.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

1. The flood openings standard in BMC 15.48.010(C)(3).

2. The anchoring standards in BMC 15.48.010(A).

3. The construction materials and methods standards in BMC 15.48.010.

4. The standards for utilities in BMC 15.49.020.

For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements. This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

“Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

“New construction” means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after May 31, 1977, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision which was completed on or after May 31, 1977.

“One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this division.

“Person” means an individual or his agent, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

1. Built on a single chassis;

2. Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Remedy a violation” means to bring a structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damage, implementing the enforcement provisions of this division or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

“Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

“Sand dunes” means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

“Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V or VE.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure before the damage occurred.

Substantial Improvement.

1. “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of the structure either:

a. Before the improvement or repair is started; or

b. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

2. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

a. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

b. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.

“Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this division which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this division.

“Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to fully comply with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this division is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 16-02 § 2; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.060 Lands to which this division applies.
This division shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard, within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study for the City of Benicia” dated August 3, 2016, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part hereof. This Flood Insurance Study is on file at 250 East L Street, Benicia, California. This Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of this division and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this division and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 97-18 N.S.; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this division by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this division and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this division, all provisions shall be:

A. Considered as minimum requirements;

B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

C. Deemed neither to limit nor to repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.40.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This division shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

Chapter 15.44
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:

15.44.010    Establishment of development permit.

15.44.012    Fees established.

15.44.020    Designation of the floodplain administrator.

15.44.030    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.

15.44.010 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in BMC 15.40.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, and drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

A. Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO or VO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures;

B. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be floodproofed;

C. All appropriate certifications listed in BMC 15.44.030(D); and

D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.44.012 Fees established.
Fees for complying with this chapter will be set by city council resolution. (Ord. 16-02 § 3; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.44.020 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The building official or his/her designee is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator and is appointed to administer and implement this division by granting and denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 16-02 § 3; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.44.030 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

A. Review of all development permits to determine:

1. That the permit requirements of this division have been satisfied;

2. That all other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

3. That the site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

4. That the proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of the floodway. For purposes of this division, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and reasonably probable future development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

B. Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with BMC 15.40.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Chapter 15.48 BMC. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption;

C. Notification of Other Agencies.

1. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

a. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

b. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

c. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

2. Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

a. All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

b. Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

3. Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits;

D. Obtaining and maintaining for public inspection the following information, as needed:

1. The certification required in BMC 15.48.010(C)(1),

2. The certification required in BMC 15.48.010(C)(2),

3. The certification required in BMC 15.48.010(C)(3),

4. The certification required in BMC 15.48.010(C)(4)(a) or (b),

5. The certified elevation required in BMC 15.48.030(B),

6. The certification required in BMC 15.48.050(A), and

7. The information required in BMC 15.48.060(F);

E. Interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions); and

F. Taking action to remedy violations of this division as specified in BMC 15.40.080. (Ord. 16-02 § 3; Ord. 97-18 N.S.; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

Chapter 15.48
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sections:

15.48.010    Standards of construction.

15.48.020    Standards for utilities.

15.48.030    Standards for subdivisions.

15.48.040    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.48.045    Standards for recreational vehicles.

15.48.050    Floodways.

15.48.060    Coastal high hazard areas.

15.48.010 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements shall (A) be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, (B) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, (C) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, and (D) be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. The following standards are required:

A. Anchoring.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

2. All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of BMC 15.48.040.

B. Construction Materials and Methods.

1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

4. All new construction and substantial improvements within zones AH, AO or VO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

C. Elevation and Floodproofing.

1. Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement):

a. In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

b. In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

c. In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under BMC 15.44.030(B).

For all of this subsection (C)(1): upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor, and verified in the field. Certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

2. Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have an elevation that conforms to this subsection (C) or:

a. Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation required by this subsection (C), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and

b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

c. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections (C)(2)(a) and (2)(b) of this section are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

3. Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for this requirement shall meet the following minimum criteria:

a. For nonengineered openings: shall have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; and

b. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

4. Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in BMC 15.48.040. (Ord. 16-02 § 4; Ord. 97-18 N.S.; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.48.020 Standards for utilities.
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

B. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.48.030 Standards for subdivisions.
A. All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard areas and the elevation of the base flood. In addition, all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic study in areas without a base flood elevation (BFE).

B. All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

C. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

D. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

E. All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 16-02 § 4; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.48.040 Standards for manufactured homes.
A. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:

1. Within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the BFE and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

2. Within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, meet the requirements of BMC 15.48.060.

B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V and VE on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

1. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the BFE; or

2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade.

Upon the completion of the placement of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor, and verified in the field. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 16-02 § 4; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.48.045 Standards for recreational vehicles.
A. All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, AE, VI-30 and VE will either:

1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

3. Meet the permit requirements of BMC 15.44.010 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in BMC 15.48.040.

B. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection (A) of this section and BMC 15.48.060. (Ord. 16-02 § 4).

15.48.050 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in BMC 15.40.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

A. All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development are prohibited within the floodway unless certification by a registered civil engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B. If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16-02 § 4; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.48.060 Coastal high hazard areas.
Within coastal high hazard areas established in BMC 15.40.070, the following standards shall apply:

A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

B. All new construction shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide.

C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls. Such temporarily enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation.

D. Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.

E. Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.

F. The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records:

1. Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with subsection (A) of this section;

2. The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. (Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

Chapter 15.52
VARIANCES
Sections:

15.52.010    Variance – General.

15.52.010 Variance – General.
A. The building department board of appeals shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this division.

B. In passing upon an application for a variance, the building department board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, and:

1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

6. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

9. The safety of access to the property in time of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.

C. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; provided, subsections (B)(1) through (B)(11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

D. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

E. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of BMC 15.44.030(A) through (D) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

F. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

G. Variances shall only be issued upon:

1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;

2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;

3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and

4. A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

H. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B) of this section and the purposes of this division, the building department board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this division.

I. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain board in the office of the Solano County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

J. The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

K. Decisions of the building department board of appeals may be appealed to the city council by any person adversely affected by such decision by filing a written notice of appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

L. A decision of the building department board of appeals shall become final if not appealed pursuant to Chapter 15.56 BMC.

M. A variance shall expire if a building permit is not obtained within one year after the variance becomes final. The variance shall also expire if the structure is not completed by the time the building permit expires. (Ord. 07-49 § 1; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

Chapter 15.56
APPEALS
Sections:

15.56.010    Appeals to the building department board of appeals.

15.56.020    Appeals to the city council.

15.56.010 Appeals to the building department board of appeals.
Any interested person may appeal an alleged error in any requirement, decision or determination of the floodplain administrator hereunder to the building department board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-50 § 1; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

15.56.020 Appeals to the city council.
Any interested person may appeal a decision made by the building department board of appeals to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal, stating the grounds thereof, in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-50 § 2; Ord. 88-6 N.S. § 1, 1988).

Chapter 15.60
SEISMIC HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM
Sections:

15.60.010  Purpose.

15.60.020  Definitions.

15.60.030  Scope of program – Applicability.

15.60.040  Building owner notification.

15.60.050  Responsibilities of the building owner.

15.60.060  Program status report to the city council.

15.60.070  Reporting to the State Seismic Safety Commission.

15.60.080  Violation.

15.60.010 Purpose.
It is found that in the event of a strong or moderate local earthquake, loss of life or serious injury may result from damage to or collapse of buildings in the city of Benicia. It is generally acknowledged that Benicia will experience earthquakes in the future due to its proximity to both the San Andreas and Hayward faults. The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety by identifying potentially hazardous buildings in Benicia which are not earthquake resistant by reason of structural deficiencies. The city council finds that the existence and occupancy of potentially hazardous buildings constitute a threat to public safety in the event of earthquake of moderate to high magnitude. The city council finds that the public safety is served by identifying potentially hazardous buildings and providing for notification of legal owners and their tenants that the building is considered to be one of a general type that historically has exhibited little resistance to earthquake motion. Such a seismic hazards identification program is consistent with the State Unreinforced Masonry Law of 1986. (Ord. 89-15 N.S.).

15.60.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:

A. "Bearing wall" means any wall supporting a floor or roof where the total superimposed load exceeds 100 pounds per linear foot, or any unreinforced masonry wall supporting its own weight when over six feet in height.

B. "Civil engineer or structural engineer" means a licensed civil or structural engineer registered by the state of California pursuant to the rules and regulations of Title 16, Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code.

C. "Future occupant" means each successive building tenant who was not in possession at the time the building owner originally notified tenants as required by BMC 15.60.050, but who subsequently became a building tenant.

D. "Potentially hazardous building" means any building constructed prior to the adoption of local building codes requiring earthquake resistant design of buildings and constructed of unreinforced masonry wall construction. "Potentially hazardous building" includes all buildings of this type, including, but not limited to, public and private schools, theaters, places of public assembly, apartment buildings, hotels, motels, fire stations, police stations, and buildings housing emergency services, equipment, or supplies, such as government buildings, disaster relief centers, communications facilities, hospitals, blood banks, pharmaceutical supply warehouses, plants, and retail outlets. "Potentially hazardous building" does not include warehouses or similar structures not used for human habitation, except for warehouses or structures housing emergency services, equipment or supplies. "Potentially hazardous building" does not include any building having five living units or less. "Potentially hazardous building" does not include, for purposes of identification, any building which qualifies as "historical property" as determined by an appropriate governmental agency under Section 37602 of the Health and Safety Code.

E. "Tenant" means all building tenants who were in possession at the time the building owner was required to notify building tenants as required by BMC 15.60.050.

F. "Unreinforced masonry (URM) building" means any building containing walls constructed wholly or partially with any of the following materials:

1. Unreinforced brick masonry;

2. Unreinforced concrete masonry;

3. Hollow clay; and

4. Adobe or unburned clay masonry. (Ord. 90-6; Ord. 89-15).

15.60.030 Scope of program – Applicability.
The building inspection department shall inspect all "potentially hazardous buildings" constructed of unreinforced masonry (URM) to create a list of potentially hazardous buildings which by nature or extent of structural deficiencies could result in collapse or partial collapse of the building or by nature or extent of deficiencies in anchoring of external hazards in collapse or partial collapse of the building. (Ord. 89-15).

15.60.040 Building owner notification.
The owners of buildings, except those designated as historic buildings, shall be notified on or before July 31, 1990, by the building inspection department of the city that: (A) their building is considered to be a potentially hazardous building because of the nature or extent of structural deficiencies or deficiencies in anchoring which could result in collapse or partial collapse of the building in a moderate to severe earthquake; and (B) the owner must give notification to building tenants and future occupants as required by BMC 15.60.050. Said notice from the building inspection department of the city to owners as required in this section shall be referred to as a "BMC 15.60.040 notice" and said notice from owners to building tenants and future occupants shall be referred to as a "BMC 15.60.040 notice." A BMC 15.60.040 notice from the building inspection department to owners shall include a copy of BMC 15.60.050 with said notice to owners and advise the owners that failure to comply with BMC 15.60.050 is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 90-6; Ord. 89-15).

15.60.050 Responsibilities of the building owner.
A. Notification of Building Tenants. A building owner shall notify all tenants, in writing, within 30 days of receipt of a BMC 15.60.040 notice from the city, that their building may be potentially hazardous and is considered to be one of a general type that historically has exhibited little resistance to earthquake motion. A building owner who has received a BMC 15.60.040 notice shall notify all future occupants that the building is potentially hazardous. Said notice to future occupants shall (1) be given at least 10 days before a future occupant has physically occupied the premises; and (2) shall contain the notice that the building may be potentially hazardous and is considered to be one of a general type that historically has exhibited little resistance to earthquake motion.

B. Notification of the City of Benicia. A building owner shall deliver to the city clerk, within five days after each tenant is notified by the building owner that their building may be potentially hazardous, copies of each written notification given to building tenants and future occupants as required by subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 90-6; Ord. 89-15).

15.60.060 Program status report to the city council.
The building official shall submit a semi-annual narrative report to the city council on the status of the seismic hazards identification program, which shall also describe (A) by street address the location of each of the buildings identified by the building department as potentially hazardous; and (B) any actions taken by owners of each building, including copies of letters received by the city sent pursuant to BMC 15.60.050. (Ord. 90-6; Ord. 89-15).

15.60.070 Reporting to the State Seismic Safety Commission.
The building official shall submit a report to the State Seismic Safety Commission which shall include the following:

A. A listing of the number of buildings identified and the total square footage and use of each building;

B. A summary of the mitigation program implemented by the city with copies of the program and any ordinances attached to the report;

C. A summary of the status of the mitigation program listing the number of building owners notified;

D. Suggestions regarding how the state program could be improved. (Ord. 89-15).

15.60.080 Violation.
It is unlawful for the owner of a building, who has been notified by the building inspection department of the city pursuant to BMC 15.60.040, to fail to give notice to the tenants or to future occupants of the building that the building may be potentially hazardous in the manner required by BMC 15.60.050(A).

Before any action shall be taken by the city to enforce a violation of this chapter, the owner of the building shall be given written notice of the violation. The notice of violation shall be delivered either personally or by certified mail. When delivered by certified mail, the notice shall be addressed to the last known address of the owner of the building and a notice shall also be addressed to the address shown on the county tax assessment rolls if different from the last known address, or if the address of the building owner is unknown then only to the address shown on the county tax assessment rolls. The building owner shall have 10 days from the date of personal service of the written notice of violation, or 15 days from the date of mailing of the written notice of violation, to give actual notice to the tenants that the building is potentially hazardous, as required by BMC 15.60.050(A), and to deliver a copy of the written notice to the city clerk, as required by BMC 15.60.050(B). No action to enforce a violation of this chapter shall be taken by the city if the owner gives said notice and delivers to the city a copy of said written notice within said time periods. (Ord. 03-9 § 43; Ord. 90-6; Ord. 89-15).

Chapter 15.64
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Sections:

15.64.010    Purpose.

15.64.020    Definitions.

15.64.030    Responsibility for administration.

15.64.040    Construction and application.

15.64.050    Taking.

15.64.060    Discharge of pollutants.

15.64.070    Discharge in violation of permit.

15.64.080    Illicit discharge and illicit connections.

15.64.090    Best management practices and standards.

15.64.100    Tourtelot cleanup project.

15.64.110    Watercourse protection.

15.64.120    Authority to inspect.

15.64.130    Violations constituting misdemeanors.

15.64.140    Penalty for violation.

15.64.150    Continuing violation.

15.64.160    Concealment.

15.64.170    Acts potentially resulting in violation of federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act.

15.64.180    Violations deemed a public nuisance.

15.64.190    California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

15.64.200    Civil actions.

15.64.210    Administrative enforcement powers.

15.64.220    Remedies not exclusive.

15.64.230    Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.

15.64.010 Purpose.
The city council finds as follows:

A. The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality in the city of Benicia’s watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to, and consistent with, the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Section 13000 et seq.), the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent revisions and amendments thereto, and with the goals of the city of Benicia general plan including:

Goal 2.38:

Protect water quality.

Goal 3.22:

Preserve water bodies.

Goal 3.24:

Protect watersheds.

Goal 4.12:

Accommodate runoff from existing and future development.

Goal 4.14:

Prevent ground and surface water contamination.

B. This chapter also carries out the conditions in the city’s Phase II small municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004 (Phase II Storm Water Permit) and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto, that require, effective upon adoption of this chapter, implementation of appropriate measures to control pollutant discharges into and from the MS4 system.

C. It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of city of Benicia residents and acting in accordance with the precepts of the general plan by:

1. Detecting and eliminating non-storm water discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm drain system.

2. Responding to and prohibiting the discharge to municipal separate storm drains from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than storm water.

3. Reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to waters of the United States to the maximum extent practicable.

4. Complying with applicable state and federal laws.

5. Minimizing increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by storm water runoff from development that would otherwise degrade local water quality.

6. Reducing storm water runoff rates and volumes and nonpoint source pollution whenever possible, through storm water management controls and ensuring that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall be as defined herein. Words and phrases in this chapter and not otherwise defined shall be interpreted as defined in the regulations issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to implement the provisions of the Phase II storm water permit, the federal Clean Water Act, and as defined by the State Water Resources Control Board to implement the Porter-Cologne Act:

“Authorized enforcement official” or “authorized enforcement officer” is the city engineer and those individuals designated by the city engineer as authorized enforcement officials.

“BASMAA Post Construction Manual” means the most recent version of the Bay Area Storm Water Management Agencies (BASMAA) Post Construction Manual.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” are schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

“City storm drain system” includes but is not limited to those facilities within the city by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, drainage inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade open channels or culverts and pipes, which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR Part 122.2.

“Construction activity” means any activity that involves soil disturbing activities including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, paving, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation.

“Development runoff requirements” shall mean the provisions in the city’s storm water Phase II final rule that contains performance standards to address both construction and post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redevelopment projects on storm water quality.

“Discharge” or “discharge of a pollutant” is (1) the addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source, or (2) any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft, which is being used as a means of transportation. The term includes additions of pollutants to waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.

“Erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP)” means a plan prepared to control erosion and prevent the discharge of sediment and construction materials from a construction site.

“Illicit connection” is any device or method that conveys non-storm water to a municipal separate storm sewer (storm drain) system (MS4) or receiving water.

“Illicit discharge” is any discharge to an MS4 that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term “illicit discharge” includes all non-storm water discharges not composed entirely of storm water and discharges that are identified under the discharge of pollutants section of this chapter (BMC 15.64.060). The term “illicit discharge” does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES permit.

“Incidental irrigation runoff” means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal overspray from sprinklers that escapes the landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence.

“Low impact development (LID)” means a sustainable practice that benefits water supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and storm water management to maintain the site’s predevelopment runoff rates and volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site’s predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to the source of rainfall.

“Non-storm water discharge” is any discharge to a storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water.

“NPDES permit” is a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States.

“Permit registration documents (PRDs)” are the application materials required by the State Water Resources Control Board that include a notice of intent to comply with the terms of the general permit to discharge storm water associated with construction and ground disturbing activities (Order No. 2009-0009-DWQ as amended, General Permit No. CAS000002) or the general permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activities (Order No. 2014-057-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000001).

“Phase II storm water permit” is the NPDES general storm water permit applicable to the city of Benicia, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001-DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this NPDES permit.

“Pollutant” is any material other than storm water including, but not limited to, petroleum products or byproducts, acidity, dredged or excavated soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, pet wastes, manure, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, sediment, cellar dirt, concrete, debris, dumped yard wastes, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste; temperature, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil and industrial, municipal or agricultural waste discharged into the water or storm water system, that is discharged to or placed in such a way as to be carried away by storm water into the storm drains and watercourses of the city.

“Post-construction measure requirements” are the provisions in Section E.12 of the Phase II storm water permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address the post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on storm water quality and quantity.

“Premises” are any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

“Responsible person” shall mean the owner or occupant of any premises or who engages in any activity from which there is or may be a non-storm water discharge or any person who releases pollutants to the city’s storm water system.

“Storm drain system” or “storm drain” includes but is not limited to those storm water drainage conveyance facilities within the city by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, drainage inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, creeks, manmade open channels or culverts and pipes, which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (at 40 CFR Part 122.2).

“Storm water” means storm water runoff, surface runoff and drainage. It excludes infiltration and runoff from agricultural land.

“Storm water control plan” means a plan that meets the criteria contained in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.

“Storm water facilities operation and maintenance plan” is a plan identifying the locations and characteristics of storm water management facilities on a newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities, schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those facilities.

“Storm water management facility” is any device designated to detain, retain, filter, or infiltrate storm water.

“Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)” is a plan to identify sources of sediment and other pollutants that affect the quality of storm water discharges and describes and ensures the implementation of practices to reduce sediment and other pollutants in storm water discharges.

“Watercourse” is any channel, ditch, drainage swale, closed pipe system, whether manmade or natural, that collects and transports runoff.

“Waters of the United States” are all waters which are currently used, or were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide as defined in 33 CFR Part 328. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.030 Responsibility for administration.
This chapter shall be administered for the city by the city engineer. In administering this chapter, the city engineer has the authority to request and require the submittal of information deemed necessary to assess compliance with this chapter and the Phase II storm water permit. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.040 Construction and application.
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, and applicable implementing regulations. Every application for a development project, including but not limited to a rezoning, tentative map, parcel map, conditional use permit, variance, site development permit, design review, or building permit is subject to the development runoff requirements in the city’s NPDES permit and shall be accompanied by a storm water control plan that meets the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.050 Taking.
The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to deprive any landowner of substantially all of the market value of his/her property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. If application of this chapter to a specific project would create a taking, then pursuant to this chapter the city council may allow additional land uses, but only to the extent necessary to avoid a taking. Such uses shall be consistent with and carry out the purposes of this chapter as stated in BMC 15.64.010. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.060 Discharge of pollutants.
A. The discharge of non-storm water discharges to the city storm drain system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with this chapter, state and federal regulations and authorized by the city engineer.

B. The discharge of storm water from premises or an activity that causes or contributes to a violation of receiving water limitations in the city’s NPDES permit is prohibited.

C. Exceptions to Discharge Prohibition. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection (A) of this section:

1. Discharges regulated under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (other than the Phase II storm water permit) issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations.

2. Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities unless they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.

3. Discharges from the following activities, provided any pollutants in the discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented:

a. Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources;

b. Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the conditions in subsection (C)(4) of this section are met;

c. Diverted stream flows;

d. Rising ground waters;

e. Infiltration to separate storm drains;

f. Uncontaminated pumped ground water (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;

g. Foundation and footing drains;

h. Water from crawl space pumps;

i. Air conditioning condensation;

j. Natural springs;

k. Individual residential car washing;

l. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; and

m. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.

4. Irrigation systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area of application. Persons responsible for controlling irrigation systems shall prevent excessive irrigation runoff by:

a. Detecting and correcting leaks from the irrigation system within 72 hours of discovering the leak;

b. Properly designing and aiming sprinkler heads to only irrigate the planned application area;

c. Not irrigating during precipitation events; and

d. Where recycled water is used for irrigation, designing and managing holding ponds such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the 25-year, 24-hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to the Regional Water Board and the city of Benicia within 24 hours of the discharge. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.070 Discharge in violation of permit.
Any discharge that would result in a contribution to a violation of the Phase II storm water permit, either separately considered or when combined with other discharge, is prohibited. Any non-storm water discharge not within the confines of this chapter and/or not approved by the city engineer is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.080 Illicit discharge and illicit connections.
A. It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit drainage connections to the city storm water system or watercourse, and to commence or continue any illicit discharges to the city storm water system or watercourse. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

B. Any person responsible for a discharge, spill, or pollutant release shall promptly cease and desist discharging, and/or clean up and abate such a discharge as directed by the city engineer.

C. Any person found to be in violation of this section or found to be responsible for an illicit connection shall promptly remove the illicit drainage or connection in a manner acceptable to and approved by the city.

D. No discharge shall cause the following conditions, create a nuisance or adversely affect beneficial uses of waters of the state:

1. Floating, suspended or deposited macroscopic matter or foam;

2. Bottom deposits or aquatic growth;

3. Alterations of temperature, sediment load, nutrient load, or dissolved oxygen, which cause significant adverse impacts to native aquatic biota;

4. Visible, floating, suspended or deposited oil or products of petroleum origin; or

5. Substances present in concentrations or quantities which cause deleterious effects on aquatic biota, wildlife or waterfowl, or which render any of these unfit for human consumption.

E. The city may perform cleanup and abatement work and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in BMC 15.64.200. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.090 Best management practices and standards.
Any person engaged in activities that will or may result in pollutants entering the city storm drain system shall undertake all practicable measures to cease such activities, and/or eliminate or reduce such pollutants. Such activities shall include, but not be limited to: ownership and use of parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial facilities, commercial facilities, ground disturbing activities, and stores fronting city streets. The following minimal requirements shall apply:

A. Littering. Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet, drain inlet, conduit or other drainage structures, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant.

B. Sidewalks. The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city of Benicia in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for the disposal of garbage, trash or green waste.

C. Standard for Parking Lots and Similar Uses. Persons owning or operating private streets, a parking lot, gas station pavement or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city storm water system.

D. Best Management Practices for Construction and Ground Disturbing Activities.

1. Any person performing construction activities in the city shall use the best available technology (BAT) and the best conventional technology (BCT). Any person performing construction activities shall implement appropriate BMPs consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association BMPs or equivalent to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering the storm drain system or watercourse.

2. Construction-phase BMPs include erosion and sediment controls and pollution prevention practices.

a. Erosion control BMPs may include, but are not limited to:

i. Scheduling and timing of grading activities;

ii. Preservation of existing vegetation;

iii. Timely revegetation of graded areas;

iv. The use of hydroseed and hydraulic mulches;

v. Soil binders;

vi. Earth dike and drainage swales;

vii. Velocity dissipation devices;

viii. Slope drains;

ix. Installation of erosion control blankets;

x. Soil preparation – roughening;

xi. Wind erosion control.

b. Sediment control BMPs may include, but are not limited to:

i. Properly sized detention basins, dams, or filters to reduce entry of suspended sediment into the storm drain system and watercourses;

ii. Installation of construction entrances to prevent tracking of sediment onto adjacent streets;

iii. Biofilter bags;

iv. Sandbag barrier;

v. Storm drain inlet protection;

vi. Entrance outlet tire wash;

vii. Street sweeping to remove tracked sediment.

c. Pollution prevention practices may include, but are not limited to:

i. Designated concrete washout areas or facilities;

ii. Control of trash and recycled materials;

iii. Tarping of materials stored on site;

iv. Proper location of and maintenance of temporary sanitary facilities.

The combination of BMPs used, and their execution in the field, must be customized to the site using up-to-date standards and practices.

3. Financial security may be required to ensure that temporary measures to control storm water pollution are implemented and maintained during construction and after construction for a period determined by the city. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the agency.

4. When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the authorized enforcement official authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to, and does not supersede or limit, any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal, provided in the city of Benicia Municipal Code.

5. The city has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post-construction).

6. All construction plans and applications for construction activity submitted to the city shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

7. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Requirements:

a. An erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) shall be required for:

i. Any project subject to a grading permit under Chapter 15.28 BMC, Grading and Erosion Control;

ii. Any project subject to a building permit or other permit that has the potential for significant erosion and/or significant non-storm water discharges of sediment and/or construction site waste;

iii. Any other project, as required by the authorized enforcement official, considering factors such as whether the project involves hillside soil disturbance, rainy season construction, construction near a creek or an intermittent or ephemeral drainage way, or any other condition or construction site activity that could lead to a non-storm water discharge to a storm drain if not managed by effective implementation of an ESCP.

b. The ESCP shall be submitted for review and approval by the authorized enforcement official. The project applicant shall follow guidance issued by the city engineer in preparing the ESCP. At a minimum, the ESCP shall include:

i. Description of the proposed project and soil disturbing activity;

ii. Site-specific construction-phase BMPs;

iii. Rationale for selecting the BMPs, including, if needed, soil loss calculations;

iv. List of applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity, such as: the state’s construction general permit (CGP); Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit; Clean Water Act Section 401 Water Quality Certification; streambed/lake alteration agreement (1600 Agreements);

v. Proof that the applicant has obtained the applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity that must be submitted prior to approval of the ESCP; and

vi. Project information including but not limited to:

(A) Owner and contractor contact information;

(B) Site information (location, status, size of project, size of disturbed area);

(C) Name and distance to the nearest receiving water; and

(D) Planned start date and anticipated completion date.

c. For projects subject to the state’s general construction permit (CGP), project applicants may submit a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) developed pursuant to the CGP in lieu of submitting an ESCP.

d. Implementation of an approved ESCP shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit, a grading permit, or other permit issued by the city for a project subject to this section. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site. Any modifications to the ESCP shall be submitted to the city for review and approval.

E. Best Management Practices for New Development and Redevelopment.

1. Prior to and/or during construction, the authorized enforcement official may establish controls on the volume and rate of storm water runoff from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume, and to mimic the predevelopment site hydrology. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on site.

2. The authorized enforcement official may require, as a condition of project approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants, and for control on the volume and rate of storm water runoff from the project’s added or replaced impervious surfaces. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal, state, and local agencies, and where required, the BASMAA Post Construction Manual. Where physical and safety conditions allow, the preferred control measure is to retain drainage ways above ground and in as natural a state as possible, or by other biological methods such as bioretention areas.

3. Storm Water Control Plan Requirements:

a. For each new development and redevelopment project subject to post-construction measure requirements, or where required by the nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the city, every applicant shall submit a storm water control plan (SCP) that meets the criteria in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.

i. Applicable new development and redevelopment projects subject to post-construction measures include:

(A) Small Projects. Projects that create or replace between 2,500 and 5,000 square feet of impervious area, excluding linear underground/overhead utility projects.

(B) Regulated Projects. Projects that create or replace greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet of impervious area, excluding: detached single-family residences that are not part of a common plan of development; interior remodels; routine maintenance or repair; linear underground/overhead utility projects unless the project has a discrete location that has 5,000 square feet or more of newly constructed contiguous impervious area.

(C) Full Hydromodification Projects. Regulated projects that create or replace greater than or equal to one acre of impervious area, with a net increase in impervious area.

b. Applicants shall implement the controls identified in the SCP and required by the conditions of approval that reduce storm water pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact development design, site design measures, storm water treatment measures and hydromodification management measures. Increases in runoff shall be managed in accordance with the post-construction measures requirements.

c. The SCP is separate and distinct from the ESCP requirements described in subsection (D) of this section.

d. Where projects are required to have a SCP, project applicants shall follow the appropriate SCP template, based on the project type, in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.

e. Implementation of an approved SCP and submittal of an approved storm water facilities operation and maintenance plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit or another city-issued permit for a project subject to this section.

f. Financial security may be required to ensure that storm water management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a period which may be determined by the city. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the city.

g. When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the city engineer authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and does not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal, provided in the BMC.

h. All storm water management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.

i. All storm water management facilities shall be maintained according to the approved storm water facilities operation and maintenance plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the storm water management facilities at least annually and submit a written report of the inspection to the city engineer. The storm water facilities operation and maintenance plan shall describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. If the responsible person fails to maintain the storm water management facilities in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the city may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in BMC 15.64.200.

j. For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the post-construction measures requirements, or where deemed appropriate by the city, access by the city to storm water management facilities for inspections, as provided in BMC 15.64.200, and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be provided by the property owner.

k. All project proponents and their successors, or successors in fee title, in control of a new development and redevelopment project subject to the post-construction measures requirements, shall submit one of the following as a condition prior to final inspection and approval of building permit closure:

i. The project proponent’s signed statement accepting responsibility for the operations and maintenance of storm water management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

ii. Written conditions in the sales or lease agreements or deed for the project that requires the buyer or lessee to assume responsibility for the operations and maintenance of the storm water management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

iii. Written text in project deeds, or conditions, covenants and restrictions for multi-unit residential projects that require the homeowners’ association or, if there is no association, each individual owner, to assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity; or

iv. Any other legally enforceable agreement or mechanism, such as recordation in the property deed, that assigns the operation and maintenance of the storm water management facilities to the project owner(s).

F. Notification of Intent and Compliance with General Permits. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger, described in any general storm water permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, San Francisco Bay Region, shall provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general storm water permit applicable to such discharges.

Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to storm water discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit.

G. Compliance with Best Management Practices. Where best management practices, guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, state of California, and/or regional agency, or by the city, for any activity, operation, or facility that may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm drain system, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility, shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the city engineer.

H. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. The city engineer may require any business or utility in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in any discharges, lawful or otherwise, to develop and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), which must include maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment storage, vehicle loading, fueling, vehicle maintenance, food handling or processing or cleanup procedure that is carried out partially or wholly out of doors.

I. Coordination with Hazardous Materials Release Response and Inventory Plans. Any business subject to hazardous material release response and inventory plan, Division 20, Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code (commencing with Section 25500), shall include, in that plan, provision for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibition of non-storm water discharges and the requirement to reduce release of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.100 Tourtelot cleanup project.
The Tourtelot cleanup project area consists of approximately 220 acres of the former Benicia Arsenal, north of Rose Drive and west of East 2nd Street. The site was used from 1944 to 1960 as part of the Benicia Arsenal. The site was known to contain ordnance and explosives and has been subject to a cleanup project. Because of various methods of detection and cleanup used on the site, areas of the site are subject to specific controls. Some areas are under the restriction of filing a plan for any work below grade. Other areas of the site also require the submittal of approved procedures prepared by a licensed engineer and observed by representatives of the State of California Division of Toxic Substances Control. No new discharges of any type or alteration of any existing discharge are allowed into the Tourtelot site without compliance with restrictions contained in the Tourtelot site contingency action plans and the operation and maintenance plan which are further cited in Chapter 15.28 BMC, Grading and Erosion Control. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.110 Watercourse protection.
A. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person’s lessee or tenant, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse; shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse; and shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, and not remove vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

B. No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the city engineer:

1. Discharge into or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse;

2. Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse;

3. Carry out development within the greater of 30 feet of the center line of any creek or 25 feet of the top of a bank wherein the “top of bank” is defined as the flatter of the actual top of bank or a projected top of bank from the toe of slope at two horizontal to one vertical bank slope;

4. Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a watercourse including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance;

5. Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change, or remove any structure in a watercourse; or

6. Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a watercourse or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by storm water passing through such watercourse. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.120 Authority to inspect.
A. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement official has the duty and the responsibility to inspect any and all locations for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. The authorized enforcement official may, within the limitations of applicable state and federal laws, enter any such building or any premises (including, but not limited to, facilities, equipment, practices, or operations) at all reasonable times to inspect the same for any or all of the following situations, as determined by the authorized enforcement official:

1. Routine inspections to ensure implementation of BMPs and other requirements of this chapter;

2. Active or potential storm water discharges;

3. Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II storm water permit;

4. Actual violations of this chapter or the Phase II storm water permit;

5. Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II storm water permit; or

6. To perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter.

B. Prior to entry for inspections, the authorized enforcement official shall comply with the following: (1) If the building or premises is occupied, the enforcement official shall first present proper credentials and request entry; (2) if the building or premises is unoccupied, the enforcement official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. Any such request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the official is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

C. The authorized enforcement official has the right to and shall conduct routine sampling and monitoring on, or adjacent to, the premises under review. Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit discharges, discharge of non-storm water to the storm sewer system, or similar factors. The cost of such routine sampling and/or monitoring activities, including test reports and results, shall be borne by the city. The authorized enforcement official may, within the limitations of law, enter such premises at reasonable times to conduct sampling and monitoring operations; provided, that the official presents proper credentials to and obtains consent from the owner or occupant to enter. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official shall request assistance of the city attorney to obtain an administrative warrant to enter the premises, pursuant to the provisions of state law.

D. Authority to Sample and Establish Sampling Devices. The city shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the official may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or in the recordation of the activities on site.

E. Notification of Spills. All persons in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility have a responsibility to train facility personnel and maintain notification procedures to ensure that immediate notification is provided to the city of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste creating a risk of discharge into the city storm water system.

F. As soon as any person in charge of a facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste that may result in pollutants or non-storm water discharges entering the city storm water system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and cleanup of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephoning the city engineer during normal business hours and confirming the notification by correspondence. Outside of normal business hours, telephone notice shall be made to the Benicia fire department.

G. The city will identify, document and respond to pretreatment violations in accordance with its enforcement response plan.

H. Requirement to Test or Monitor. Any authorized enforcement official may request that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of non-storm water to the storm water system, undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the official may specify. The burden and cost of undertaking such sampling and monitoring activities, including test results and reports, shall be borne by the owner of the premises under review. The type and method of sampling and monitoring shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for testing and monitoring and to the benefits to be obtained, as determined by the enforcement official.

I. Exigent Circumstances. Whenever a condition is found to exist in violation of this chapter that presents an immediate and present danger to the public health, safety and welfare requiring immediate remedial action to prevent injury to persons or property, the authorized enforcement official shall take whatever reasonable and appropriate action is necessary to neutralize the danger, including but not limited to entry upon private premises for inspection, sampling and monitoring, and abatement. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.130 Violations constituting misdemeanors.
The violation of any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor. However, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.140 Penalty for violation.
Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36901.

Upon conviction of an infraction, a person shall be subject to payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in California Government Code Section 36900. After a third conviction for a violation of the same provision subsequent violations within a 12-month period may be charged as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.150 Continuing violation.
Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly as herein provided. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.160 Concealment.
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.170 Acts potentially resulting in violation of federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Act, and/or the Phase II storm water permit, and may be subject to the sanctions of those Acts including civil and criminal penalty. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter should also include notice to the violator of such potential liability. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.180 Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is hereby declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may be summarily abated and original conditions restored by any authorized enforcement official, and/or by a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance brought by the city attorney.

The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. If the lien is not satisfied by the owner of the property within three months after the completion by the authorized enforcement official of the removal of the nuisance and the restoration of the property to its original condition, the property may be sold in satisfaction thereof in a like manner as other real property is sold under execution.

If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the city council shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further hearing. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.190 California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.
The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure are applicable to judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.200 Civil actions.
In addition to any other enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

A. A temporary and/or permanent injunction;

B. An action for an unlawful business practice pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17206;

C. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection;

D. Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation;

E. Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing storm water discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter;

F. The cost of maintenance and repair of any BMP or storm water management facility that is not maintained in accordance with the guidebook or the storm water control plan. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.210 Administrative enforcement powers.
In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, any authorized enforcement official has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:

A. Cease and Desist Orders. When an authorized enforcement official finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the official may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying: (1) comply with the requirement, (2) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and/or (3) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. Upon the violator’s failure to comply with such order, the city shall take further enforcement action as specified in this chapter, or in accordance with other appropriate provisions of local, state or federal law. At the discretion of the authorized enforcement official, orders to cease and desist may take the following form:

1. Verbal warnings, as may be issued during inspections;

2. Warning letters and orders to abate pollution;

3. Warning letters with requirements to submit written reports; or

4. Formal violations and legal action as described in this chapter and as authorized by Chapter 17.128 BMC.

B. Notice to Clean. Whenever an authorized enforcement official finds any oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the city storm drain system or a non-storm water discharge to the city storm drain system, the authorized enforcement official may give notice to remove such oil, earth, dirt, grass, weeds, dead trees, metal cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that the enforcement official may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.220 Remedies not exclusive.
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.

A. Appeal. Any person, firm, corporation or organization required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement officer who is aggrieved by the decision of the authorized enforcement officer may appeal such decision to the city engineer within 10 days following the effective date of the decision by writing the city engineer in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. Upon receipt of such request, the city manager shall request a report and recommendation from the authorized enforcement officer and shall set the matter for hearing within 14 days. At said hearing, the city manager may hear additional evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement officer’s decision. Said decision shall be final unless appealed further in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 07-51 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

15.64.230 Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.
The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the city’s hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-storm water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce storm water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 15-01 § 1; Ord. 06-14 § 1).

Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS1
Chapters:

16.04  General Provisions

16.08  Definitions and Responsibilities

16.12  Maps Required

16.16  Tentative Subdivision Maps – Five or More Parcels

16.20  Final Subdivision Maps – Five or More Parcels

16.24  Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels

16.28  Vesting Tentative Maps

16.32  Dedications and Reservations

16.36  Improvements

16.40  Reversions to Acreage

16.44  Parcel Mergers and Unmergers

16.48  Correction and Amendments of Maps

16.52  Enforcement

1 For statutory provisions on local control of subdivisions, see Government Code §§ 66410 et seq. Prior ordinance history: Ords. 999 M.C., 1000 M.C., 1000-A M.C., 1000-B M.C., 1252 M.C., 74-1, 77-16, 77-23, 78-4, 81-8, 81-13, 83-10, 85-2 and 86-3.


Chapter 16.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.04.010    Citation and authority.

16.04.020    Purpose.

16.04.030    Consistency.

16.04.040    Application.

16.04.050    Exceptions.

16.04.060    Public hearings – Notice.

16.04.070    Public hearings – When required.

16.04.080    Modification of requirements.

16.04.090    Fees and deposits.

16.04.010 Citation and authority.
This title is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410 et seq. of the Government Code, and may be cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city of Benicia. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this title and any rules, regulations and specifications adopted pursuant hereto is to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps provided by the Subdivision Map Act, and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the city regarding the maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this title are determined to be necessary to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare; to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use of land; and to ensure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities, and other services in the city. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.030 Consistency.
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan of the city or which is not permitted by BMC Title 17, Zoning, or other applicable provisions of this code.

The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall determine, together with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the type of streets, roads, highways, utilities, and other public services that shall be provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.040 Application.
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all or parts of subdivisions within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and this title after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. All subdivisions and any part thereof lying within the city shall be made and all subdivision maps shall be prepared and presented for approval as provided for in this title. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.050 Exceptions.
This title shall not apply to:

A. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks;

B. Mineral, oil or gas leases;

C. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the California Health and Safety Code;

D. A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created; provided, that subject to the provisions of Section 66412(d) of the Subdivision Map Act, the lot line adjustment is approved pursuant to BMC 16.12.030;

E. Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party;

F. Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

G. Subject to the requirements of Section 66412(g) and 66412(h) of the Subdivision Map Act, the conversion of a community apartment project or a stock cooperative to a condominium;

H. The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a parcel of land, or any portion or portions thereof, in conjunction with the financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city;

I. The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvements;

J. The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel;

K. The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 or second units pursuant to Section 65852.2 of the Government Code; but this title shall apply to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of those units;

L. Leasing for agricultural purposes, cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock;

M. Subdivisions of four parcels or less for construction of removable commercial buildings having a floor area of less than 100 square feet. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.060 Public hearings – Notice.
A. Whenever a public hearing is held by the community development director, the planning commission or the city council pursuant to this title, notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the subject matter, shall be given at least 10 days before the hearing. Such notice shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city, and by posting in City Hall, with copies to any interested agencies, organizations or individuals.

B. When the public hearing deals with a subdivision, the notice shall give a general description of the location of the subdivision or proposed subdivision. Within the time limits set forth in subsection (A) of this section, copies of said notice shall be mailed to the subdivider; to each owner of property, as shown on the latest city-wide assessment roll, located within 500 feet of the subdivision boundaries; and to each resident in the subdivision or proposed subdivision.

C. Notice also shall be given to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the subdivision.

D. In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given in accordance with Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act.

E. In the event that the proposed application has been submitted by a person other than the property owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give notice by mail or delivery to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

F. Substantial compliance with these provisions for notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken according to the procedures in this chapter. (Ord. 14-02 § 1; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.070 Public hearings – When required.
Whenever a property is to be subdivided, the community development director, at his or her discretion, may hold a public hearing prior to reporting on the tentative map for said subdivision. The planning commission and city council shall hold public hearings as required by BMC 16.16.070. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.080 Modification of requirements.
Whenever, in the opinion of the planning commission or city council, the land involved in any subdivision is subject to title limitations of record, or is affected by topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to a use that is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this title, the planning commission or city council may make modifications as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.04.090 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting maps as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by this title and by the city council’s resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and charges. Said resolution or resolutions are incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.08
DEFINITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Sections:

16.08.010  Definitions.

16.08.020  Responsibilities.

16.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined in this section as set forth below. All definitions provided in BMC Title 1, General Provisions, and all definitions provided in the Subdivision Map Act shall also be applicable to this title and said definitions are incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth herein.

A. "Acreage" means any parcel of land which is not a lot, as defined in this section, and those areas where a legal subdivision has not been made previously, or where a legal subdivision has declared such parcel as acreage.

B. "Block" means the area of land within a subdivision, which area is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.

C. "City engineer" means the city engineer of the city of Benicia.

D. "Collector street" means a street, intermediate in importance between a local street and either a major or secondary thoroughfare, which has the purpose of collecting local traffic and carrying it to a thoroughfare.

E. "Community apartment project" shall be defined as provided in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code.

F. "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property.

G. "Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings.

H. "Day" means calendar day unless otherwise specified. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

I. "Department" means the planning department of the city of Benicia.

J. "Design" means alignment, grade, size, and other details of construction for the sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage systems, roadway and other miscellaneous improvements as required by the city engineer and such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan, any applicable specific plan, or the Subdivision Map Act.

K. "Development" means the uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto.

L. "Easement" means an easement dedicated to the city, which shall be continuing and irrevocable unless formally abandoned by the city, and any other easement whether owned by a public entity, public utility, or private party.

M. "Final map" means a map showing a subdivision of five or more lots, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

N. "Frontage street" means an existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of a subdivision.

O. "General plan" means the general plan of the city of Benicia, adopted August 2, 1977, and all amendments thereto.

P. "Improvements" refers to street work, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, storm drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers and facilities, public utilities, landscaping and fences to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used for public rights-of-way, private streets and easements, and any other improvements as defined by Section 66419 of the Subdivision Map Act.

Q. "Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separate from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision map or parcel map, or by such other map approved by the county or by the city under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of city ordinances in effect at the time of such approval, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing.

R. "Lot line adjustment" means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustment where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the community development director pursuant to BMC 16.12.030.

S. "Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.

T. "Parcel map" means a map showing a subdivision of four or fewer lots, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

U. "Private street" means any street, accessway, or the like, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision which is privately held and maintained and which is utilized as access to a development.

V. "Remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision. A remainder of five acres or more need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder.

W. "Scenic easement" means an easement dedicated to the city that protects a view from a specific location or locations to a specific visual resource by prohibiting or limiting development.

X. "Standard engineering specifications" means those standard specifications for public improvements prepared by the city engineer and adopted pursuant to BMC Title 15.

Y. "Stock cooperative" shall be defined as provided in Section 11003.2 of the State Business and Professions Code.

Z. "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for oneself or for others. Employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers."

AA. "Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. This definition shall specifically include condominiums, community apartment projects, stock cooperatives, and conversions.

BB. "Subdivision Map Act" means the provisions of Division 2, Subdivisions, of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410.

CC. "Tentative map" means a map for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it, precedent to the approval of a final map. "Tentative map" shall include a tentative parcel map prepared pursuant to the provisions of this title.

DD. "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a residential subdivision that has, printed conspicuously on its face, the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed with the city, and is processed in accord with the provisions of Chapter 16.28 BMC. (Ord. 97-16 N.S.; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.08.020 Responsibilities.
A. City Attorney. The city attorney’s responsibilities shall include approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and security, liability agreements and insurance, and all governing documents for a community apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative, or conversion.

B. City Council. The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of final maps and improvement agreements and the acceptance by the city of land and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the city.

The city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative subdivision maps for subdivisions of five or more parcels and shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative parcel maps for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels. The city council shall also act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of other planning commission actions as provided in this title.

C. Planning Commission. The planning commission’s responsibilities shall include recommending approval, conditional approval or denial of subdivisions of five or more parcels. The planning commission shall also act as the appeals board for hearing appeals of community development director actions as provided in this title.

D. Community Development Director. The community development director’s responsibilities shall include:

1. The approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels;

2. The processing and approval of waivers of parcel map requirements, lot line adjustments, mergers and certificates of compliance;

3. Determinations of violations of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title;

4. The management of the planning department in carrying out the responsibilities imposed upon it by this title. When necessary to carry out the community development director’s responsibilities hereunder, the community development director may designate and authorize a representative to act on his or her behalf.

E. City Engineer. The city engineer’s responsibilities shall include:

1. Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications;

2. Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title;

3. The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans; and the processing and approval of parcel maps;

4. Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map;

5. The inspection and approval of subdivision public improvements;

6. Collection of all required fees and deposits.

F. Planning Department. The planning department’s responsibilities shall include the processing of tentative maps and of lot line adjustments. (Ord. 92-16 N.S. § 5, 1992; Ord. 89-2 N.S. §§ 5, 6, 7, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.12
MAPS REQUIRED
Sections:

16.12.010  General.

16.12.020  Division of land – Five or more parcels.

16.12.030  Division of land – Four or fewer parcels.

16.12.010 General.
For the purposes of this title, the specific requirements for tentative, final, and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.12.020 Division of land – Five or more parcels.
A tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the department that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where:

A. The land before division contains fewer than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body;

B. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway;

C. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or

D. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subsections (A) through (D) of this section. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.12.030 Division of land – Four or fewer parcels.
A tentative and final parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four or fewer parcels, except that maps shall not be required for:

A. Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined by Section 230 of the State Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing.

B. Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way unless a showing is made by the department in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map.

C. Lot line adjustments, provided:

1. No additional parcels or building sites are created;

2. The resulting parcels conform to BMC Title 17, Zoning, and BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction;

3. The lot line adjustment is approved by the community development director or by the planning commission on appeal; and

4. A certificate of correction, certificate of compliance, deed, or record of survey showing the lot line adjustment is prepared, approved, and filed in accord with the provisions of Chapter 16.48 BMC.

D. Parcel maps waived by the community development director as provided by BMC 16.24.090. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 8, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.16
TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS – FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
Sections:

16.16.010  General.

16.16.020  Form and contents.

16.16.030  Accompanying data and reports.

16.16.040  Geotechnical reports.

16.16.050  Street names.

16.16.060  Department review and referral.

16.16.070  Planning commission action.

16.16.080  City council action.

16.16.090  Extension of time for community development director, planning commission, or city council action.

16.16.100  Expiration.

16.16.110  Extensions.

16.16.120  Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.16.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal, and approval of tentative maps for five or more parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.020 Form and contents.
The tentative maps shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet and contain not less than the following:

A. A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name, and type of subdivision;

B. Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number;

C. Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision;

D. The names and numbers of adjacent subdivisions and the names of owners of adjacent unplatted land;

E. Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours;

F. A statement of present zoning and of existing and proposed uses of the property as well as any proposed zoning changes, whether immediate or future;

G. A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community;

H. Existing topography of the proposed site and at least 100 feet beyond its boundary, and proposed changes in topography. The contours of the land shall be shown at intervals of not more than five feet, and of not more than two-foot intervals, if the slope of the land is less than 10 percent;

I. Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees with a trunk diameter of four inches or more, measured 24 inches above existing grade. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated;

J. The location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked;

K. The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each watercourse;

L. The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways;

M. The widths, location and identity of all existing easements;

N. The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated;

O. Proposed improvements to be shown shall include, but not be limited to:

1. The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown, and proposed private streets shall be clearly indicated,

2. The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs,

3. The location, width and purpose of all easements,

4. The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees,

5. The proposed use of each lot, approximate lot layout, and the approximate dimensions of each lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale, and the number of each lot,

6. Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use,

7. Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space,

8. The location and size of sanitary sewers, fire hydrants, water mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated,

9. A planting plan for slopes, erosion control, street trees, other landscaping and fencing,

10. The name or names of any geologist or soil engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map;

P. If the subdivider plans to develop the site in units, the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown;

Q. The department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements, or if other circumstances justify a waiver. The department may require other drawings, data, or information as deemed necessary by the department to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.030 Accompanying data and reports.
The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data and reports:

A. Environmental Review. Information shall be submitted as required by the department to allow a determination on environmental review to be made in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act.

B. Street Names. A list of potential street names for any unnamed street or alley for review by the department. This requirement does not apply to conversions.

C. Geotechnical Reports. Three copies of a preliminary soils report and engineering geology report, unless this requirement is waived by the city engineer, as provided by BMC 16.16.040.

D. Title Report. A preliminary title report, not more than six months old and acceptable to the department, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map.

E. Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the department. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.040 Geotechnical reports.
A. A preliminary soils and/or geology report may be waived by the city engineer provided the city engineer finds that, due to the knowledge the city has as to the soil and geologic conditions in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. Such knowledge would include the nature, distribution, and strength of the existing soils; the necessary grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures; and the geology of the site and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

B. If the city engineer has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils and geology reports indicate, the presence of soil or geologic conditions which, if corrective measures are not taken, would lead to structural defects, a soils and/or geologic investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the city engineer. Such soils and/or geologic investigation shall address the adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading and the effect of the soil or geologic conditions on the proposed development. The city may approve the subdivision, or portion thereof, where soils or geologic problems exist if the city determines that the recommended actions provide for acceptable procedures and design criteria for corrective measures. A condition of the issuance of any foundation permit will require that the approved recommended action be completed and certified as having been done in compliance with the report.

C. When preliminary soils and/or geology reports are prepared, final reports shall be submitted, prior to the acceptance of the improvements or the release of occupancy permits, indicating the specific actions taken pursuant to the preliminary report recommendations. Such reports shall contain complete and sufficient field data to indicate full compliance with the preliminary report or subsequent progress report recommendations as they were applied to specific areas or improvements. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.050 Street names.
Each proposed public street that is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing dedicated street shall be given the same name as the existing street. The proposed name of each other street shown on the tentative map shall be subject to approval by the city council. Where any such street forms a portion of any proposed street ordered by the council to be surveyed, opened, widened, or improved, and such street is shown on the final map, the name of such street shall be the same as the name contained in the order of the council. The words "Avenue," "Boulevard," "Place," "Way," "Court," or other designations of any street shall be spelled in full on the map, and such terms shall be approved by the city. All streets ending in a cul-de-sac shall be designated as "courts." (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.060 Department review and referral.
The tentative map shall be accepted for filing only when the map conforms to BMC 16.16.020 and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by BMC 16.16.030 and all fees and/or deposits as required by BMC 16.04.090 have been submitted and accepted by the department. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the community development director may deem necessary. The department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies and utilities which may, in turn, forward to the department their findings and recommendations. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.070 Planning commission action.
A. Notice of Public Hearings. Upon receipt of an application that is accepted as complete, the department shall set a date for a public hearing before the planning commission, provide notice as required by BMC 16.04.060 and prepare a report with recommendations. A copy of the department report shall be forwarded to the subdivider at least three working days prior to the public hearing.

B. Planning Commission Action. The planning commission shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map, and shall report its recommendation to the city council and to the subdivider within 50 days after the tentative map has been accepted for filing. The commission’s recommendation shall be accompanied, in cases of conditional approval, with a statement of the specific changes it recommends or, in cases of disapproval, with a statement of the reasons therefor. If an environmental impact report is prepared, the decision shall be made 45 days after certification of the environmental impact report. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.080 City council action.
At the next regular meeting of the city council following the receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall fix the meeting date at which the tentative map will be considered. That date shall be within 30 days thereafter, and the city council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the map within that 30-day period.

A. Factors to Be Considered. In reaching a decision upon the tentative map, the city council shall consider the effect of that decision on the housing needs of the region and balance these needs against the public service needs of its residents and available fiscal and environmental resources.

B. Approval. The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved by the city council if it makes the following findings:

1. That the proposed map is consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code;

2. That the site is physically suitable for the type of development;

3. That the site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

4. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements will not cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. (Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and finding was made that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternative identified in the environmental impact report);

5. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not cause serious public health problems; and

6. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. (In this connection the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternative easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is granted to the city council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.)

The city council may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the planning commission’s report, except conditions required by this code or by the city engineer related to public health and safety or by the city-approved policies and standards. The city council may add additional requirements as a condition of its approval.

If no action is taken by the city council within the time limits specified in this chapter, the tentative map, as filed, shall be deemed to be approved if it complies with the general plan, any applicable adopted specific plans, BMC Title 17, Zoning, and all other applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this code.

C. Denial. The tentative map shall be denied by the city council on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act or this code. The city council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

1. That the proposed map is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan, or other applicable provisions of this code;

2. That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

3. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

4. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may approve such a tentative map if an environmental impact report was prepared with respect to the project and a finding was made that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

5. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

6. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgement of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the city council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; or

7. Subject to Section 66474.4 of the Subdivision Map Act, that the land is subject to a contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965 (commencing with Section 51200 of the Government Code) and that the resulting parcels following a subdivision of the land would be too small to sustain their agricultural use. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.090 Extension of time for community development director, planning commission, or city council action.
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director, the planning commission, or the city council. A waiver of applicable time limits may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or environmental review on the same development project. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.100 Expiration.
A. The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from its approval by the city council. However, if in connection with a tentative map for which the filing of multiple final maps is authorized pursuant to BMC 16.20.020, the subdivider is made subject to a requirement of $100,000 or more to construct or improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, or if the tentative map is on property subject to a development agreement executed pursuant to BMC Title 17, then the expiration date shall be extended in accordance with Section 66452.6(a) of the Subdivision Map Act. An extension to the expiration date may also be approved as provided in BMC 16.16.110.

B. The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council.

After service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing to the community development director, request a stay in the time period for the tentative map. Within 40 days after receiving the request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be considered at a public hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within 10 days, render its decision.

C. The period of time specified in subsection (A) of this section shall not include any period of time during which the city has adopted a moratorium on processing or approving applications as provided by Section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 9, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.110 Extensions.
A. Request by Subdivider. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the department. The application and any required fee shall be filed prior to the expiration of the map and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.

B. City Council Action. The department shall review the request, determine whether a public hearing is required based on changing conditions in the area, and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the city council for approval, conditional approval, or denial at the next scheduled city council meeting. A copy of the department’s report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the city council meeting on the extension. After conducting a public hearing or reviewing the request, the city council may approve or deny the requested extension.

C. Time Limit of Extensions. The time at which the tentative map expires may be extended by the city council for a period or periods up to but not exceeding a total of three years. Upon application of the subdivider to extend the map, the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application for extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 10, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.16.120 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
A. Minor amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval may be approved by the department upon application by the subdivider or on the department’s own initiative, provided:

1. No units, building sites, or structures are added;

2. Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval;

3. There are no resulting violations of this code.

B. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved or conditionally approved tentative map and certified by the community development director. Amendments to the tentative map conditions of approval which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the city council for its approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this title. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map, but extensions may be granted under the provisions of BMC 16.16.110. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.20
FINAL SUBDIVISION MAPS – FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
Sections:

16.20.010    General.

16.20.020    Phasing.

16.20.030    Survey required.

16.20.040    Form.

16.20.050    Contents.

16.20.060    Preliminary submittal for city approval.

16.20.070    Review by city engineer.

16.20.080    Approval by director of public works or city engineer.

16.20.090    Approval by city council.

16.20.100    Limitation on denial by city council.

16.20.110    Filing with the county recorder.

16.20.010 General.
A. The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

B. The final map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.020 Phasing.
A. Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if (1) the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, notifies the community development director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map; or (2) after filing of the tentative map, the community development director and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. In submitting such a request, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps.

B. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.030 Survey required.
A. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1:10,000 for field closures and 1:20,000 for calculated closures.

B. At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments, conforming with the standards of Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code, so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.040 Form.
The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A. The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

B. The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 26 inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals 100 feet, or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets, including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth-inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.050 Contents.
The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as follows:

A. Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line, one-sixteenth-inch thick, in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.

B. Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title: “City of Benicia, Solano County, California.”

C. Certificates and Acknowledgements. All certificates and acknowledgements shall be made as required by the Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66544 et seq.) and shall appear only once on the cover sheet.

D. Scale, North Point and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings based on Zone II of the California Coordinates, and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer.

E. Linear, Angular and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.

F. Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at or on city engineer approved offsets, and the following locations:

1. The intersection of street centerlines;

2. Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines;

3. At other locations as may be required by the city engineer.

G. Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the city engineer.

H. Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; and if no subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page number for the last record owner.

I. City Boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated.

J. Street Names. The names of all streets, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.

K. Easements and Dedications.

1. Easements and dedications for roads or streets, paths, water mains, storm water drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

2. The city may accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.

3. All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder’s serial number and date, or book and page of official records.

4. Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created.

5. The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer.

L. Open Space Areas. Open space areas, including greenbelts and open space corridors, may be shown, subject to the approval of the city. Such areas shall be dedicated as open space easements unless otherwise specified in the approval of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall agree to allow such land to be included within an open space maintenance assessment district if proposed by the city. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.060 Preliminary submittal for city approval.
The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following data, plans, reports, and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer and, where applicable, the city attorney:

A. Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by BMC 16.36.060;

B. Soils Report. A soils report prepared in accordance with this title;

C. Title Report. A title report not more than six months old, showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map;

D. Tax Certificate. A certificate from the county tax collector stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond or other adequate form of security assuring payments of all taxes that are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county;

E. Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deeds for off-site easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

F. Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines;

G. Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains;

H. Governing Documents. For a cooperative apartment project, condominium, stock cooperative, or conversion, the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions containing the provisions described in Section 1353 of the Civil Code, and all other governing documents for the subdivision, are as appropriate pursuant to Section 1363 of the Civil Code; for all other subdivisions any declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions proposed in connection therewith. All governing documents shall be subject to review and approval by the community development director and city attorney;

I. Guarantee of Title. A guarantee of title, in form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney, shall be issued by a competent title company to and for the benefit and protection of the city and shall be continued complete up to the instant of recording of the final map, guaranteeing that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being offered for dedication, and all acknowledgements thereto, appear on the proper certificates and are correctly shown on the map, both as to consents as to the making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary;

J. Improvement Agreement. In the event drainage structures, grading, paving, or other required improvements have not been completed prior to the presentation of the final map, an agreement in accordance with the requirements of BMC 16.36.070 shall be filed for the improvement thereof. The subdivider shall secure the performance of the agreement in accordance with the requirements of BMC 16.36.080;

K. Liability Agreement and Insurance.

1. A hold-harmless agreement acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney obligating the subdivider to hold the city and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider and/or the subdivider’s subcontractors in connection with the subdivision,

2. A certificate of insurance or contractual liability endorsement acceptable to the city attorney naming the city as additional insured and reporting to the city the amount of insurance the subdivider carries for the subdivider’s own liability for damages or claims for damages for personal injury or death which arise from the operations of the subdivider or his subcontractors in connection with the subdivision,

3. The city attorney, in consultation with the city manager or his designee, may waive the requirement for a certificate of insurance or contractual liability endorsement if evidence satisfactory to the city attorney is submitted indicating the subdivider’s inability to obtain such a certificate or endorsement naming the city as an additional insured,

4. Appeals. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by the city attorney’s or other city officer’s action under subsection (K)(2) of this section may file an appeal in writing pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC;

L. Other Information. Any additional data, reports, or information as required by the city engineer or city attorney. (Ord. 07-52 § 1; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.070 Review by city engineer.
The city engineer shall review the final map, and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.080 Approval by director of public works or city engineer.
The subdivider shall submit to the director of public works or city engineer the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing and on any duplicates. Upon receipt of all required certificates and submittals, the director of public works or city engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original map to the city clerk. (Ord. 91-17 N.S. § 1, 1991; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.090 Approval by city council.
A. The final map approved by the city engineer as complying with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall be filed with the city council for approval after all required certificates have been signed. The date the map shall be deemed filed with the city council is the date on which the city council receives the map. The city council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security before approving the final map.

B. If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the mayor to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make its recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted.

C. The city council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land for which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. In this case, the city shall follow the procedure according to BMC 16.36.020(I). (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.100 Limitation on denial by city council.
The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if the city has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the city council finds that the final map is in compliance with the requirements of the general plan, any applicable adopted specific plans, BMC Title 17, Zoning, the Subdivision Map Act, this title, the tentative map and all conditions thereof, and all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.20.110 Filing with the county recorder.
Upon approval of the final map by the city council, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the map, or have an authorized agent transmit the map, to the county recorder. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.24
SUBDIVISIONS OF FOUR OR FEWER PARCELS
Sections:

16.24.010    General.

16.24.020    Form and contents, accompanying data and reports.

16.24.030    Department review.

16.24.040    Action by community development director.

16.24.050    Extension of time for community development director action.

16.24.060    Appeals of community development director action.

16.24.070    Expiration and extensions.

16.24.080    Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.

16.24.090    Waiver of parcel map requirements.

16.24.100    Parcel maps.

16.24.010 General.
The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative maps for four or fewer parcels shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.020 Form and contents, accompanying data and reports.
The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents shall comply and be consistent with the requirements of BMC 16.16.020 and the accompanying data and reports shall comply with and be consistent with BMC 16.16.030 through 16.16.050, inclusive. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.030 Department review.
The tentative map shall be accepted for review in accord with the provisions of BMC 16.16.060. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.040 Action by community development director.
A. Upon receipt of an application that is accepted as complete by the city, the department shall prepare a report and set the matter for a public hearing before the community development director in accord with the provisions of BMC 16.04.060.

B. The community development director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map within 50 days after the tentative map has been accepted for filing. The tentative map may be approved or conditionally approved by the community development director if he makes the findings set forth in BMC 16.16.080(B). The director shall deny approval of the map if he makes any of the findings contained in BMC 16.16.080(C). The director’s action shall be reported to the subdivider within 50 days of the date the map is accepted for filing. (Ord. 92-16 N.S. § 6(1), 1992; Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 11, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.050 Extension of time for community development director action.
Any applicable time limits for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director. A waiver of applicable time limits may be required to permit concurrent processing of related project approvals or environmental review on the same development project. (Ord. 92-16 N.S. § 6(2), 1992; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.060 Appeals of community development director action.
A. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected by the community development director’s action under BMC 16.24.040 may file a written appeal in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. Within 10 days following the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall render its decision. The planning commission may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the community development director that are the subject of the appeal, and may make any findings that are consistent with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title.

B. If the planning commission fails to act upon an appeal within the time limits set forth in this chapter, the tentative map shall be deemed to be approved or conditionally approved by the community development director insofar as it complies with the Subdivision Map Act, this title and this code. (Ord. 07-53 § 1; Ord. 92-16 N.S. § 6(3), 1992; Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 12, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.070 Expiration and extensions.
The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 24 months from its approval, unless this time period is extended by the provisions of BMC 16.16.100 or 16.16.110. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date for action in accord with the provisions of BMC 16.16.110. The community development director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the request for an extension. The subdivider or any interested person or agency may appeal the action in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-53 § 2; Ord. 92-16 N.S. § 6(4), 1992; Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 13, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.080 Amendments to approved or conditionally approved tentative map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved tentative map or conditions of approval shall be made in accordance with BMC 16.16.120; provided, that amendments which, in the opinion of the department, are not minor, shall be presented to the planning commission for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with the provisions for processing a tentative map as set forth in this title. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.090 Waiver of parcel map requirements.
A. The community development director may, at his or her discretion, waive the requirements for a parcel map for the following:

1. Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgements or decrees;

2. Division of property resulting from conveyance of land or interest therein to or from the city, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.;

3. Division of property which has been merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the city;

4. Any other division of property which would otherwise require a parcel map.

B. The community development director, in consultation with the city engineer, shall make a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to: (1) area; (2) the city’s standard engineering specifications for improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection; and (3) other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this code.

C. Upon the waiver of the parcel map requirement pursuant to this section, the department shall file with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided, in accordance with BMC 16.52.030(B), and a plat map showing the division. The certificate shall include a certificate by the county tax collector in accordance with Division 8 of the Subdivision Map Act.

D. A waiver by the community development director may be conditioned to provide for payment by the subdivider of parkland dedication, drainage, and other fees by a method approved by the community development director. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.24.100 Parcel maps.
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this section.

A. Survey Required. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1:10,000 for field closures and 1:20,000 for calculated closures.

B. Form and Contents. The form and contents of the parcel map shall conform to the final map form and contents requirements of BMC 16.20.040 and 16.20.050.

C. Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by BMC 16.20.060.

The city engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision does not need compliance with the requirements of BMC 16.20.060.

D. Review and Approval by Director of Public Works or City Engineer. The director of public works or city engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the public works director or city engineer. The subdivider shall submit to the city engineer the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. The city clerk or authorized agent shall, subject to the provisions of Section 66464 of the Subdivision Map Act, transmit the approved parcel map to the county recorder.

The director of public works or city engineer shall approve the parcel map if it complies with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, the tentative map and all conditions thereof. (Ord. 91-17 N.S. § 2, 1991; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.28
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.28.010    Authority and purpose.

16.28.020    Application.

16.28.030    Filing and processing.

16.28.040    Fees.

16.28.050    Expiration.

16.28.060    Rights of vesting tentative map.

16.28.070    Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.

16.28.080    Development inconsistent with zoning.

16.28.090    Applications inconsistent with current policies.

16.28.010 Authority and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter, enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 of the Subdivision Map Act (the Vesting Tentative Map Statute) is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of this statute. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.020 Application.
A. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 88-8 N.S. § 4, 1988; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.030 Filing and processing.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:

A. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

B. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, the subdivider shall also provide the following additional information regarding the project:

1. A master plan in accordance with the requirements of BMC 17.68.060;

2. An economic analysis for the subdivision, including a cost-revenue analysis;

3. Any other studies deemed necessary due to the particular nature of the subdivision. (Ord. 88-8 N.S. § 5, 1988; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.040 Fees.
A. Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay all required fees and/or deposits for checking and processing maps, plans and reports as established by city council resolution.

B. The amount of all other fees required by this title for the development may be determined at the time an application for the building permit is made. (Ord. 17-10 § 20; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.050 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period and shall be subject to the same extensions established by BMC 16.16.100 and 16.24.070 for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 88-8 N.S. § 6, 1988; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.060 Rights of vesting tentative map.
A. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

B. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are determined:

1. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

2. The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

C. The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in BMC 16.28.050. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

1. An initial time period of two years beyond the recording of the final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this two-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of said final maps or parcel maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in BMC 16.28.050 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded.

2. The two-year initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed.

3. A subdivider may apply to the city council, in the case of final maps, or to the planning commission, in the case of parcel maps, for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If a parcel map extension is denied by the planning commission, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of the permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 07-54 § 1; Ord. 88-8 N.S. §§ 7, 8, 9, 10, 1988; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.070 Amendment to approved vesting tentative map.
Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be made in accord with BMC 16.16.120 or 16.24.080, as the case may be. (Ord. 88-8 N.S. § 11, 1988; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.080 Development inconsistent with zoning.
A. Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with BMC Title 17, Zoning, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning title to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in zoning is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding BMC 16.28.060(A), confer a vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in zoning, as approved.

B. The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in BMC 16.28.060(C). (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.28.090 Applications inconsistent with current policies.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in BMC 16.28.060(A) and 16.28.080, and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.32
DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
Sections:

16.32.010  Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.

16.32.020  Waiver of direct access rights.

16.32.030  Dedications.

16.32.035  Rejection of all offers of dedication.

16.32.040  Parkland dedication.

16.32.050  School site dedication.

16.32.060  Reservations.

16.32.070  Local transit facilities.

16.32.080  Bridges and major thoroughfares.

16.32.090  Supplemental improvement capacity.

16.32.100  Drainage fees.

16.32.110  Solar access easements.

16.32.120  Other public facilities.

16.32.010 Dedication of streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way or easements.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer to dedicate, all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for improvements required by Chapter 16.36 BMC, including streets, alleys, other public rights-of-way, access rights and abutters’ rights. In addition, the subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all required improvements in accord with Chapter 16.36 BMC. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.020 Waiver of direct access rights.
The city may require as a condition of approval of a tentative map that dedications or offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property within or abutting the subdivision. Upon acceptance of the dedication, such waiver shall be reflected in an appropriate title document, which shall be recorded and shall become effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.030 Dedications.
All dedications of property to the city for public purposes shall be made in fee title, except that, at the city’s discretion, the grant of an easement may be taken for the following purposes: open space easements, emergency access easements, scenic easements or public utility easements. All dedications in fee and grants of easements shall be free of liens and encumbrances except for those which the city, in its discretion, determines would not conflict with the intended ownership and use. The city may elect to accept an irrevocable offer of dedication in lieu of dedication of fee title. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.035 Rejection of all offers of dedication.
Unless, as to any given dedication of land and/or improvements, the improvements related thereto have been satisfactorily completed and certified as such by the city engineer, at the time the city council approves a final map or the city engineer approves a final parcel map, the council shall also reject all offers of dedication or dedications of land and/or improvements made part of the final map and the city engineer shall reject all dedications of or offers of dedication that are made by a statement on the parcel map. The city clerk shall certify or state on the map the action taken by the city council or the city engineer. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 14, 1989).

16.32.040 Parkland dedication.
A. General. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act and the general police power of the city and is for the purpose of providing such additional park and recreational facilities and open space as is appropriate pursuant to the general plan of the city. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this chapter are in accordance with the policies, principles and standards for park and recreational facilities contained in the general plan.

B. Requirements. As a condition of approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. The land dedicated or the fees paid, or both, shall be used for community and neighborhood parks and facilities in such a manner that the locations of such parks and facilities bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision generating such dedication or fees, or both. Fees required under this section shall be established by the city council by resolution. (See Resolution No. 02-147, 9/3/02).

C. General Standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and welfare require that five acres of property for each 1,000 persons residing within the city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes.

D. Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the general plan and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision and is reasonably related to serving the present and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for park and recreation facilities sufficient in size and topography to meet that purpose. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula:

Acres of Parkland

=

0.005 Acres*

x

Average No. of Persons

Dwelling Unit

Persons

Dwelling Unit

* Based on five acres of parkland per 1,000 population

The following parkland dedication table has been established pursuant to Section 66477(b) of the California Government Code:

Dwelling Type

Average No. Persons/Dwelling Unit

Acres per Dwelling Unit

Single-family

3.0

0.015

Duplexes and low-density multifamily

2.5

0.013

Medium- and high-density multifamily

2.0

0.010

For the purposes of this section, the number of proposed dwelling units shall be determined as follows: In areas zoned for one dwelling unit per lot or parcel, the number of dwelling units shall equal the number of parcels indicated on the tentative map. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for multiple dwelling units per parcel, and an application for concurrent processing of a development project under BMC Title 17, Zoning, has been accepted as complete, the number of dwelling units shall equal the number of units proposed for development. If no such application has been submitted, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum number of dwelling units allowed under that zone. For residential condominium projects, the number of dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units on the tentative map.

The term "new dwelling unit" does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the tentative map is approved.

Lands to be dedicated or reserved for park and/or recreational purposes shall be suitable in the opinion of the community development director and the director of parks and recreation in location, topography, environmental characteristics and development potential as related to the intended use. The primary intent of this chapter shall be construed to provide the land for functional recreation units of local or neighborhood service, including but not limited to: tot lots, play lots, playgrounds, neighborhood parks, playfields, community or district parks, and other specialized recreational facilities that may serve the family group and also senior citizens’ activities. Principal consideration shall be given therefore to lands that offer:

1. A variety of recreational potential for all age groups;

2. Recreational opportunities within walking distance from residents’ homes;

3. Possibility for expansion or connection with school grounds;

4. Integration with hiking, riding and bicycle trails, natural stream reserves and other open space;

5. Coordination with all other park systems;

6. Access to at least one existing or proposed public street.

E. Formula for Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.

1. General Formula. If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the general plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, at the city’s discretion, either dedicate land in the amount provided in subsection (D) of this section or pay a fee in lieu of dedication equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in subsection (D) of this section and in an amount determined in accord with the provisions of subsection (G) of this section.

2. Fees in Lieu of Land – 50 Parcels or Fewer. If the proposed subdivision contains 50 parcels or fewer and has no park or recreational facility, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the park or recreational facilities required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in subsection (D) of this section and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of subsection (G) of this section.

The city may elect to accept a voluntary offer of dedication of land in lieu of all or a portion of the required fee, consistent with the provisions of subsection (H) of this section.

3. Use of Money. The money collected shall be used, in accordance with the schedule developed pursuant to subsection (K) of this section, for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision, including the purchase of necessary land and/or improvement of such land for park or recreational purposes. The money shall be committed within five years after payment thereof or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the money is not committed, it shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of each lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision.

F. Criteria for Requiring Both Dedication and Fee. If the proposed subdivision contains more than 50 parcels, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu of dedication in accordance with the following:

1. When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the general plan as the site for a local park or recreational facility, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (G) of this section shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to subsection (D) of this section.

2. When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such portion shall be dedicated, and a fee, computed according to subsection (G) of this section, shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated according to this section.

G. Amount of Fee in Lieu of Parkland Dedication. When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of parkland dedication, the amount of the fee shall be based upon the estimated fair market value of the land being subdivided and the estimated fair market value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated according to subsection (D) of this section. Such fees shall be based on a fee schedule adopted by the city council by resolution. (See Resolution No. 02-147, 9/3/02).

If the subdivider objects to the fair market value determination used in the fee schedule, the subdivider may request the city engineer to obtain two written appraisal reports prepared and signed by qualified real estate appraisers acceptable to the city. All costs required to obtain such appraisals shall be borne by the subdivider. The appraisals shall be made immediately prior to filing of the final map or parcel map. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer of the expected filing date at least six weeks prior to filing the final map. For purposes of determining the fair market value of a buildable acre in the proposed subdivision, the appraisers shall consider, but not necessarily be limited to:

1. Approval of and conditions of the tentative subdivision map;

2. The Benicia general plan and zoning for the area;

3. The location and site characteristics of the property; and

4. Off-site and on-site improvements facilitating use of the property.

The determined fair market value shall be the higher of the two appraisals.

H. Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication, or elects to require the payment of a fee in lieu of, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:

1. Policies, standards and principles for park and recreation facilities in the general plan;

2. Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

3. Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

4. Feasibility of dedication;

5. Compatibility of dedication with the general plan;

6. Availability of previously acquired park property.

The determination by the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination, shall be final and conclusive.

I. Credit for Improvements and Private Open Space. If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment location thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land required by this section. The value shall be determined by the city engineer and shall be subject to appeal to the city council. If appealed, the burden of proof shall lie with the subdivider.

Planned developments, real estate developments, stock cooperatives, and condominiums shall receive partial credit, not to exceed 50 percent, against the amount of land required to be dedicated or the amount of the fee imposed pursuant to this section, for the value of private open space within the development which is usable for active recreational uses, if the city council, on the recommendation of the parks and recreation commission, finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that the following standards are met:

1. That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required by BMC Title 17, Zoning, shall not be included in the computation of the private open space;

2. That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions;

3. That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property, and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor;

4. That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and

5. That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accord with the provisions of the general plan.

J. Procedure.

1. At the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, the city council shall determine, after a report and recommendation from the parks and recreation department, whether land, in-lieu fees, or a combination of land and fees shall be dedicated and/or paid by the subdivider.

2. The city council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the parks and recreation department.

3. The recommendation of the parks and recreation department shall include the following:

a. The amount of land required; or

b. That a fee be charged in lieu of land; or

c. That a combination of land and a fee be required; and

d. The location of the parkland and, where appropriate, the siting and conceptual design of the park facilities appurtenant thereto, to be dedicated or used in lieu of fees; and

e. The approximate time when the development of the park or recreation facility shall commence.

4. At the time of the recording of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the city. At the discretion of the city, fees may be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for any structure in the subdivision.

5. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to the approval of the final map or parcel map and, if approved, shall be recorded concurrently with the final map or parcel map.

K. Schedule of Use. At the time of the approval of the final map or parcel map, the city shall develop a schedule specifying how, when and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop or rehabilitate park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision.

L. Not Applicable to Certain Subdivisions. The provisions of this section do not apply to: (1) commercial or industrial subdivisions; or (2) to condominium projects or stock cooperatives that consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added.

M. Fees in Effect at Time Required to Be Paid. The amount of the fees to be paid under this chapter shall be the amount of the fees in effect at the time the fees are required to be paid. (See Resolution No. 02-147, 9/3/02). (Ord. 92-7 N.S. §§ 2, 3, 1992; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.050 School site dedication.
A. General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within one or more school districts maintaining an elementary school shall dedicate to the school district or districts such lands as the city, in consultation with the school district, shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon elementary schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service.

B. Procedure. The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within 30 days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time, before, concurrently with, or up to 60 days after the filing of the final map or parcel map on any portion of the subdivision.

C. Payments to Subdivider for School Site Dedication. The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the divided land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

1. The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

2. The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

3. Any other costs incurred by the subdivider from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into a binding commitment to accept the dedication that pertain to maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

D. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than 10 years prior to the filing of the tentative map. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.060 Reservations.
A. General. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.

B. Standards for Reservation of Land. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library, or other public use is shown on the general plan or an adopted specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the policies and standards contained in the general plan or the adopted specific plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically infeasible. The reserved area shall be consistent with the general plan or the adopted specific plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period.

C. Procedure. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements unless the period of time is extended by mutual agreement.

D. Payment to Subdivider. The purchase price for the reserved area shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area.

E. Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement in accordance with this section, the reservation of the area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.070 Local transit facilities.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate, or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of, land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as shelters, benches, bus turnouts, park-and-ride facilities and similar items which directly benefit the residents of the subdivision, if:

A. The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for 200 dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown on the general plan, or contains 100 acres or more; and

B. The city finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be made available to the subdivision.(Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.080 Bridges and major thoroughfares.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to make provision for assessing and collecting fees as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges or major thoroughfares pursuant to Section 66484 of the Subdivision Map Act, and in order to implement the circulation element of the general plan and, in the case of bridges, the transportation provisions thereof.

B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

1. "Area of benefit" shall mean the geographic area that benefits from the improved accessibility attributable to construction of a bridge or major thoroughfare. This includes lands with direct and indirect access to the new transportation facility.

2. "Construction" means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction.

3. "Major thoroughfare" means a roadway as shown on the circulation element of the general plan whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system.

C. Payment of Fees Generally.

1. Prior to filing a final map which includes land within an area of benefit established pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider shall pay, or cause to be paid, any fees established and apportioned to such property pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing major thoroughfares, including related improvements such as traffic signals, landscaping, and medians.

2. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction on any property within an area of benefit established pursuant to this section, the applicant for such permit shall pay, or cause to be paid, any fees established and apportioned pursuant to this section for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing bridges over waterways, railways, freeways or canyons or constructing major thoroughfares, including related improvements, such as traffic signals, landscaping and medians, unless such fees have been paid pursuant to subsection (C)(1) of this section.

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section:

a. Payment of bridge fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.

b. Payment of major thoroughfare fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfares are in addition to, or a reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit.

D. Consideration in Lieu of Fees. Upon application by the subdivider or applicant for a building permit, the city council, in the case of subdivisions of five or more parcels, or the community development director, in the case of subdivisions of four or less parcels, may accept consideration in lieu of the payment of fees required pursuant to this section; provided, that the city council or community development director, as the case may be, first finds, upon recommendation of the public works director, that the substitute consideration has a value equal to or greater than the fee; and provided further, that the substitute consideration is in a form acceptable to the city council or community development director, as the case may be.

E. Public Hearing. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, a duly noticed public hearing shall be held by the city council, at which time the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit and fee apportionment, and the fee to be collected, shall be established.

F. Amount. The amount of the fees and the areas of benefit established pursuant to this section may be established by ordinance or resolution.

G. Exemptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (F) of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required for:

1. The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, that the total value, as determined by the building official, of all such alteration, enlargement or construction completed within any one-year period does not exceed one-half of the current market value, as determined by the building official, of all existing buildings on such lot or parcel of land, and the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction.

2. The following accessory buildings and structures: private garages, children’s playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings.

H. Protest.

1. At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare, any owner of property to be benefited by the improvement may file a protest against the proposed bridge facility or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be benefited by the improvements or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify such property, and, if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protest or objections shall be considered. Any protest may be withdrawn, in writing, by the owners making such protests, at any time prior to the conclusion of the public hearing.

2. If there is a written protest filed with the city clerk by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one-half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of that written protest, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement, or that portion thereof so protested against, under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.090 Supplemental improvement capacity.
A. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city may impose a requirement that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. However, when such supplemental size, capacity, number or length is solely for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, the city shall, subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements.

B. The city council shall determine the method for payment of the costs required by a reimbursement agreement which may include but is not limited to the establishment and maintenance of local benefit districts for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited.

C. No charge, area of benefit or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing is held thereon by the city council and the city council finds that the charge, area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof.

D. In addition to the notice required by BMC 16.04.060(E), written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time (10 days prior to the date established for the hearing). (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.100 Drainage fees.
Reserved. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.110 Solar access easements.
A. As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city may impose a requirement that the subdivider dedicate easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the subdivision shall have the right to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar energy system. In establishing such easements the city shall consider the feasibility, contour, configuration of the parcel to be divided, and cost. Required easements shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or a structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time such tentative map is filed.

B. At the time of tentative map approval, the community development director or the planning commission, as may be the case, shall specify: (1) the standards for determining the exact dimensions and locations of such easements; (2) any restrictions on vegetation, buildings, and other objects that would obstruct the passage of sunlight through the easement; and (3) conditions, if any, under which an easement may be revised or eliminated.

C. This section is not applicable to conversion projects. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.32.120 Other public facilities.
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate land, pay fees, or both, for fire stations, library sites, child day care, public art or any other public facilities pursuant to, and in order to implement, the provisions of the general plan regarding such facilities. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.36
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.36.010    General.

16.36.020    Improvements required.

16.36.030    Deferred improvement agreements.

16.36.040    Design.

16.36.050    Access.

16.36.060    Improvement plans.

16.36.070    Improvement agreement.

16.36.080    Improvement security.

16.36.090    Construction and inspection.

16.36.100    Completion of improvements.

16.36.110    Acceptance of improvements.

16.36.010 General.
A. The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, on-site and off-site, in accordance with standard engineering specifications and other approved standards as provided by this title.

B. No final map shall be presented to the council, or parcel map to the city engineer, for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do the work. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 15, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.020 Improvements required.
A. General. All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or by city ordinance or resolution, together with, but not limited to, the required improvements set forth below shall be required of all subdivisions. Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, waiver of parcel map, or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map.

B. Frontage Improvements. The frontage of each lot shall be improved to its ultimate adopted geometric section, including street structural section, curbs, sidewalks, driveway approaches and transitions.

C. Storm Drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development. Off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement.

D. Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system.

E. Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system.

F. Utilities. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cablevision facilities.

G. Underground Utilities.

1. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, all existing and proposed utilities within the subdivision, and along frontage streets, shall be placed underground, except those facilities exempted by Public Utilities Commission regulations. Undergrounding shall be completed as part of the construction of the subdivision improvements. Undergrounding shall be required for any overhead lines located on the subdivision side of the street for all peripheral streets.

2. For all subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, undergrounding of utilities along the subdivision side of all frontage streets shall be required in accordance with subsection (G)(1) of this section; however, the subdivider may request and the city engineer may recommend the grant of a deferral based upon the following criteria:

a. The absence of similar improvements in the surrounding area;

b. The likelihood of future development within the surrounding area;

c. The presence of physical constraints which make undergrounding impractical; or

d. The significance of the visual impact of overhead utilities within the surrounding area.

The city engineer shall include a recommendation for deferral within the conditions of approval recommended to the planning commission. If a deferral is granted, the subdivider shall enter into a deferred improvement agreement to complete the undergrounding at a later date, as recommended by the city engineer and confirmed by the planning commission, or shall enter into a consent agreement for the formation of an assessment district to complete the undergrounding requirement. The deferred improvement agreement and/or consent agreement shall be made conditions of approval of the tentative map.

H. Other Improvements. Other improvements such as street lights, fire hydrants, signs, street trees and shrubs, monuments, and smoke detectors, or fees in lieu of any of the foregoing, shall also be required as determined by the city engineer in accord with this code and city standards and specifications.

I. Off-Site Improvements. If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the city has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the city shall, within 120 days of recording the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land. If the city fails to meet the 120-day time limit, the condition for the construction shall be waived.

Prior to approval of the final map, the city may require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time the city acquires title or an interest in the land. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 16, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.030 Deferred improvement agreements.
A. Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels. The frontage improvements along existing peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the city engineer. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider and/or owner of the real property shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form acceptable to the city engineer and city attorney for the installation of all frontage improvements at a time in the future as specified by the city. The agreement shall provide:

1. Construction of improvements shall commence within 90 days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city, or as mutually agreed upon in writing;

2. That in the event of a default by the subdivider and/or owners, the city is authorized to cause construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the subdivider and/or owner, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid;

3. That the agreement shall be recorded with the county recorder at the expense of the subdivider and/or owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of title to the real property of the obligations set forth therein, and shall also constitute a lien in such amount necessary to fully reimburse the city, including interest as provided in subsection (A)(2) of this section, subject to foreclosure in the event of a default in payment;

4. That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the subdivider and/or owner, the subdivider and/or owner agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

5. That the terms “subdivider” and “owner” shall include, respectively, not only the subdivider and the present owner of the real property but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns thereof, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it.

The agreement shall not relieve the subdivider or owner from any other specific requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this code or law. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this title and all applicable provisions of this code in effect at the time of construction.

B. Remainders. Where a remainder is made part of a final or parcel map, the subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city to construct improvements within the remainder at some future date and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder. The improvements shall be at the subdivider’s expense. In the absence of such an agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of the remainder, upon a finding that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of:

1. The public health and safety; or

2. The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.040 Design.
A. General. The design and layout of all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards, standard engineering specifications, the Subdivision Map Act and applicable provisions of this code.

B. Energy Conservation.

1. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, excluding conversions, shall provide to the extent feasible for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision.

2. For the purpose of this subsection, “feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

3. Compliance with this provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities, or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed.

C. Cable Television Service. A subdivider for a residential project, excluding conversions, is required to provide one or more franchised or licensed operators serving the area an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision.

D. Water Conservation. All applicable requirements of the city water conservation plan adopted by the city shall be incorporated into the design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, excluding conversions. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.050 Access.
A. All lots or parcels created shall have access to a public street improved to city standards. Private streets shall not normally be permitted. However, if the city council, in the case of subdivisions of five or more parcels, or the planning commission, in the case of subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created with access to private streets, such a development may be approved. The subdivider shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade, and material specifications of any proposed private street, the topography and means of access to each lot, and the drainage and sewage of the lots served by such private street. Construction of the private street, as approved by the city engineer, shall be completed prior to the completion of the construction and/or occupancy of the lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide a feasible method for the maintenance of such private streets.

B. Reserve strips or nonaccess at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required by the city. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 17, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.060 Improvement plans.
A. General. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California, and shall conform to the standard engineering specifications of the city. Improvement plans shall include, but not be limited to, grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities.

B. Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond or other security estimates and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California and in a form approved by the city engineer.

C. Review by the City Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans and all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with any required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider.

D. Approval by the City Engineer.

1. After completing any required revisions, the subdivider shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for signature.

2. Upon finding that any required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances and plans, design requirements and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider.

3. Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the gas, electric, telephone and cable television service construction plans.

4. Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider’s engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map.

E. Revision to Approved Plan.

1. By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer, or authorized representative, and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable to the city engineer and consistent with the tentative map, the originals shall be submitted to the city engineer’s office for initialing.

The originals shall be returned to the subdivider and revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the city engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and approved by the city engineer.

2. By City Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect the public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider. The subdivider shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the city engineer for initialing within the time specified by the city engineer.

Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the city engineer.

Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.

The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer pursuant to Chapter 1.44 BMC.

3. Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the city for the checking of plans and calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider in accord with the schedule of fees adopted in accord with BMC 16.04.090. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised plans and applied toward the actual costs. (Ord. 07-55 § 1; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.070 Improvement agreement.
The improvement agreement shall be prepared and signed by the city engineer and approved as to form by the city attorney. The agreement shall provide for:

A. Construction of all improvements, including any required off-site improvements, according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the city engineer;

B. Completion of improvements within the time specified by BMC 16.36.100;

C. Right of the city to modify plans and specifications in writing to the subdivider;

D. Warranty by the subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties;

E. Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city’s resolution;

F. Execution of a deferred improvement agreement and/or consent agreement for underground utility improvements as required by the conditions of approval of the tentative map;

G. Improvement security as required by this chapter;

H. Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and their causes;

I. Release and indemnification of the city from all liability incurred in connection with the development and payment of all reasonable attorneys’ fees that the city may incur because of any legal action or other proceeding arising from the development;

J. Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by city ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the city engineer;

K. Right of the city to withhold occupancy permits until completion of improvements;

L. Any other provisions required by the city as reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes and provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this code, including reimbursement provisions for supplemental improvement capacity as provided by BMC 16.32.090. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 18, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.080 Improvement security.
A. General.

1. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, for which security is required, shall be secured in accord with Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act and as provided below.

2. No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been received and approved.

B. Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or a combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city:

1. A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties. The form of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 66499.4 of the Subdivision Map Act;

2. A deposit, either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys;

3. An irrevocable instrument of credit or letter of credit from one or more financial institutions regulated by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment and will only be released upon receipt of written instructions from the city;

4. Any other comparable form of security, acceptable to the city, as provided in Section 66499 of the Subdivision Map Act.

C. Amount of Security. A performance bond or other security in the amount of 100 percent of the total estimated construction cost, to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements, shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of 50 percent of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee payment to subdivider’s contractors, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the city in enforcing the obligations secured.

The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for:

1. Not less than five percent nor more than 10 percent of the total construction costs for contingencies;

2. Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction;

3. All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation.

D. Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit with the city an amount equal to one percent of the total estimated construction cost. This deposit shall be credited toward the amount of security required under subsection (C) of this section. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider, contractor or subcontractors that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unexpended amount will be returned to the subdivider at the time all bonds and other security are released.

E. Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements against any defective work or labor done or defective materials used in the performance of the improvements throughout the warranty period, which shall be the period of one year following completion and acceptance of the improvements. The amount of the warranty security shall not be less than 10 percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond, which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period.

F. Reduction in Performance Security. The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than 10 percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. If the requirement for construction of any off-site improvements is waived in accord with BMC 16.36.020(I), the city engineer shall authorize a reduction in improvement security for the proportional value of such off-site improvements. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, this code or the improvement agreement.

G. Release of Improvement Security.

1. Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. If a warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released 12 months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies.

2. Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment, may, six months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the city, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the city council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all claims and obligations for which the security was given.

3. Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period, provided:

a. All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected.

b. Not less than 12 months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city.

H. Affordable Housing Subdivisions. The following provision shall only apply to affordable housing projects as proposed by nonprofit corporations described in subdivision (c) of Section 66499.3 of the California Government Code. For affordable housing subdivision projects, the amount of security to guarantee the performance of any act or agreement may, by resolution of the city council, be in any amount not inconsistent with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66499.3. (Ord. 00-8; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.090 Construction and inspection.
A. The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard engineering specifications and all other plans and specifications of the city.

B. Construction shall not commence until all required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may authorize grading of the subdivision prior to approval of all improvement plans, subject to the requirements of Chapter 15.04 BMC. All improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the city’s approved specifications. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.100 Completion of improvements.
A. Subdivisions of Five or More Parcels.

1. The improvements for subdivisions of five or more parcels shall be completed by the subdivider within 24 months, or a time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed 36 months, from the recording of the final map, unless the extension is granted by the city council.

2. Improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit within the subdivision. However, if a portion of the improvements are completed and have been inspected and approved by the city engineer, the city engineer may authorize final building inspection and issuance of an occupancy permit for that portion of the subdivision for which the required improvements have been inspected and approved.

3. Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may, by resolution of the city council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the security or securities shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs.

B. Subdivision of Four or Fewer Parcels. The completion of improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within the subdivision is applied for. The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified date by the city when the completion of the improvements is found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the city engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Generally, improvements shall be completed prior to final building inspection or the issuance of an occupancy permit for any unit within the subdivision. If a portion of the improvements are completed and have been inspected and approved by the city engineer, the city engineer may authorize final building inspection and issuance of an occupancy permit for that portion of the subdivision for which the required improvements have been inspected and approved.

C. Extensions.

1. The completion date may be extended by the city council, for subdivisions of five or more parcels, or by the city engineer, for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, upon written request by the subdivider and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than 30 days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement.

2. The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the city. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the agreement shall be prepared and signed by the city engineer, approved as to form by the city attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety, and transmitted to the city council for its consideration. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. For subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, the same procedure shall be followed, except that the agreement shall be considered by the city engineer and, if approved, executed by the city engineer on behalf of the city.

3. In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required:

a. Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer;

b. Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates;

c. Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund.

The city council or city engineer, as the case may be, may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements.

The costs incurred by the city in processing the agreement shall be paid by the subdivider at actual cost. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 19, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.36.110 Acceptance of improvements.
A. General. When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and record drawings of the improvements submitted, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city for acceptance. The completed improvements for all subdivisions shall be inspected by, and, if satisfactorily completed, certified as such by the city engineer. Upon receipt of the city engineer’s certificate of completion, the city council shall determine if all the improvements have been satisfactorily completed and, if so, shall accept said improvements and accept all offers of dedication and dedications. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use.

B. Acceptance. If the subdivision improvements have been accepted by the city council and public improvements and/or land have been dedicated on the final map or parcel map, the city clerk shall file a certified copy of the council resolution accepting such improvements and offers of dedication with the county recorder.

C. Private Improvements. In the event the subdivider constructs street, curb, gutter, drainage, water, sewer or similar type improvements on land which is not to be dedicated to the city, before the city council may consider accepting any improvements as complete, as to those which shall remain in private property, the subdivider shall furnish a recorded notice of completion. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 20, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.40
REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Sections:

16.40.010  General.

16.40.020  Initiation of proceedings.

16.40.030  Contents of petition.

16.40.040  Submittal of petition to the community development director.

16.40.050  City council approval.

16.40.060  Filing with county recorder.

16.40.010 General.
Any subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Subdivisions also may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage under the provisions of Chapter 16.44 BMC. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.40.020 Initiation of proceedings.
A. By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition (in a form prescribed by the department) of all of the owners of record of the property.

B. By City Council. The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the department to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings and to notify all property owners affected. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.40.030 Contents of petition.
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

A. Evidence of title to the real property;

B. Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

C. Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made has been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

D. Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record;

E. A final or parcel map, in the form prescribed by BMC 16.20.040 or 16.24.100, delineating dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The Purpose of This Map Is a Reversion to Acreage." (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.40.040 Submittal of petition to the community development director.
A. The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the community development director for review.

B. Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the community development director shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for its consideration. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.40.050 City council approval.
A. A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all proposed reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in BMC 16.04.060. The department may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable.

B. The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that:

1. Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and

2. Either:

a. All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or

b. None of the improvements required to be made has been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or

c. No lots shown on the final or parcel map or portion thereof have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record.

C. The city council may require as conditions of the reversion:

1. That owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements;

2. That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities be retained if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of this chapter; or

3. Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this title or are necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.40.060 Filing with county recorder.
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the city clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.44
PARCEL MERGERS AND UNMERGERS
Sections:

16.44.010    Mergers required.

16.44.020    Notice of intention to determine status.

16.44.030    Hearing on determination of status.

16.44.040    Determination of merger.

16.44.050    Appeals.

16.44.060    Mergers under prior law.

16.44.070    Determination when no hearing is requested.

16.44.080    Request to merge by property owner.

16.44.090    Unmerged parcels.

16.44.100    Request for determination by owner.

16.44.110    Fee for mergers and unmergers.

16.44.010 Mergers required.
Two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner shall be considered as merged if one of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel or lot size required by BMC Title 17, Zoning, and if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

A. At least one of the affected parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous parcel or unit.

B. With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the parcels:

1. Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of the merger;

2. Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

3. Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

4. Does not meet slope stability standards;

5. Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

6. Will create health or safety hazards if developed; or

7. Is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

C. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that the notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this chapter.

D. Subsection (B) of this section shall not apply if any of the conditions stated in Section 66451.11(b)(A), (B), (C) or (D) of the Subdivision Map Act exist. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.020 Notice of intention to determine status.
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the department shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to determine status to the current owner of record of the property. The notice shall state that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter and that, within 30 days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, the owner may request a hearing before the community development director to present evidence that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department on the same day that the notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.030 Hearing on determination of status.
A. The owner of the affected property may file a written request for a hearing with the department within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status. Upon receipt of the request, the department shall set a time, date and place for a hearing before the community development director and notify the owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted within 60 days following the receipt of the owner’s request, or may be postponed or continued by mutual consent of the community development director and the property owner.

B. At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the requirements for merger specified in this chapter.

C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the community development director shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of the determination. Such notification shall be mailed to the property owner by the department within five days of the date of the hearing. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.040 Determination of merger.
A. If the community development director makes a determination that the parcels are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed pursuant to BMC 16.44.050. The notice of merger shall specify the name of the record owner and a description of the property.

B. If the community development director makes a determination that the parcels shall not be merged, a release of the notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 30 days after the community development director’s determination and a clearance letter shall be mailed to the owner by the department. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.050 Appeals.
The determination of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. If, after hearing, the planning commission grants the appeal and determines that the affected property has not been merged pursuant to this chapter, the department shall, within 30 days after the planning commission determination, file for record with the county recorder a release of the notice of intention to determine status and mail a clearance letter to the owner. (Ord. 07-56 § 1; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.060 Mergers under prior law.
A. Except as provided in BMC 16.44.090 and 16.44.100, prior to January 1, 1986, the department shall file for record with the county recorder a notice of merger for any parcel merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984. At least 30 days before recording the notice of merger, the department shall mail written notice to the owner of the affected parcels stating the intention to record the notice and specifying a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence to the community development director why the notice should not be recorded.

B.     If, after the hearing, the community development director determines that the parcels have merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department. The decision of the community development director may be appealed according to the procedures established in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-56 § 2; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.070 Determination when no hearing is requested.
If the owner does not file a request for a hearing within 30 days after the recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the community development director may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the parcels are or are not to be merged. If they are to be merged, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder by the department within 90 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to BMC 16.44.020. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.080 Request to merge by property owner.
If the merger of contiguous parcels or units is initiated by the record owner, the owner may waive the right to a hearing before the community development director and to all notices required by this chapter. Upon signing the waiver, the department shall simultaneously file for record with the county recorder a notice of intention to determine status, a waiver of right of hearing and notice, and a notice of merger. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.090 Unmerged parcels.
Any parcel which has merged under the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984, and for which a notice of merger had not been recorded on or before that date, shall be unmerged if on that date:

A. The parcel meets each of the following criteria:

1. Contains at least 5,000 square feet in area;

2. Was created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;

3. Meets current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply;

4. Meets slope density standards;

5. Has legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability;

6. Its unmerger and development would create no health or safety hazard;

7. The unmerged parcel would be consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards;

B. And, with respect to the parcel, none of the conditions stated in Section 66451.30(b)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of the Subdivision Map Act exists. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.100 Request for determination by owner.
A. Upon written application made by the owner to the department, the community development director shall make a determination that the affected parcels have merged or are to be merged. If the community development director determines that the parcels have not merged, the owner shall be so notified by the department.

B. If the community development director determines that the parcels have merged and that they meet the requirements for unmerger in BMC 16.44.090, a notice of status shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the department, which shall identify each parcel and declare that they are unmerged pursuant to this chapter.

C. If the community development director determines that the parcels have merged and do not meet the unmerger requirements in BMC 16.44.090, a notice of merger specifying the record owner and description of the parcel shall be issued to the owner and filed for record with the county recorder by the department. The owner may appeal the decision of the community development director in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-56 § 3; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.44.110 Fee for mergers and unmergers.
A fee and/or deposit for processing mergers and unmergers at the request of an owner shall be charged to the owner in accordance with BMC 16.04.090. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.48
CORRECTION AND AMENDMENTS OF MAPS
Sections:

16.48.010  Requirements.

16.48.020  Form and contents.

16.48.030  Submittal and approval by city engineer.

16.48.040  Filing with the county recorder.

16.48.010 Requirements.
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:

A. To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

B. To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

C. To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

D. To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;

E. To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed in location or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;

F. To adjust lot lines in accord with the provisions of BMC 16.12.030(C);

G. To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map;

H. To make modifications when there are changes that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the city council, in the case of a final map, or the planning commission, in the case of a parcel map, in accord with BMC 16.04.060. The city council or planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. (Ord. 89-2 N.S. § 22, 1989; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.48.020 Form and contents.
A. The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of BMC 16.20.040 and 16.20.050 if a final map, and BMC 16.24.100 if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction.

B. Any request for a lot line adjustment shall be accompanied by a map showing existing boundaries and the proposed change, and all other information prescribed by BMC 16.16.020 unless specifically waived by the department. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.48.030 Submittal and approval by city engineer.
A. The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval.

B. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in BMC 16.48.010, this fact shall be certified by the city engineer on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.48.040 Filing with the county recorder.
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected, and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Chapter 16.52
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

16.52.010    Prohibition.

16.52.020    Remedies.

16.52.030    Certificate of compliance.

16.52.040    Notice of violation.

16.52.050    Appeals of community development director action.

16.52.010 Prohibition.
A. No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, has been filed for record by the county recorder.

B. No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such a map, in full compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, has been filed for record by the county recorder.

C. Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder.

D. This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

E. Nothing contained in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.52.020 Remedies.
A. Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy thereof within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee.

B. Any grantee, or successor in interest thereof, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who so divided the property and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.

C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to BMC 16.52.030 or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording.

The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect, in any way, the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law.

D. This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter.

E. The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny or approve such a permit shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record, or a vendee thereof, with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the city may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of BMC 16.52.030, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.52.030 Certificate of compliance.
A. Any person owning real property, or a vendee of such person, pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request the community development director to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. A written application for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by a preliminary title report not more than six months old that shows the legal owners of the property.

B. If the community development director determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the department shall file a certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

C. If the community development director determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the community development director may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions in accordance with BMC 16.52.020(E). Upon the community development director’s making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the department shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property.

Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city.

D. A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

E. Subject to the provisions of Section 66499.35E of the Subdivision Map Act, an official map prepared pursuant to Section 66499.52B of the Subdivision Map Act shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

F. A fee and/or deposit shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance in accordance with BMC 16.04.090. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.52.040 Notice of violation.
A. If the department has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the department by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice shall describe the property in detail, name the owners, describe the violation and state that the owner will be given the opportunity to present evidence. The notice shall also contain an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Section 66412.6(a) or (b) of the Subdivision Map Act. The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the community development director why a notice of violation should not be recorded.

B. The meeting shall be held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from the date of mailing of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within 15 days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to file with the department a written objection to recording the notice of violation, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, the community development director determines that there has been no violation, the department shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the community development director determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the department shall file the notice of violation for record with the county recorder.

C. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 86-6, 1986).

16.52.050 Appeals of community development director action.
Appeal of any community development director action pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-57 § 1; Ord. 86-6, 1986).

Title 17
ZONING1
Chapters:

Division I. General Provisions

17.04    Title, Components, and Purposes

17.08    Organization, Applicability, and Interpretation

17.12    Definitions

17.16    Use Classifications

17.20    (Reserved)

Division II. Base District Regulations

17.24    Residential Districts

17.26    Mixed Use Districts

17.28    C Commercial Districts

17.32    Industrial Districts

17.36    OS Open Space District

17.40    PS Public and Semipublic District

17.44    PD Planned Development District

17.46    Repealed

17.48    Repealed

Division III. Overlay Zoning Districts

17.50    HD Hillside Development Overlay District

17.54    H Historic Overlay District

17.58    S Shoreline Protection Overlay District

17.62    NC Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District

17.66    IS Interim Study Overlay District

17.68    MP Master Plan Overlay District

Division IV. Regulations Applying in All or Several Districts

17.70    General Regulations

17.74    Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations

17.78    Signs

17.82    Trees and Views

17.84    Cannabis

17.86    Wind Energy Conversion Systems

17.90    Condominium Conversions

17.94    Mobile Home Park Conversions

17.98    Nonconforming Uses and Structures

Division V. Administration

17.100    Zoning Permits – Environmental Review – Fees and Deposits

17.102    Adult Businesses: Zoning

17.104    Use Permits and Variances

17.108    Design Review

17.112    Development Plan Review

17.116    Development Agreements

17.120    Amendments

17.124    Appeals and Calls for Review

17.128    Enforcement

17.132    Reasonable Accommodation

1
    For statutory provisions pertaining to planning in general, see Government Code § 65000 et seq.; for provisions authorizing cities to regulate the use of land and buildings, see Government Code § 65850 et seq.

    Prior ordinance history: Prior code §1-305, Ord. 1253 M.C., Ord. 1253-A M.C., Ord. 1261 M.C., 1261-J M.C., 72-2 N.S., 73-2 N.S., 73-4 N.S., 73-11 N.S., 73-18 N.S., 74-13 N.S., 75-14 N.S., 76-12 N.S., 76-19 N.S., 76-25 N.S., 76-26 N.S., 77-6 N.S., 77-7 N.S., 77-21 N.S., 79-12 N.S., 79-13 N.S., 80-2 N.S., 80-6 N.S., 81-2 N.S., 81-4 N.S., 81-11 N.S., 82-2 N.S., 82-7 N.S., 82-10 N.S., 82-12 N.S., 82-14 N.S., 82-17 N.S., 83-6 N.S., 83-10 N.S., 85-5 N.S., 85-6 N.S., 85-7 N.S. and 85-11 N.S.


Chapter 17.04
TITLE, COMPONENTS, AND PURPOSES
Sections:

17.04.010    Title.

17.04.020    Components.

17.04.030    Purposes.

17.04.010 Title.
This title of the municipal code shall be known and cited as the “zoning ordinance of the city of Benicia,” or “zoning ordinance.” (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.04.020 Components.
The zoning ordinance shall have the following components:

A. Regulations, known as the zoning regulations, establishing various classes of zoning districts and governing the use of land and the placement of buildings and improvements within districts;

B. A map or set of maps, known as the zoning map, delineating the boundaries of zoning districts within the city.

A copy of the zoning regulations and the zoning map, together with a record of all amendments, shall be kept on file with the city clerk and shall constitute the original record. A copy of the zoning regulations and zoning map currently in effect shall also be kept on file with the community development director. (Ord. 04-13 § 1; Ord. 01-11 N.S., 2001; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.04.030 Purposes.
The broad purposes of the zoning ordinance are to protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to implement the policies of the city’s general plan, as provided in the California Government Code, Title 7, Chapters 3 and 4 and in the California Constitution, Article 11, Section 7. More specifically, the zoning ordinance is intended to:

A. Provide a precise guide for the physical development of the city in order to:

1. Preserve the character and quality of residential neighborhoods,

2. Foster convenient, harmonious, and workable relationships among land uses, and

3. Achieve progressively the arrangement of land uses described in the general plan;

B. Promote the economic stability of existing land uses that are consistent with the general plan and protect them from intrusions by inharmonious or harmful land uses;

C. Prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of land or buildings;

D. Ensure the provision of adequate open space for light, air, and fire safety;

E. Permit the development of office, commercial, industrial, and related land uses that are consistent with the general plan, in order to strengthen the city’s economic base;

F. Conserve and enhance the city’s architectural and cultural resources;

G. Conserve and enhance key visual features of Benicia’s setting, including the shoreline and undeveloped hillsides and ridgelines, consistent with the general plan;

H. Require the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities, and promote a safe, effective traffic circulation system;

I. Ensure that service demands of new development will not exceed the capacities of existing streets, utilities, or public services. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.08
ORGANIZATION, APPLICABILITY, AND INTERPRETATION
Sections:

17.08.010    Organization.

17.08.020    General rules for applicability of zoning regulations.

17.08.030    Applicability of land use and development regulations.

17.08.040    Rules for interpretation.

17.08.050    Effect of this title on approved projects and projects in process.

17.08.060    Consolidation of applications.

17.08.010 Organization.
A. Structure of Regulations. The zoning regulations are divided into five divisions:

Division I:

General Provisions;

Division II:

Base District Regulations;

Division III:

Overlay District Regulations;

Division IV:

Regulations Applying in All or Several Districts;

Division V:

Administrative Regulations.

B. Types of Regulations. Three types of zoning regulations control the use and development of property:

1. Land use regulations specify land uses permitted or conditionally permitted in each zoning district, and include special requirements, if any, applicable to specific uses. Land use regulations for base zoning districts are in Division II of the zoning regulations; land use regulations for overlay districts are in Division III. Certain regulations, applicable in all or several districts, are in Division IV.

2. Development regulations control the height, bulk, location, and appearance of structures on development sites. Development regulations for base zoning districts are in Division II of the zoning regulations; development regulations for overlay districts are in Division III. Certain development regulations, applicable in more than one class of base or overlay districts, are in Division IV. These include parking and loading regulations; regulations for condominium conversions, mobile home park conversions, wind energy conversion systems, and trees and views; as well as site development regulations.

3. Administrative regulations contain detailed procedures for the administration of zoning regulations, including requirements for design review; public hearings on ordinance amendments, zoning permits, use permits, and variances; development agreements; amendments; appeals of zoning decisions; and enforcement. Administrative regulations are in Division V. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.08.020 General rules for applicability of zoning regulations.
A. Applicability to Property. Zoning regulations shall apply to all land within the city of Benicia, including land owned by the city and other local, state or federal agencies, where applicable. Application of regulations to specific lots shall be governed by the zoning map.

B. Relation to Streets and Rights-of-Way. Public streets, utilities, and other rights-of-way shall be in the same zoning district as contiguous property. Where contiguous properties are classified in different zoning districts, the centerline of the street or right-of-way shall be the district boundary. The permitted use of such streets, utilities and rights-of-way shall be construed to include those uses and improvements necessary for vehicular transportation, pedestrian and bicycle ways, or other related purposes to serve the general public. Private or proprietary use of such land, irrespective of whether it is permitted by the underlying zoning district, shall be permitted only in accordance with the other applicable provisions and permitting requirements of this municipal code.

C. Compliance with Regulations. No land shall be used and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, or moved in any zoning district except in accord with the provisions of this title.

D. Public Nuisance. Neither the provisions of this title nor the approval of any permit authorized by this title shall authorize the maintenance of any public nuisance.

E. Compliance with Public Notice Requirements. Compliance with public notice requirements prescribed by this title shall be deemed sufficient notice to allow the city to proceed with a public hearing and take action on an application, regardless of actual receipt of mailed or delivered notice.

F. Requests for Notice. Where this title requires that notice be given by first class mail to “any person who has filed a written request for such notice,” the request shall be filed with the community development director and shall be subject to the applicable fees set to cover mailing costs pursuant to BMC 17.100.070. A request for mailing of a single notice of a single decision shall not require payment of a fee.

G. Conflict with Other Regulations. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this title and any other city code, ordinance, resolution, guideline, or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall control unless otherwise specified in this title.

H. Relation to Private Agreements. This title shall not interfere with or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect; provided, that where this title imposes a greater restriction than imposed by an easement, covenant, or agreement, this title shall control.

I. Relation to Prior Ordinance. The provisions of this title supersede Ordinance 1261 M.C. (1970), as amended, of the city, except that no provision of this title shall validate or legalize any land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of Ordinance 1261 M.C. (1970), as amended, unless specifically authorized by this title.

J. Zoning of Annexed Land. The community development director shall conduct a study to determine the most appropriate general plan designation for land proposed for annexation to the city, and shall recommend prezoning consistent with the general plan designation. If prezoning is approved by the planning commission and the city council, the zoning shall become effective upon annexation.

K. Application During Local Emergency. The city council may authorize deviations from any provision of this title during a local emergency declared and ratified pursuant to Chapter 2.64 BMC. Such deviations shall be authorized by resolution of the city council, without notice or public hearing.

L. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, or phase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of this title shall not be affected. It is expressly declared that this title and each section, subsection, sentence, and phrase would have been adopted regardless of the fact that one or more other portions of this title would be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

M. Nondiscrimination. In the administration of its zoning and land use policies regarding homeless shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing or other housing designed to assist homeless persons or persons with special needs, the city shall comply with all applicable state and federal fair housing laws, including, but not limited to, applicable provisions of the Federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq. as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 12117, the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, Government Code Section 12950 et seq., the Unruh Act, Civil Code Section 51 and Government Code Sections 65008 and 65589.5. (Ord. 15-02 § 1; Ord. 99-7; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.08.030 Applicability of land use and development regulations.
A. Zoning Designation System. Land use and development regulations applicable to specific sites shall be shown on the zoning map by zoning designations consisting of classes of letter designators:

1. A land use regulations designator, indicating the principal land uses permitted or conditionally permitted in each district, shall be a component of all zoning designations.

2. Overlay district designators shall be included in a zoning designation if the provisions of one or more overlay districts are applicable to a site.

B. Establishment of Base Zoning Districts. Base zoning districts into which the city is divided are established as follows:

Base District Designator

Base District Name

Chapter

RS

Single-Family Residential District

17.24

RM

Medium-Density Residential District

17.24

RH

High-Density Residential District

17.24

CC

Community Commercial District

17.28

CO

Commercial Office District

17.28

CG

General Commercial District

17.28

CW

Waterfront Commercial District

17.28

IL

Limited Industrial District

17.32

IG

General Industrial District

17.32

IW

Water-Related Industrial District

17.32

IP

Industrial Park District

17.32

OS

Open Space District

17.36

PS

Public and Semipublic District

17.40

PD

Planned Development District

17.44

C. Establishment of Overlay Zoning Districts. Overlay zoning districts, one or more of which may be combined with a base district, are established as follows:

Overlay District Designator

Overlay District Name

Chapter

HD

Hillside Development Overlay District

17.50

H

Historic Overlay District

17.54

S

Shoreline Protection Overlay District

17.58

NC

Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District

17.62

IS

Interim Study Overlay District

17.66

MP

Master Plan Overlay District    

17.68

D. References to Classes of Base Districts. References to R districts refer to all residential districts; references to C districts refer to all commercial districts; and references to I districts refer to all industrial districts. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.08.040 Rules for interpretation.
A. Zoning Regulations. Where uncertainty exists regarding the interpretation of any provision of this title or its application to a specific site, the community development director shall determine the intent of the provision.

B. Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists regarding the boundary of a zoning district, the following rules shall apply:

1. District boundaries shown as approximately following the property line of a lot shall be construed to follow such property line.

2. On unsubdivided land, or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of the district boundary shall be determined by using the scale appearing on the zoning map, unless the boundary location is indicated by dimensions printed on the map.

3. District boundaries shown as approximately following right-of-way lines of freeways, streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow such right-of-way or boundary lines.

4. District boundaries shown as lying within right-of-way lines of freeways, streets, alleys, railroads, or other identifiable boundary lines shall be construed to follow the centerline of such right-of-way or boundary lines.

5. Should any uncertainty remain as to the location of a district boundary or other feature shown on the zoning map, the location shall be determined by the community development director.

C. Appeals. An interpretation of the zoning regulations or zoning map by the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission, as provided in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-58 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.08.050 Effect of this title on approved projects and projects in process.
A. Approved Projects.

1. Use permits, variances, design approvals, and tentative subdivision maps, which are valid on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall remain valid until their expiration date. These projects can be built in accord with the development standards in effect at the time of approval; provided, that the use permit or design approval is valid at the time building permits are issued and that such permit is subject to any time limits imposed pursuant to BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction.

2. No provision of this title shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or any subsequent amendment.

3. Any reapplication for an expired permit must meet the standards in effect at the time of reapplication.

4. Any modification of a valid permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title that results in a change of use or an increase in square footage may be approved only as a conditional use under the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC by the planning commission; and in no case may an increase in excess of 10,000 square feet be allowed. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.08.060 Consolidation of applications.
Applications for any discretionary permit requested or required in conjunction with other permits or variances requiring discretionary action by more than one decision-making authority or body may be consolidated at the applicant’s request. The findings for each permit shall be considered individually; however, for the purpose of discretionary action, these multiple permits shall constitute one project, but decision-making authority shall rest with the permit-granting authority or body as prescribed by this title. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.12
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

17.12.010    Purpose and applicability.

17.12.020    Rules for construction language.

17.12.030    Definitions.

17.12.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning regulations, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.12.020 Rules for construction language.
In addition to the general provisions of the municipal code, the following rules of construction shall apply:

A. The particular shall control the general.

B. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

1. “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

2. “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

3. “Either...or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

C. In case of conflict between the text and a diagram, the text shall control.

D. All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the city of Benicia, unless otherwise indicated.

E. All references to public officials are to those of the city of Benicia, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

F. All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.12.030 Definitions.
“Abutting or adjoining” means having district boundaries or lot lines in common.

“Acre, gross” means the area of a lot or site, including easements and right-of-way to be dedicated, but excluding existing public rights-of-way.

“Acre, net” means the area of a lot or site remaining after dedication of all required rights-of-way.

“Alley” means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

“Alter” means to make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, that will prolong the life of the structure.

“Amplified noise” means sounds that are made louder than would normally occur through some sound-amplifying equipment (e.g., microphone, speaker).

“Animal, domestic” means small animals of the type generally accepted as pets, including dogs, cats, rabbits, hens, fish, and the like, but not including roosters, ducks, geese, pea fowl, goats, sheep, hogs or the like.

“Animal, exotic” means any wild animal not customarily confined or cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes but kept as a pet or for display.

“Animal, large” means an animal larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes horses, cows, and other mammals customarily kept in corrals or stables.

“Animal, small” means an animal no larger than the largest breed of dogs. This term includes fish, birds, and mammals customarily kept as domestic pets within a dwelling unit.

“Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including but not limited to antennas or towers used for transmitting or receiving television, radio, citizen’s band or cellular phone communication.

“Antenna structure, monopole” is a single, ground-mounted free-standing pole, post piling, tower or similar structure, often tubular in shape, made of metal, reinforced concrete or wood, used to support equipment associated with a wireless communication facility.

“Apartment.” See “dwelling, multifamily.”

“Area, lot, parcel, or site” means the horizontal area within the property lines excluding access corridors, vehicular easements, and areas to be included in future street rights-of-way as established by easement, dedication, or ordinance.

“Areas, specified anatomical” means human genitals (pubic region), buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the areola when less than completely and opaquely covered; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

“Balcony” means a platform, less than three feet wide, that projects from the wall of a building, typically above the first level, and is surrounded by a rail, balustrade or parapet.

“Blockface” means the properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land, watercourse, or city boundary.

“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.

“Caretaker’s quarters” means a dwelling unit on the site of a commercial, industrial, public or semipublic use, occupied by a guard or caretaker.

“Carport” means a permanently roofed structure which is open on at least one side and has no door closure, for the purpose of vehicle storage; see also the definition of “garage, private.”

“City” means the city of Benicia.

“Collection buildings” means buildings with a gross floor area of 225 square feet or less used for the deposit and storage of household articles or recyclables donated to a nonprofit organization.

“Collocation” means the location of two or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure. For the purposes of this chapter, collocation shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, communication towers and other facilities and structures.

“Community noise equivalent level (CNEL)” means the average noise level during a 24-hour day, in decibels, weighted to account for the lower tolerance of people to noise during evening (7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) and night (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) hours relative to daytime hours.

“Conditionally permitted” means permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or temporary conditional use permit.

“Construction trailer” means a nonresidential temporary movable trailer which is used for the storage of construction materials or tools, for supervising construction activity, for a sales office or other office needed for the development of a site, and which is temporarily located on a site during construction.

“Convenience market” means retail sales of food, beverages and small convenience items primarily for off-premises consumption and typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation and a relatively small building. This definition excludes delicatessens and other specialty food shops and establishments having a sizeable assortment of fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh cut meat.

“Cottage food operations” means an enterprise within a dwelling unit where cottage food products, not including cannabis or cannabis products, are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect or direct and indirect sale to consumers pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 113758.

“Court.” See “yard or court.”

“Coverage, lot or site” means the percentage of a site covered by roofs, soffits, or overhangs extending more than two and one-half feet from a wall and by decks more than 30 inches in height.

“dBA” means a number in decibels read from a sound level meter with the meter switched to a weighing scale “A.” The number is an approximate measurement of the relative noisiness or annoyance level of common sounds.

“Deck” means a platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts (see also “balcony.”)

“Depth” means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines.

“Development” means the physical extension and/or construction of urban land uses. Development activities include: subdivision of land; construction or alteration of structures, roads, utilities, and other facilities; installation of septic systems; grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill materials; and clearing of natural vegetative cover (with the exception of agricultural activities). Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted.

“Distribution line” means an electric power line bringing power from a distribution substation to consumers.

“District” means a portion of the city within which the use of land and structures and the location, height, and bulk of structures are governed by this title.

“Dwelling, multifamily” means a building containing two or more dwelling units.

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms with a single kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.

“Entertainment, live” means regulations pertaining to live entertainment in this chapter apply to the following activities where they occur on a scheduled basis three or more days during a calendar year on the site of a use other than a public or semipublic use:

A. A comedy act, musical, theatrical, or dance recital performed by one or more persons, regardless of whether performers are compensated;

B. Any form of dancing by patrons or guests at a business establishment;

C. A fashion show, except when conducted within an enclosed building used primarily for the manufacture or sale of clothing.

“Environmental impact report (EIR)” means a report complying with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and its implementing guidelines.

“Exemption, categorical” means an exception from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for a class of projects, based on a finding by the California Secretary for Resources that the class of projects does not have a significant effect on the environment.

“Family” means two or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; provided, that this shall not exclude the renting of rooms in a dwelling unit as permitted by district regulations.

“Fence” means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

“Floor area, gross” means the total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured to the outside face of the structural members in exterior walls, and including halls, stairways, elevator shafts at each floor level, service and mechanical equipment rooms, and basement or attic areas having a height of more than seven feet but excluding area used exclusively for vehicle parking or loading and, in industrial areas, storage sheds with less than 150 square feet of space, bunkers, electrical substations, smoking shelters, instrument shelters and similar enclosures.

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the gross floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area or site area.

“Formula business” means an eating and drinking establishment that maintains any of the following features in common with more than four other establishments in the nine Bay Area counties: standardized array of services and/or merchandise, trademark, logo, service mark, symbol, sign, decor, uniform, menu, or other similar standardized feature.

“Front building line” means the line, parallel to the street line, which passes through the point of the principal building face or corner closest to the front lot line.

“Garage, private” means a building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot as the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles, with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature; see also the definition of “carport.”

“General plan” means the city of Benicia general plan, as amended.

“Grade, existing” means the surface of the ground or pavement at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project regulated by this title.

“Grade, street” means the top of the curb, or the top of the edge of the pavement or traveled way where no curb exists.

“Height” means a vertical dimension measured from existing grade, unless otherwise specified.

“Home occupations” means occupations conducted in a dwelling unit, garage, or accessory building that are incidental to the principal residential use of the lot or site. It does not include cottage food operations defined separately herein.

“Illumination, direct” means illumination by means of light that travels directly from its source to the viewer’s eye.

“Illumination, indirect” means illumination by means only of light cast upon an opaque surface from a concealed source.

“Lot” means a site or parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally subdivided, resubdivided, or combined.

“Lot, corner” means a site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines that have an angle of intersection of not more than 135 degrees. The front yard of a corner lot shall adjoin the shortest street property line; provided, that where street property lines are substantially the same length, the community development director shall determine the location of the front yard.

“Lot, double-frontage” means an interior lot having frontage on more than one street. Each frontage from which access is permitted shall be deemed a front lot line.

“Lot, flag or corridor” means a lot connected to a street by an access corridor.

“Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.

“Lot, key” means the first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot.

“Lot or property line, front” means, on an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street; or, on a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street; or, on a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.

“Lot, reversed corner” means a corner lot the side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear.

“Lot or property line, rear” means a lot line, not a front lot line, that is parallel or approximately parallel to the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of measuring rear yard depth.

“Lot or property line, interior” means a lot line not abutting a street.

“Lot or property line, side” means any lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

“Lot or property line, street” means a lot line abutting a street.

“Mobile food vendor” means a person who is engaged in mobile food vending.

“Municipal code” means the municipal code of the city of Benicia, as amended.

“Nonamplified noise” means naturally occurring noise from a point source without the use of noise-amplifying equipment.

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character which was lawfully erected or displayed, but which does not conform with standards for location, size, or illumination for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure which was lawfully erected, but which does not conform with the standards for yard spaces, height of structures, or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Nonconforming uses” means a use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not conform with the use regulations or required conditions for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this title or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.

“Off-street loading facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

“Off-street parking facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

“Open space, private” means a usable open space, adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.

“Open space, shared” means an open space within a residential development reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the development and their guests.

“Open space, total” means the sum of private open space and shared open space.

“Opposite” means walls, windows, signs, districts, or property lines shall be deemed opposite if a line perpendicular to a vertical plane through one element and having its widest horizontal dimension would intersect a similar vertical plane through another element.

“Permitted” means permitted without a requirement for approval of a use permit or temporary use permit.

“Porch” means a covered platform, usually having a separate roof, at an entrance to a dwelling, or an open or enclosed gallery or room, which is not heated or cooled, that is attached to the outside of a building.

“Preexisting” means in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

“Project” means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this title.

“Proscenium, garage” means the structural frame of a garage door.

“Room, habitable” means a room meeting the requirements of the housing code (Chapter 15.18 BMC) for sleeping, living, cooking, or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, garages, and similar spaces.

“Sexual activities, specified” means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals (pubic region), buttocks, or female breasts.

“Single ownership” means holding a record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease by a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, individually, jointly, in common or in any other manner where the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

“Site” means a lot, or group of contiguous lots not divided by an alley, street, other right-of-way, or city limit, that is proposed for development in accord with the provisions of this title, and is in a single ownership or has multiple owners, all of whom join in an application for development.

“Soundproofed” means a structure or portion of a structure which is insulated or constructed in such a manner that sound will not penetrate from it in excess of the ambient noise levels specified in BMC 8.20.190.

“Specific plan” means a plan for a defined area that is consistent with the general plan and with the provisions of the California Government Code, Section 65450 et seq. (Specific Plans).

“Structure” means anything constructed or erected that requires a location on the ground, including a building or a swimming pool but not including a fence or a wall used as a fence, if the height does not exceed six feet, or access drives or walks.

“Structure, main” means a structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use.

“Sunroom” means an enclosed and covered porch, deck, or patio area attached to a residence in which at least 60 percent of the exterior wall area is comprised of glazing or similar transparent material, and which, if directly accessible from the indoor living area of the residence, is separated from that area of the residence by a closable door.

“Swimming pools and hot tubs” means water-filled enclosures, having a depth of 18 inches or more, used for swimming or recreation.

“Target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 commencing with Section 4500 of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

“Top of bank” means the following, depending on whether the waterway has defined banks, or is channelized, as illustrated in the graphics that follow:

Waterway with Defined Bank. Top of bank line is the line connecting all the points where there is substantial grade change between the creek bank and the property as determined by the applicant’s engineer and subject to the review and approval of the city engineer.

Waterway without Defined Bank. Where there is no defined bank and the slope from the streambed is less than 2:1, top of bank is considered the 100-year storm surface elevation established by FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps or in the most recent flood insurance study for the city of Benicia, or the water surface elevation as calculated by the applicant’s engineer and subject to the review and approval of the city engineer.

Channelized Waterway. Where a fully channelized waterway exists, top of bank is the highest edge of the engineered channel. A separate top of bank shall be determined for each side of the channel.

Waterway with defined bank

Waterway without defined bank

“Transmission line” means an electric power line bringing power to a receiving or distribution substation.

“Tree, mature” means any tree with a diameter of 12 inches or more, measured 24 inches above existing grade.

“Use” means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged for which either a site or structure is or may be occupied or maintained.

“Use, accessory” means a use that is appropriate, subordinate, and customarily incidental to the main use of the site and which is located on the same site as the main use.

“Used” means and includes the following: arranged, designed, constructed, altered, rented, leased, sold, occupied, and intended to be occupied.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or pulled.

“Visible” means likely to be noticed by a person of average height walking on a street or sidewalk two years after installation of any planting intended to screen a view.

“Water-related” means a use or activity that directly or indirectly serves industries that use water for transportation, thereby gaining sufficient economic benefits by fronting on or being in close proximity to navigable water.

“Width” means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site, measured at right angles to the depth at the rear of a required front yard.

“Window, required” means an exterior opening in a habitable room meeting the area requirements of the housing code (Chapter 15.18 BMC).

“Wireless communication facility” means an unstaffed facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves, including, but not limited to, the following technologies: cellular, personal communication services (PCS), general mobile radio services (GMRS), family radio service (R/C), interactive video and data services (IVDS), low power radio service (LPRS) and paging systems. It includes antennas and all other types of equipment used in the transmission or receipt of such signals, structures designed and placed specifically to support this equipment; associated equipment cabinets and/or buildings; and other accessory development. It does not include radio and television towers, antennas or related equipment for commercial broadcast or amateur use; citizens band and any other miscellaneous telemetric and control communications systems.

“Yard or court” means an open space on the same site as a structure, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the ground upward or from the floor level of the structure requiring the yard or court upward except as otherwise provided in this title, including a front yard, side yard, rear yard, or court between structures.

“Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and a line parallel thereto on the site.

“Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and a line parallel thereto on the site, except that on a corner lot the rear yard shall extend only to the side yard abutting a street.

“Yard, side” means a yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard, or the front property line of the site where no front yard is required, to the front line of the required rear yard, or the rear property line of the site where no rear yard is required, the width of which is the horizontal distance between the side property line and a line parallel thereto on the site, except that the side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall extend to the rear lot line.

“Zoning ordinance” means the zoning ordinance of the city of Benicia, as amended. (Ord. 19-02 § 1; Ord. 18-16 § 1; Ord. 18-06 § 1; Ord. 18-05 § 1; Ord. 14-11 § 1; Ord. 14-06 § 1; Ord. 13-06 §§ 1, 2; Ord. 07-12 § 1; Ord. 06-10 § 1; amended during 2004 republication; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 5, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.16
USE CLASSIFICATIONS
Sections:

17.16.010    Purpose and applicability.

17.16.020    Uses not classified.

17.16.030    Residential use classifications.

17.16.040    Public and semipublic use classifications.

17.16.050    Commercial use classifications.

17.16.060    Industrial use classifications.

17.16.070    Agricultural and extractive use classifications.

17.16.080    Accessory use classifications.

17.16.090    Temporary use classifications.

17.16.010 Purpose and applicability.
Use classifications describe one or more uses having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the classification. The community development director shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within any classification in this title. The community development director may determine that a specific use shall not be deemed to be within a classification, whether or not named within the classification, if its characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named within the classification. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.020 Uses not classified.
Any new use, or any use that cannot be clearly determined to be in an existing use classification, may be incorporated into the zoning regulations by a zoning ordinance text amendment, as provided in Chapter 17.120 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.030 Residential use classifications.
A. Family Day Care, Large. Licensed home that provides nonmedical care and supervision for nine to 14 children on a less than 24-hour basis.

B. Family Day Care, Small. Licensed home that provides nonmedical care and supervision for eight or fewer children on a less than 24-hour basis.

C. Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes boardinghouses, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and private residential clubs.

D. Work/Live Quarters. An area comprised of one or more rooms or floors in a building originally designed for industrial or commercial occupancy that includes cooking space and sanitary facilities and working space for artists, artisans and similarly situated individuals.

E. Multifamily Residential. Two or more dwelling units on a site. This classification includes mobile home and factory-built housing.

F. Residential Care, Limited. Twenty-four hour nonmedical care for six or fewer persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those services and facilities licensed by the state of California.

G. Single-Family Residential. Buildings containing one dwelling unit located on a single lot. This classification includes mobile home and factory-built housing.

H. Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the target population and is linked to an on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. The dwelling type is of the same type as that found within the zoning district.

I. Transitional Housing. Buildings configured as rental housing developments but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. The dwelling type is of the same type as that found within the zoning district. (Ord. 14-11 § 2; Ord. 13-15 § 1; Ord. 11-04 § 1; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.040 Public and semipublic use classifications.
“Adult day health care” means a licensed and certified home or facility that provides therapeutic, social, and skilled nursing health activities and services to elderly persons or adults with disabilities on a less than 24-hour basis.

“Cemetery” means a place for burying the dead.

“Clubs and lodges” means meeting, recreational or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests. This classification includes union halls, social clubs, and youth centers.

“Convalescent facilities” means establishments providing care on a 24-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services.

“Cultural institutions” means nonprofit institutions displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes libraries, museums, and art galleries.

“Day care center” means a licensed child day care facility other than a family day care home that provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age on a less than 24-hour basis, and includes infant centers, nursery schools, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child care centers.

“Detention facilities” means publicly owned and operated facilities providing housing, care, and supervision for persons confined by law.

“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. Such a facility may have individual rooms, but does not have individual dwelling units.

“Government offices” means administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

“Heliports” means pads and facilities enabling takeoffs and landings by helicopters.

“Hospitals” means facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

“Maintenance and service facilities” means facilities providing maintenance and repair services for vehicles and equipment, and materials storage areas. This classification includes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities.

“Parks and recreation facilities” means noncommercial parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities, and open spaces.

“Public safety facilities” means facilities for public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection.

“Religious assembly” means facilities for religious worship and incidental religious education, but not including private schools as defined in this section.

“Residential care, general” means 24-hour nonmedical care for seven or more persons, including wards of the juvenile court, in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living. This classification includes only those services and facilities licensed by the state of California.

“Schools, public and private” means educational institutions having a curriculum comparable to that required in the public schools of the state of California.

“Utilities, major” means generating plants greater than five megawatts in size, electrical substations, aboveground electrical transmission lines, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water reservoirs, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies, public utilities or private utilities. A structure that may have a significant effect on surrounding uses shall be regulated under this classification.

1. Waste Facility. A facility that provides for on-site waste stabilization or neutralization. This classification excludes hazardous waste disposal facilities.

“Utilities, minor” means utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures such as electrical distribution lines and underground water and sewer lines. (Ord. 14-11 § 3; Ord. 11-04 § 2; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 5, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.050 Commercial use classifications.
A. Adult Businesses. A business based primarily upon materials or performances that depict, describe, or relate to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in Chapter 17.12 BMC. This includes businesses regulated under Chapter 5.44 BMC.

B. Ambulance Services. Provision of emergency medical care or transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

C. Animal Sales and Services.

1. Animal Boarding. Provision of shelter and care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, grooming, and incidental medical care.

2. Animal Grooming. Provision of bathing and trimming services for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification includes boarding of domestic animals for a maximum period of 48 hours.

3. Animal Hospitals. Establishments where small animals receive medical and surgical treatment. This classification includes only facilities that are entirely enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned. Grooming and temporary (30 days) boarding of animals is included if incidental to the hospital use.

4. Animals – Retail Sales. Retail sales and boarding of small animals, provided such activities take place within an entirely enclosed building. This classification includes grooming, if incidental to the retail use, and boarding of animals not offered for sale for a maximum period of 48 hours.

D. Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or craft.

E. Banks and Savings and Loans. Financial institutions that provide retail banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money.

1. With Drive-up Service. Institutions providing services accessible to persons who remain in automobiles.

F. Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and building contractors’ yards, but excludes retail sales of paint and hardware, except as an accessory use to a lumber yard, and activities classified under “vehicle/equipment sales and services.”

G. Catering Services. Preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption. (See also “eating and drinking establishments.”)

H. Commercial Filming. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location more than six days per quarter of a calendar year.

I. Commercial Recreation and Entertainment. Provision of participant or spectator recreation or entertainment. This classification includes theaters, sports stadiums and arenas, amusement parks, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice/roller skating rinks, golf courses, miniature golf courses, scale-model courses, shooting galleries, tennis/racquetball courts, health/fitness clubs, pinball arcades or electronic games centers having three or more coin-operated game machines, card rooms, subject to the regulation of Chapter 5.08 BMC, and facilities used exclusively for bingo games, as regulated by Chapter 5.12 BMC.

1. Card room, game center, billiard parlor.

2. Limited. Indoor movie theaters and performing arts theaters.

J. Communications Facilities. Broadcasting, recording, and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, but excluding “Utilities (Major).” This classification includes radio, television, or recording studios; telephone switching centers; and telegraph offices.

K. Conference and Meeting Facilities. Facilities providing indoor and/or outdoor event space for conferences, meetings, weddings, banquets, luncheons or similar events on a commercial basis.

L. Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses serving prepared food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises, not including cannabis or cannabis products.

1. With Wine and Beer Service. Alcoholic beverages served are limited to wine and beer.

2. With full alcoholic beverage service.

3. With Live Entertainment. Establishments offering live entertainment, as defined in Chapter 17.12 BMC.

4. With Take-Out Service. Establishments at which 20 percent or more of the transactions are sales for off-site consumption, and which serve or deliver prepared food to persons in vehicles or have more than two work stations at which employees package or service prepared food and receive payment.

a. Drive-Up. Service from a building to persons in vehicles through an outdoor service window.

b. Limited. Establishments that do not serve persons in vehicles.

5. Truck Stop. A facility geared primarily to providing services for truckers, including on-site fueling, repair and servicing of freight trucks; restaurant facilities; restrooms; towing services; overnight accommodations and related services.

6. Mobile Food Vending. The sale of ready-to-consume prepared foods from vehicles located on private property or approved public property on a semi-permanent basis during hours of operation. Vehicular food vending generally has the following characteristics:

a. Food and beverages are ordered and served from a take-out counter that is integral to the vehicle;

b. Food and beverages are paid for prior to consumption;

c. Food and beverages are served in disposable wrappers, plates or containers; and

d. Food and beverages are prepared and sold for primarily off-site consumption with limited on-site consumption.

M. Food and Beverage Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption, not including cannabis or cannabis products. Typical uses include groceries, liquor stores, or delicatessens. Establishments at which 20 percent or more of the transactions are sales of prepared food for on-site or take-out consumption shall be classified as “catering services” or “eating and drinking establishments.”

N. Funeral and Interment Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation or disposition of human dead other than in cemeteries. Typical uses include crematories, columbariums, mausoleums or mortuaries.

O. Horticulture, Limited. The raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and shrubs, not including cannabis, as a commercial enterprise; provided, that no nursery equipment or materials shall be stored and no structures erected. Commercial horticulture accessory to a dwelling unit shall be regulated as a home occupation.

P. Laboratories. Establishments providing medical or dental laboratory services, or establishments with less than 2,000 square feet providing photographic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are classified as “limited industry” or “cannabis testing laboratory.”

Q. Maintenance and Repair Services. Establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, bicycle repair or building maintenance services. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles (see “vehicle/equipment repair”) or boats or ships (see “marine sales and services”).

R. Marinas. A boat basin with docks, mooring facilities, supplies and equipment for small boats.

S. Marine Sales and Services. Establishments providing supplies and equipment for shipping or related services, or pleasure boating. Typical uses include chandleries, yacht brokerage and sales, boat yards, boat docks, and sail-making lofts.

T. Nurseries. Establishments in which all merchandise other than plants is kept within an encased building or fully screened enclosure, and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only. This use classification does not include cannabis.

U. Offices, Business and Professional. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as architectural, engineering, real estate, insurance, investment, legal, and medical/dental offices. This classification includes medical/dental laboratories incidental to an office use, and pharmacies, eyeglass shops, and similar prescription-dispensing services as an accessory to a medical office complex, but excludes banks and savings and loan associations.

V. Outdoor Entertainment. Activities occurring outdoors that involve amplified or nonamplified noise for the enjoyment, recreation, or similar purpose of persons or patrons who are physically present at the location the noise originates. This definition includes, but is not limited to, live music and playing, broadcasting or mixing recorded music.

W. Pawn Shops. Establishments engaged in retail sales of new or secondhand merchandise and offering loans secured by personal property.

X. Personal Improvement Services. Provision of instructional services or facilities, including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios, driving schools, business and trade schools, and diet centers.

Y. Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning agencies (excluding plants), and self-service laundries.

Z. Research and Development Services. Establishments primarily engaged in industrial or scientific research, including limited product testing. This classification includes electronic research firms or pharmaceutical research laboratories, but excludes manufacturing, medical testing and analysis, and activities related to cannabis or cannabis products.

AA. Retail Sales. The retail sale of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification and not including cannabis or cannabis products. This classification includes department stores, clothing stores, and furniture stores and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding service and installation).

BB. Secondhand Appliance and Clothing Sales. The retail sale of used appliances and clothing. This classification excludes antique shops primarily engaged in the sale of used furniture and accessories other than appliances.

CC. Swap Meets, Recurring. Retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a sponsor on a more than twice yearly basis.

DD. Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services.

1. Automobile Rentals. Rental of automobiles, taxicab services, and limousine services, including storage and incidental maintenance, but excluding maintenance requiring pneumatic lifts.

2. Automobile Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

3. Service Stations. Establishments engaged in the retail sale of gas, diesel fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories. This classification includes incidental maintenance and repair of automobiles and light trucks, but excludes body and fender work or repair of heavy trucks or vehicles.

4. Vehicle/Equipment Repair. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair shops, auto detailing shops, body and fender shops, wheel and brake shops, and tire sales and installation, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvage and tire retreading or recapping.

5. Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals. Sale or rental of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and incidental maintenance.

6. Vehicle Storage. Storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. This classification includes storage of parking tow-aways, impound yards, and storage lots for automobiles, trucks, buses and recreational vehicles, but does not include vehicle dismantling.

EE. Visitor Accommodations.

1. Bed and Breakfast Inns. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis typically in a converted single-family or multifamily dwelling, with incidental eating and drinking service (not including cannabis or cannabis products) for lodgers only, provided from a single kitchen.

2. Hotels and Motels. Establishments offering lodging on a less than weekly basis, and having kitchens in no more than 60 percent of guest units. This classification includes eating, drinking, and banquet service, not including cannabis or cannabis products.

FF. Warehousing and Storage, Limited. Provision of storage space for household or commercial goods, not including cannabis or cannabis products, within an enclosed building. This classification includes mini-storage facilities but excludes “wholesaling, distribution and storage,” and “vehicle storage.” (Ord. 18-16 § 2; Ord. 18-05 §§ 2 – 10; Ord. 14-06 § 2; Ord. 93-11 N.S. § 6, 1993; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 5, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 6 – 10, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.060 Industrial use classifications.
A. Industry, Custom. Establishments primarily engaged in off-site production of goods by hand manufacturing involving the use of hand tools and small-scale equipment.

1. Limited. Includes mechanical equipment not exceeding two horsepower or a single kiln not exceeding eight kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops, and custom jewelry manufacture.

2. Boat Building.

B. Industry, General. Manufacturing of products primarily from extracted or raw materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials, not including cannabis or cannabis products. Uses in this classification typically involve a high incidence of truck or rail traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, equipment, or bulk fuel. This classification includes chemical manufacture or processing, food processing and packaging, laundry and dry cleaning plants, auto dismantling within an enclosed building, oil and gas refining, stonework and concrete products manufacture (excluding concrete ready-mix plants) within an enclosed building, and accessory power generation facilities of five megawatts or less in conjunction with a permitted use.

1. Water-Related. Industrial activities that use water for transportation of raw materials or finished products, including the following:

a. Waterfront Storage Facility. Ship cargo storage and handling facility, including storage of raw materials, which is contiguous and has a functional relationship to a berthing facility.

b. Waterfront Manufacturing or Processing Facility. Manufacturing or processing operations that require frontage on navigable waters to receive raw materials or to distribute manufactured or processed materials by ship.

c. Water-Using Facilities. Power plants and desalinization plants. Other uses that demonstrate a need for substantial amounts of water may qualify if the industry can demonstrate that it cannot make use of lower-quality water; it cannot reasonably assume the costs of conveying water to an inland site; and a waterfront site would result in substantial energy saving over an alternative site.

d. Associated Manufacturing or Processing Uses. Manufacturing or processing uses that must be in close proximity to an approved water-dependent manufacturing or processing use and meet one of the following conditions:

i. The transportation of either raw material inputs or finished product outputs to an inland site would constitute a substantial enough increase in product cost to make its production economically unfeasible; or

ii. The transport of materials from a berth to or from an inland site would produce major increases in hazardous conditions due to security problems, road or rail congestion, or spillage or explosion of hazardous materials.

e. Berthing Facility. Wharves, piers, berths, docks, and launching facilities in conjunction with any water-related use.

f. Support Facilities. Uses that are required to support the operation of a water-related use including maintenance or ancillary types of operations and offices for management and materials control.

C. Industry, Limited. Manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials; and provision of industrial services; both within an enclosed building. This classification includes processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging, but excludes basic industrial processing from raw materials, food processing, cannabis, cannabis products, and “vehicle/equipment sales and services.”

1. Small-Scale. Limited to a maximum gross floor area of 5,000 square feet.

D. Industry, Research and Development. Establishments engaged in the theoretical or applied study, testing, engineering, product design, analysis and development of devices, products, processes, or services related to current or new technologies, not including cannabis or cannabis products. Research and development may include limited manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling or storage of prototypes, devices, compounds, products or materials, or similar related activities, where such activities are incidental to research, development, or evaluation. Examples of uses include, but are not limited to, computer software and hardware firms, computer peripherals and related products, electronic research firms, biotechnical and biomedical firms, instrument analysis, genomics, robotics, pharmaceuticals, and related educational development. Research and development may include the storage or use of hazardous materials not in excess of the maximum allowable quantities listed in the California Fire Code without a permit issued by the fire chief.

E. Industry, Technology. Establishments engaged in the creation, fabrication, processing, assembling, storage, manufacturing and/or service provision of products and/or processes, related to current or new technologies, not including cannabis or cannabis products. Examples of uses include, but are not limited to, computer software and hardware firms, computer peripherals and related products, electronic research firms, biotechnical and biomedical firms, instrument analysis, genomics, robotics, pharmaceuticals, and related educational development.

F. Port Terminals. Facilities for loading, unloading, transferring and storing raw or finished materials, and incidental freight between modes of transportation, not including cannabis or cannabis products. This classification includes the terminals themselves and directly related ancillary activities such as warehousing and other temporary storage, ship repairing, support transportation uses including trucking and railroad yards, freight forwarders, and government offices related to port activity.

 

G. Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage.

1. Wholesaling and Distribution. Facilities primarily engaged in the selling of goods, merchandise, products or materials to retailers, contractors, professional business users, other wholesalers or to agents or brokers, not including cannabis or cannabis products. May include related storage, break-bulk activity, redistribution and delivery.

2. Warehousing and Transportation. Storage of products or goods, including household goods but not including cannabis or cannabis products, with related local or long-distance trucking and transfer of stored items.

3. Trucking Terminal/Freight Transfer Station. A facility where goods and products, not including cannabis or cannabis products, are transferred, often directly, from one vehicle to another without the storage of such goods and products on a long-term basis within a warehouse building or storage yard. Includes break-bulk facilities. May include related maintenance facilities and incidental storage of trucks on site when not in use.

4. Package Distribution. A warehousing and distribution facility used primarily to gather and distribute for delivery, packages and mail, not including cannabis or cannabis products. (Ord. 18-05 §§ 11 – 16; Ord. 13-15 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 93-11 N.S. § 5, 1993; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 11, 12, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.070 Agricultural and extractive use classifications.
A. Animal Husbandry. Raising of animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products, on an agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses including grazing, ranching, dairy farming, and poultry farming.

B. Crop Production. Raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including packing and processing. Cannabis cultivation is subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis.

C. Mining and Processing. Places or plants primarily devoted to surface or subsurface mining of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, oil or gas, together with essential on-site processing and production of only nonmetallic mineral products. Typical places are borrow pits, quarries, oil and gas drilling rigs or concrete batch plants. (Ord. 18-05 § 17; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.16.080 Accessory use classifications.
A. Accessory Uses and Structures. Uses and structures that are incidental to the principal permitted or conditionally permitted use or structure on a site and are customarily found on the same site. This classification includes accessory dwelling units, home occupations, and construction trailers.

1. Accessory Dwelling Unit. An attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides permanent, complete, independent living facilities, including facilities for living, sleeping, food preparation and cooking, eating and sanitation, for one or more persons, on the same parcel as a primary dwelling. This classification is also inclusive of “junior accessory dwelling unit,” as such term is defined in Government Code Section 65852.22.

2. Donation and Collection Bin. An unstaffed drop-off box, receptacle or other similar container used to accept donated clothing or other salvageable personal property, including but not limited to books, shoes, canned goods, and small household items to be used by a nonprofit or for-profit operator for distribution, resale, or recycling. (Ord. 19-04 § 1; Ord. 19-02 § 2).

17.16.090 Temporary use classifications.
A. Animal Shows. Exhibitions of domestic or large animals for a maximum of seven days.

B. Christmas Tree Sales. Retail sale of Christmas trees between Thanksgiving and December 26th.

C. Circuses and Carnivals. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, animal exhibitions, or similar activities in a tent or other temporary structure for a maximum of seven days. This classification excludes events conducted in a permanent entertainment facility.

D. Commercial Filming, Limited. Commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location six or fewer days per quarter of a calendar year.

E. Personal Property Sales. Sales of personal property.

F. Religious Assembly. Religious services conducted on a site that is not permanently occupied by a religious assembly use, for a period of not more than 30 days.

G. Retail Sales, Outdoor. Retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business.

H. Street Fairs. Provision of games, eating and drinking facilities, live entertainment, or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures.

I. Swap Meets, Nonrecurring. Retail sale or exchange of new, handcrafted, or secondhand merchandise for a maximum period of 48 hours, conducted by a sponsor no more than twice in any year.

J. Trade Fairs. Display and sale of goods or equipment related to a specific trade or industry for a maximum period of five days.

K. Other Uses. Other uses of a clearly temporary nature as determined to be appropriate by the community development director. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 13, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.20
(Reserved)
Chapter 17.24
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.24.010    Specific purposes.

17.24.020    RS, RM, and RH districts – Land use regulations.

17.24.030    RS, RM and RH districts – Property development regulations.

17.24.040    Review of plans.

17.24.010 Specific purposes.
A. In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of residential districts are to:

1. Provide appropriately located areas for residential development that are consistent with the general plan and with standards of public health and safety established by the municipal code;

2. Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling, and protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population density, traffic congestion, and other adverse environmental effects;

3. Promote development of housing affordable by low- and moderate-income households by providing a density bonus for projects in which a portion of the units are affordable for such households;

4. Protect residential areas from fires, explosions, landslides, toxic fumes and substances, and other public safety hazards;

5. Protect adjoining single-family residential districts from excessive loss of sun, light, quiet, and privacy resulting from proximity to multifamily development;

6. Achieve design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods;

7. Provide sites for public and semipublic land uses needed to complement residential development or requiring a residential environment;

8. Ensure the provision of public services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.

B. The additional purposes of each R residential district are:

1. RS Single-Family Residential District. To provide opportunities for single-family residential land use, either in neighborhoods or in conjunction with agricultural pursuits, subject to appropriate standards. Duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes existing as of July 1, 1977, are allowed to remain, but all new residential construction shall be single-family dwellings or approved accessory structures.

2. RM Medium-Density Residential District. To provide opportunities for multiple residential uses with low land coverage, including older residences converted to duplexes and new townhouses or cluster housing with landscaped open space for residents’ use.

3. RH High-Density Residential District. To provide opportunities for an intensive form of residential development, including apartments and townhouses with relatively high land coverage, at appropriate locations in the vicinity of First Street, along the waterfront, and near convenience commercial nodes at Southampton Road, East Fifth Street and West Seventh Street. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.24.020 RS, RM, and RH districts – Land use regulations.
In the following schedules, the letter “P” designates use classifications permitted in residential districts. The letter “L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed under the “Additional Use Regulations” which follow. The letter “U” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.104 BMC. The letters “P/U” designate use classifications permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requiring a use permit on the site of a conditional use. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Use Regulations” following the schedule.

Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

RS, RM, and RH Districts: Land Use Regulations 

P    –    Permitted

U    –    Use Permit

L    –    Limited (See “Additional Use Regulations”)

–     –    Not Permitted

 

RS

RM

RH

Additional Regulations

Residential

 

 

 

(A)(B)(M)

Family Day Care, Large

P

P

P

(P)

Family Day Care, Small

P

P

P

 

Group Residential

–

U

U

(C)(D)

Multifamily Residential

–

P

P

(D)

Residential Care, Limited

P

P

P

 

Single-Family Residential

P

P

P

(E)(L)

Supportive Housing

P

P

P

 

Transitional Housing

P

P

P

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

Conference and Meeting Facilities

U

U

U

 

Horticulture, Limited

L1

L1

L1

(Q)

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

 

Adult Day Health Care

U

U

U

 

Clubs and Lodges

–

U

U

 

Convalescent Facilities

–

U

U

 

Cultural Institutions

–

U

U

 

Day Care Center

U

U

U

 

Emergency Shelter

–

L4

–

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

L2

L2

L2

(F)

Public Safety Facilities

U

U

U

 

Religious Assembly

U

U

U

(O)

Residential Care, General

–

U

U

 

Schools, Public or Private

U

U

U

 

Utilities, Major

 

 

 

 

Waste Facility

–

–

–

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

 

Visitor Accommodation

 

 

 

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns

L3

L3

L3

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

P/U

P/U

(A)(G)(H)(I)(J)(K)(Q)

Donation and Collection Bins

L5

L5

L5

(R)

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

P

P

 

Personal Property Sales

P

P

P

 

Street Fairs

U

U

U

 

 

Nonconforming

 

 

 

(N)

 

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

Cultivation of Cannabis for Personal Use, Indoors or Outdoors

P

P

P

(Q)

RS, RM, and RH Districts: Additional Use Regulations

L-1    Use permit required, and no on-site retail sales permitted. Shall not include cannabis cultivation.

L-2    Use permit required for private noncommercial facilities, including swim clubs and tennis clubs.

L-3    Community development director use permit required.

L-4    See BMC 17.70.390, Emergency shelter.

L-5    Only permitted when accessory to a duly permitted club, lodge, cultural institution, religious assembly or school.

(A)    See BMC 17.70.020, Relocated buildings (use permit required).

(B)    See BMC 17.70.030, Exterior materials in R districts.

(C)    Approval of a use permit shall require a finding that (1) the proposed use will have no significant unmitigated environmental impacts; and (2) the building design is compatible with surrounding buildings.

(D)    Design review shall be required; see Chapter 17.108 BMC.

(E)    Rooms in a dwelling unit may be rented for occupancy by not more than three persons who are not members of a single housekeeping unit; provided, that not more than two bedrooms shall be rented in each unit.

(F)    Limited to facilities on sites of fewer than two acres.

(G)    See BMC 17.70.370, Cottage food operations, and BMC 17.70.070, Home occupations.

(H)    See BMC 17.70.050, Nonresidential accessory structures, and BMC 17.70.060, Accessory dwelling units.

(I)    See BMC 17.74.190, Driveways and carports – Design and location in R districts.

(J)    See BMC 17.70.080, Swimming pools and hot tubs.

(K)    See Chapter 17.104 BMC, Use Permits and Variances.

(L)    See BMC 17.70.280, Manufactured homes.

(M)    See BMC 17.70.300, Animals.

(N)    See Chapter 17.98 BMC, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(O)    See BMC 17.70.040, Religious assembly yard requirements.

(P)    Community development director shall issue a permit for large family day care homes caring for nine to 14 children, as defined in Chapter 3.4 of the California Health and Safety Code, upon determining that the proposed large family day care complies with the requirements below. If the proposed large family day care will not be able to conform to the following requirements, the community development director shall refer the application to the planning commission for a use permit as provided in Chapter 17.104 BMC, except that the public notification radius shall be reduced to 300 feet:

(1)    A minimum 300-foot separation is required between all large family day care facilities located on the same street. The separation shall be measured from the closest property lines. For corner properties, the separation shall be measured from the property line of all street frontages.

(2)    No signs, name plates or other advertising shall be affixed to the premises.

(3)    The hours of operation shall not exceed 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.

(4)    The applicant shall maintain a valid state license for a large family day care.

(5)    Noise. The location of the facility, including outdoor play areas, shall be sited to minimize noise impacts on neighboring properties. Noise levels shall comply with the standards identified in the general plan.

(6)    Outdoor Play Areas. Outdoor play areas shall be:

a.    Fully enclosed by a natural barrier, wall, solid fence, or other solid structure having a maximum height of six feet; and

b.    Physically separated from driveways, streets, and parking.

(7)    Adequate parking shall be provided for employees of the large family day care and for pick-up and drop-off of children at the home in accordance with the following standards:

a.    Parking shall comply with BMC 17.74.030, Off-street parking and loading spaces required;

b.    Adequate space shall be available for the safe pick-up and delivery of children to the day care home; and

c.    Vehicles for all day care employees, visitors, and potential clients associated with the day care shall not block driveway entrances and shall park in a legal parking space along the street.

    The criteria above shall be incorporated as required operational standards for all large family day care homes.

    A permit for a large family day care that is not operated in compliance with these regulations or that is in violation of any law or ordinance in connection with large family day care homes or has a currently suspended or revoked state license, shall be revoked by the community development director after 30 days’ written notice unless the large family day care is altered to comply.

(Q)    See Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License, and Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis.

(R)    See BMC 17.70.410, Donation and collection bins.

(Ord. 19-04 § 2; Ord. 18-05 §§ 18, 19, 21; Ord. 16-09 § 1; Ord. 16-01 § 7; Ord. 15-02 § 2; Ord. 14-11 § 4; Ord. 13-06 § 3; Ord. 11-04 § 3; Ord. 11-02 § 3; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 92-18 N.S. § 6, 1993; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 6, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 14, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.24.030 RS, RM and RH districts – Property development regulations.
The following schedules prescribe development regulations for residential districts. The first three columns establish basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses; letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Development Regulations” following the schedule.

RS, RM and RH Districts: Property Development Regulations 

 

Districts


RS

RM

RH

Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.)

6,000

3,000

2,000

 

Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.)

 
Low- or Moderate-Income Housing

4,800

2,400

1,600

Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.)

Elderly Housing

–

2,000

1,300

Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.)

Low-Income Elderly Housing

–

1,500

1,000

(A)

Minimum Site Area (sq. ft.)

6,000

6,000

7,500

(B)(C)(D)

Minimum Site Width (ft.)

60

60

60

(R)(S)

Minimum Yards:

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

20

20

20

(E)(F)

Side (ft.)

5

6; 10

6; 10

(E)(G)(H)

Corner Side (ft.)

10

15

15

(E)

Rear (ft.)

15

15

15

(E)(G)

Courts

 

 

 

(I)

Maximum Height (ft.)

30

35

35

(J)(K)

Maximum Coverage

40%

45%

50%

 

Maximum Nonresidential (FAR)

0.4

0.45

0.5

(L)

Outdoor Living Area

 

 

 

(M)

Minimum Site Landscaping

35%

30%

30%

(N)(O)

Fences and Walls

 

 

 

(P)

Off-Street Parking and Loading

 

 

 

(Q)

Signs

See Chapter 17.78 BMC

Outdoor Facilities

See BMC 17.70.200, Outdoor facilities, and BMC 17.70.250, Satellite antennas and microwave equipment

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See BMC 17.70.210 and 17.70.250

Refuse Storage Areas

See BMC 17.70.220

Underground Utilities

See BMC 17.70.230

Performance Standards

See BMC 17.70.240

Nonconforming Structures

See Chapter 17.98 BMC

RS, RM, and RH Districts: Additional Development Regulations

(A)    See BMC 17.70.270, Affordable housing density bonus.

(B)    See BMC 17.70.130, Development on substandard lots.

(C)    See BMC 17.70.140, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

(D)    The minimum site area shall be 12,000 square feet for use classifications requiring a use permit; see BMC 17.24.020.

(E)    Permitted Projections into Required Yards.

(1)    In All Districts. See BMC 17.70.150, Building projections into yards and courts.

(2)    Accessory Structures. See BMC 17.70.050, Nonresidential accessory structures; BMC 17.70.060, Accessory dwelling units; and BMC 17.74.190, Driveways and carports – Design and location in R districts.

(F)    See BMC 17.70.160, Front yards in R districts.

(G)    Building Height and Required Yards. The width of a required interior side or rear yard adjoining a building wall exceeding 25 feet in height, excluding any portion of a roof, shall be increased five feet over the basic requirement.



(G) BUILDING HEIGHT AND REQUIRED YARDS

(The diagram is illustrative)

(H)    In the RM and RH districts, the average yard width shall be 10 feet, and the minimum width six feet.

(I)    Courts Opposite Windows (RM and RH Districts).

(1)    Opposite Living Room Windows. The minimum width of a court opposite a living room window shall equal the height of the opposite wall, but shall not be less than 20 feet if there is a required window of a habitable room in the opposite wall.

(2)    Opposite Other Habitable Rooms. The minimum width of a court opposite a window of a habitable room other than a living room shall be 14 feet if there is a required window of a habitable room in the opposite wall.

(3)    Dimensions of Courts. Required courts shall extend horizontally 20 feet in both directions from the vertical centerline of a required window, and shall extend upward from the window sill.



(J) COURTS OPPOSITE WINDOWS

(The diagram is illustrative)

(J)    See BMC 17.70.180, Exceptions to height limits.

(K)    Any structure constructed in any Benicia residential area (R district) located west of First Street, and further located within the first 150 feet of the shoreline behind the highest tide mark, shall not exceed 24 feet in height (two stories). The height measurement of the structure shall be the maximum vertical dimension measured from the lowest outside surface ground contact with the structure perimeter to the highest structure point. If the structure is to be built upon fill placed on the site after April 10, 1980, the 24-foot dimension shall include the average depth of fill at the structure perimeter. Pursuant to California Elections Code Section 4013, this requirement shall not be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people. If any portion of a structure is located within the first 150 feet of the shoreline behind the highest tide mark, the whole structure shall conform with the 24-foot height limit.

(K) HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS IN R DISTRICTS WEST OF FIRST STREET

(The diagram is illustrative)

(L)    In the RM and RH districts up to 10 percent additional floor area may be allowed for mixed-use projects with 25 percent affordable residential units; see BMC 17.70.270.

(M)    Open Space.

(1)    Basic Requirement. Total open space on a site having three or more dwelling units shall be at least 200 square feet per dwelling unit.

(2)    Private Open Space. Private open space meeting a portion of the requirement shall be on patios or balconies within which a horizontal rectangle has no dimension less than six feet.

(3)    Shared Open Space. Shared open space, provided by nonstreet side yards, patios and terraces, shall be designed so that a horizontal rectangle inscribed within it has no dimension less than 10 feet, shall be open to the sky, and shall not include driveways or parking areas, or area required for front or street side yards.

(4)    Parkland Dedication. All new single-family and multifamily housing development projects shall be subject to the parkland dedication requirements prescribed by BMC 16.32.040 because they contribute to increased demand for community and neighborhood parks and recreational facilities. Imposition of said parkland dedication requirements is consistent with and implements the general plan’s land use element insofar as it identifies parkland deficiencies in the city and calls for the creation and prioritization of new parks and park improvements. Said developments shall be subject to said requirements irrespective of whether or not they require tentative or parcel map approval. The applicant for such developments shall dedicate land or pay an appropriate fee or a combination of dedication and fee as provided by BMC 16.32.040(F). The applicant shall be entitled to the credit provided for in BMC 16.32.040(I), if applicable. The fees to be imposed pursuant to this subsection (M)(4) shall be set by resolution.

(N)    Planting Areas.

(1)    Yards Adjoining Streets. All visible portions of a required yard adjoining a street shall be planting area or hard scape that includes parking areas, driveways and walks, as well as areas covered by ornamental gravel, crushed rock or similar materials.

(2)    Interior Yards. In the RM and RH districts, at least 50 percent of each required interior side yard and rear yard shall be planting areas having a minimum width of five feet adjoining a side or rear property line; provided, that the width of a required planting area may be reduced to two feet in one side or rear yard adjoining a driveway and an accessory structure may occupy a portion of the planting area in a rear yard.

(3)    Notwithstanding subsection (N)(2) of this section, a continuous planting area having a minimum width of five feet shall adjoin an RS district.

(O)    See BMC 17.70.190, Landscaping, irrigation and hydroseeding, and Chapter 17.82 BMC, Trees and Views.

(P)    Fences and Walls. The maximum heights of a fence or wall shall be six feet except within 15 feet of the front property line abutting a street, where the maximum height shall be three feet. In addition, all fences and walls shall be subject to the driveway and intersection visibility requirements of BMC 17.74.150. For reversed corner lots, a fence placed on the rear and side property lines may be six feet in height; provided, that the driveway visibility requirements of BMC 17.74.150 are met. Where the difference in elevation between two adjacent lots is more than 10 feet, the maximum height shall be three feet to protect views from the upper lot, unless the community development director approves a higher height. The director’s decision shall be subject to appeal to the planning commission under the provisions of Chapter 17.82 BMC.

(Q)    No portion of a driveway located in a front setback area shall be used for required parking. See Chapter 17.74 BMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

(R)    Reduction of Lot Width. In an RS district, the community development director may approve a tentative parcel map containing up to four lots, and the planning commission may approve a tentative subdivision with five or more lots, with lot widths of less than 60 feet, but not less than 50 feet, if the following criteria are met:

(1)    The applicant shall provide documented evidence to the planning commission or community development director that property within 300 feet of the original parcel is developed or subdivided; and

(2)    The applicant shall provide documented evidence of the existing lot width of properties within 300 feet of the original parcel. Minimum lot width of new parcels shall be the average of all lot widths within the 300 feet comparison area, or at least 50 feet wide, whichever is greater; and

(3)    The applicant must show that the land falls naturally into a pattern of lots containing less than 60-foot lot widths; and

(4)    Flag lots shall comply with subsection (S) of this section, Flag Lots; and

(5)    The reduction of lot width will not be detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to other property in the vicinity; and

(6)    The planning commission or community development director must be satisfied that the applicant has not sold or transferred land, or taken any other steps to create the artificial result that the lot or lots will not meet the 60-foot lot width requirement.

    The planning commission or community development director may attach additional requirements to the subdivision to ensure that the reduction in lot width is not injurious to property or detrimental to the public welfare, such as by providing for adequate distance between buildings and between driveways. The criteria above shall be incorporated into the findings of approval for any such subdivision.

(S)    Flag Lots. A tentative parcel map with four or fewer lots that contains up to two flag lots in the RS district may be approved, if the following criteria are met:

(1)    Parcel map and flag lot configuration shall require planning commission review and approval;

(2)    The original parcel’s shape, location or topography creates areas that could be developed with a residence that would not front on public streets;

(3)    The portion of the lot providing the access corridor shall not be counted towards meeting minimum lot size requirements for the flag lot;

(4)    Flag lot shall have a minimum street frontage of 25 feet;

(5)    Driveway accessing flag lot shall be paved with a minimum 16-foot width to access one lot;

(6)    Up to two lots may be accessed via one access driveway, provided the street frontage is increased to 30 feet and the paved driveway is increased to 19 feet;

(7)    Width of lot shall measure at least 60 feet where the access corridor ends;

(8)    Side and rear yard setbacks for flag lot and adjoining lots shall be measured from the access corridor;

(9)    Front yard setback for flag lots shall be measured from where the access corridor ends;

(10)    The community development director shall be satisfied the applicant has not sold or transferred land, or taken any other steps to create the artificial result that the original parcel is shaped irregularly; and

(11)    Further subdivision of flag lots shall not be allowed.

    The planning commission may attach additional requirements to the parcel map to ensure that the creation of a flag lot is not injurious to property or detrimental to the public welfare. The criteria above shall be incorporated into the findings of approval for any such subdivision.

(Ord. 11-04 § 4; Ord. 06-09 § 1; Ord. 06-08 § 1; Ord. 92-15 § 7, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 6, 1992; Ord. 92-7 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 15 – 18, 1989; Ord. 88-7 N.S. § 4, 1988; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.24.040 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require design review (see Chapter 17.108 BMC); all projects shall require development plan review (see Chapter 17.112 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.26
MIXED USE DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.26.010    Downtown.

17.26.020    Repealed.

17.26.010 Downtown.
Land use regulations and development standards for the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan area, plus the remaining parcels along First Street south of B Street, are regulated by the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan. (Ord. 07-21 § 3).

17.26.020 Medical marijuana distribution facilities and cultivation prohibited.
Repealed by Ord. 18-05. (Ord. 16-01 § 8; Ord. 11-02 § 4).

Chapter 17.28
C COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.28.010    Specific purposes.

17.28.020    CC, CO, CG, and CW districts – Land use regulations.

17.28.030    CC, CO, CG, and CW districts – Property development regulations.

17.28.040    Review of plans.

17.28.010 Specific purposes.
A. In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of commercial districts are to:

1. Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the general plan for a full range of office, retail commercial, and service commercial uses needed by residents of, and visitors to, the city and region;

2. Strengthen the city’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities;

3. Create suitable environments for various types of commercial uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of inharmonious uses;

4. Minimize the impact of commercial development on adjacent residential districts;

5. Ensure that the appearance and effects of commercial buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located;

6. Provide opportunities for residential development on the site of commercial development or on separate sites in certain commercial districts;

7. Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities;

8. Provide sites for public and semipublic uses needed to complement commercial development or compatible with a commercial environment;

9. Preserve a balanced mix of locally, regionally, and nationally based businesses and small and medium sized businesses to maintain and promote the long-term economic health of businesses and the community as a whole;

10. Regulate the location and operation of formula businesses in order to maintain the city’s unique historic small town character, the diversity and economic vitality of the community’s commercial districts and the quality of life of Benicia residents.

B. The additional purposes of each C district are as follows:

1. CC Community Commercial District. To provide sites for businesses serving the daily needs of nearby residential areas while establishing development standards that prevent significant adverse effects on residential uses adjoining a CC district.

2. CO Commercial Office District. To provide a landscaped environment for offices of residential scale and for residential development that is protected from the more intense levels of activity associated with retail commercial development.

3. CG General Commercial District. To provide opportunities for the full range of retail and service businesses deemed suitable for location in Benicia, including businesses not permitted in other commercial districts because they attract heavy vehicular traffic or have certain adverse impacts; and to provide opportunities for certain limited manufacturing uses that have impacts comparable to those of permitted retail and service uses to occupy space not in demand for retailing or services.

4. Repealed by Ord. 07-21.

5. CW Waterfront Commercial District. To provide opportunities for waterfront-related development around the Benicia marina and along the shoreline at appropriate locations. (Ord. 07-21 § 4; Ord. 07-12 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.28.020 CC, CO, CG, and CW districts – Land use regulations.
In the following schedules, the letter “P” designates use classifications permitted in commercial districts. The letter “L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Use Regulations” that follow. The letter “U” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.104 BMC. The letters “P/U” designate use classifications permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requiring a use permit on the site of a conditional use. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Use Regulations” following the schedule. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all classifications under the heading.

CC, CO, CG, and CW Districts: Land Use Regulations 

P    –    Permitted

U    –    Use Permit

L    –    Limited (See “Additional Use Regulations”)

–     –    Not Permitted

 

CC

CO

CG

CW

Additional Regulations

Residential

 

 

 

 

(A)

Group Residential

–

–

U

–

 

Work/Live Quarters

P

–

P

P

 

Multifamily Residential

L1

L1

–

P

 

Residential Care, Limited

–

–

–

P

 

Single-Family Residential

L1

L1

–

L1

 

Supportive Housing

L1

L1

–

L21

 

Transitional Housing

L1

L1

–

L21

 

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Day Health Care

U

U

–

U

 

Clubs and Lodges

U

U

P

P

 

Cultural Institutions

U

U

P

P

 

Day Care Center

U

U

–

U

 

Emergency Shelter

–

L20

L20

–

 

Government Offices

P

P

P

P

 

Hospitals

–

U

U

–

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

–

–

–

P

(B)

Public Safety Facilities

U

U

U

U

 

Religious Assembly

P

U

U

U

(K)

Residential Care, General

U

U

–

–

 

Schools, Public or Private

U

–

–

–

 

Utilities, Major

U

U

U

U

 

Waste Facility

–

–

–

–

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

(A)

Adult Businesses

–

–

P

–

(C)

Ambulance Services

–

–

P

–

 

Animal Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

 

Animal Boarding

–

–

L15

–

 

Animal Grooming

L15

–

P

–

 

Animal Hospitals

–

L15

L15

–

 

Animals – Retail Sales

–

–

P

P

 

Artists’ Studios

P

P

P

P

 

Banks and Savings and Loans

–

P

P

–

 

Banks and Savings and Loans with Drive-Up Service

–

U

U

–

 

Building Materials and Services

–

–

P

–

 

Catering Services

P

P

P

P

 

Commercial Filming

U

U

U

U

 

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

U

L12

U

U

 

Card Room, Game Center, Billiard Parlor

–

–

U

U

(D)

Communication Facilities

–

–

P

–

 

Conference and Meeting Facilities

U

U

L17

L17

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

P

P

P

P

 

With Wine and Beer Service

P

P

P

P

 

With Full Alcoholic Beverage Service

U

U

U

U

 

With Live Entertainment

–

–

U

U

 

With Take-Out Service

U

–

P

P

(E)

Drive-Up

U

–

U

–

 

Formula Business

U

–

L19

–

(L)

Limited

P

P

P

P

 

Truck Stop

–

–

U

–

 

Food and Beverage Sales

L4

–

L4

L4

 

Funeral and Interment Services

L7

L6

L7

–

 

Laboratories

–

P

P

–

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

–

–

P

–

 

Marinas

–

–

–

P

 

Marine Sales and Services

–

–

–

P

 

Nurseries

U

–

P

–

 

Offices, Business and Professional

P

P

P

P

 

Outdoor Entertainment

U

U

U

U

(O)

Pawn Shops

–

–

P

–

 

Personal Improvement Services

L8

U

L8

–

 

Personal Services

P

L13

P

P

 

Research and Development Services

–

–

P

–

 

Retail Sales

P

–

P

P

 

Establishment of more than 20,000 square feet

U

–

U

–

(M)

Secondhand Appliances/Clothing

–

–

P

–

 

Swap Meet, Recurring

–

–

U

–

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile Rentals

–

–

L10

–

 

Automobile Washing

–

–

U

–

 

Service Stations

L11

–

U

–

(F)

Vehicle/Equipment Repair

–

–

L16

–

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals

–

–

P

–

 

Visitor Accommodations

 

 

 

 

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns

L16

L16

P

P

 

Hotels and Motels

–

–

P

P

 

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

P/U

P/U

P/U

(G) (H)

Donation and Collection Bins

L22

L22

P

L22

(P)

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Animal Shows

–

–

U

–

 

Christmas Tree Sales

P

P

P

P

 

Circuses and Carnivals

–

–

U

U

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

P

P

P

 

Religious Assembly

P

U

U

U

 

Retail Sales, Outdoor

U

U

U

U

 

Swap Meets

 

 

 

 

 

Nonrecurring

U

U

U

U

 

 

Nonconforming

–

–

–

–

(J)

 

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Cannabis Laboratories

–

U

–

–

(N)

Cannabis Retail Operation

U

–

U

U

(N)

CC, CO, CG, and CW Districts: Additional Use Regulations

L-1    Not permitted on ground level.

L-2    Reserved.

L-3    Repealed by Ord. 09-01.

L-4    A use permit is required for establishments occupying more than 1,500 square feet and for convenience markets. Except as provided below, convenience markets shall not be located within 500 feet of a site occupied by a public or private school, park or recreational facilities, and no exterior vending machines shall be permitted. A convenience market may be located within 500 feet of a site occupied by park or recreational facilities if the proposed convenience market is within 500 feet of an existing retail food and beverage sales establishment. Convenience markets may be operated only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Longer hours are permitted only if they would not have an adverse effect on neighborhood uses.

L-5    Reserved.

L-6    Only mortuaries allowed, subject to a use permit.

L-7    Only mortuaries allowed.

L-8    Community development director use permit required only for dance and music studios. If the following conditions are met, the community development director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of a zoning permit:

1.    The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is completely enclosed and soundproofed, or is located at least 300 feet away from the property line of the nearest residential use;

2.    The proposed use will not operate prior to 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or prior to 8:00 a.m. Sunday, or after 10:00 p.m. any day of the week.

L-9    Only limousine or taxi service, subject to a use permit.

L-10    Use permit required only for limousine and taxi service.

L-11    No repair services are permitted, and a use permit is required.

L-12    Health/fitness clubs allowed, subject to a use permit.

L-13    No self-service laundries permitted.

L-14    Repealed by Ord. 11-04.

L-15    Community development director use permit required. If the following conditions are met, the community development director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of a zoning permit:

1.    The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is entirely enclosed, and no outside facilities are proposed;

2.    For animal hospitals, or where boarding or overnight care facilities are proposed, the use is located in a soundproofed and air-conditioned facility.

L-16    Community development director use permit required.

L-17    Staff use permit required for facilities holding outdoor events or activities.

L-18    Residential uses established prior to January 1, 1993, are permitted. New residential units created after that date are not permitted on ground level facing a street. New residential units are permitted on the first floor behind an allowed nonresidential use facing a street.

L-19    Formula businesses are a permitted use in the CG zone except for the Solano/Davies Square areas (bounded by Military, N and West and East Second Streets) where a use permit is required.

L-20    See BMC 17.70.390, Emergency shelter.

L-21    Not permitted on ground level for a single dwelling unit.

L-22    Only permitted when accessory to a duly permitted club, lodge, cultural institution, religious assembly or school.

(A)    See BMC 17.70.020, Relocated buildings (use permit required).

(B)    Limited to facilities on sites two acres or less.

(C)    An adult business offering live entertainment shall be subject to the requirements of Chapters 5.44 and 17.102 BMC.

(D)    See BMC 17.70.290, Game centers.

(E)    See BMC 17.70.090, Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

(F)    See BMC 17.70.110, Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

(G)    See BMC 17.70.050, Nonresidential accessory structures.

(H)    See BMC 17.70.080, Swimming pools and hot tubs.

(I)    See Chapter 17.104 BMC, Use Permits and Variances.

(J)    See Chapter 17.98 BMC, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(K)    See BMC 17.70.040, Religious assembly yard requirements.

(L)    See BMC 17.70.350, Formula businesses.

(M)    See BMC 17.70.360, Retail sales larger than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.

(N)    See Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License, and Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis.

(O)    See BMC 17.70.400, Outdoor entertainment.

(P)    See BMC 17.70.410, Donation and collection bins.

(Ord. 19-04 § 3; Ord. 18-16 § 3; Ord. 18-05 §§ 22, 23; Ord. 16-01 § 9; Ord. 15-02 §§ 3, 4; Ord. 14-11 § 5; Ord. 13-15 § 4; Ord. 11-04 § 5; Ord. 11-02 § 5; Ord. 09-01 § 5; Ord. 07-21 § 5; Ord. 07-15 § 1; Ord. 07-12 § 3; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 98-3 N.S.; Ord. 94-1 N.S. § 4, 1994; Ord. 93-11 N.S. § 7, 1993; Ord. 93-1 N.S. § 6, 1993; Ord. 92-18 N.S. § 7, 1992; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 8, 1992; Ord. 90-17 N.S. § 4, 1990; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 19, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.28.030 CC, CO, CG, and CW districts – Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the CC, CO, CG, and CW districts. The first five columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses in each district. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Development Regulations” following the schedule.

CC, CO, CG, and CW Districts: Property Development Regulations

Use Classifications

CC

CO

CG

CW

Additional

Residential development

 

 

 

 

(A)

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

10,000

10,000

7,500

5,000

(B) (C)

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

70

70

60

50

 

Minimum Yards:

 

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

15

15

10

15

(D)

Side (ft.)

–

–

–

–

(D)(E)(F)

Corner Side Rear (ft.)

–

–

–

–

(D)(E)(F)

Maximum Height (ft.) of Structures

40

40

40

40

(G)(H)

Maximum Lot Coverage

50%

50%

75%

50%

 

Maximum Nonresidential FAR

0.8

0.8

1.2

0.8

 

Maximum FAR

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.2

 

Minimum Site Landscaping

20%

20%

10%

20%

(I)(J)

Outdoor Living Area

 

 

 

 

(K)(L)

Fences and Walls

 

 

 

 

(M)(N)

Off-Street Parking and Loading

 

 

 

 

(O)(P)

Signs

See Chapter 17.78 BMC

Outdoor Facilities

See BMC 17.70.200

(Q)

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See BMC 17.70.210

(Q)

Refuse Storage Areas

See BMC 17.70.220

 

Underground Utilities

See BMC 17.70.230

 

Performance Standards

See BMC 17.70.240

Nonconforming Structures

See Chapter 17.98 BMC

CC, CO, CG, or CW Districts: Additional Development Regulations

(A)    Residential development in a CC, CO, CG, or CW district shall comply with the RH development regulations for site area per unit and courts opposite windows. Renting of rooms in a dwelling unit shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of BMC 17.24.020(E).

(B)    See BMC 17.70.130, Development on substandard lots.

(C)    See BMC 17.70.140, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

(D)    See BMC 17.70.150, Building projections into yards and courts. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(E)    A 10-foot side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district, and structures shall not intercept a 1:1 or 45-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of 12 feet above existing grade at the R district boundary line.

(E) SIDE OR REAR YARDS

(The diagram is illustrative)

(F)    Visible yards not used for parking shall have a three-foot planting strip adjoining an interior property line within 50 feet of a street property line, providing that such a planting strip is not required for a lot with a single-family dwelling.

(F) VISIBLE YARDS

(The diagram is illustrative)

(G)    See BMC 17.70.170, Measurement of height. Buildings fronting on First Street shall not exceed three stories.

(H)    See BMC 17.70.180, Exceptions to height limits.

(I)    Planting Areas.

(1)    CO and CW District. Sites in the CO and CW districts shall comply with the planting area requirements of BMC 17.24.030(N), Multifamily Residential.

(2)    CC and CG Districts. Required yards shall be enclosed by a solid concrete, wood or masonry wall at least six feet in height or shall be planting areas; provided, that a wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height.

(J)    See BMC 17.70.190, Landscaping, irrigation and hydroseeding.

(K)    An average 60 square feet (with a minimum horizontal dimension of six feet) of private open space is required for each dwelling unit.

(L)    Courts shall be required opposite windows in dwelling units. The minimum width shall be 20 feet opposite a living room window and 14 feet opposite the window of any other habitable room, and the court shall extend horizontally 10 feet in both directions from the vertical centerline of the window. Where no interior side yard is required, the width of the court perpendicular to the property line need not exceed 10 feet. A required court shall be open to the sky above the sill of a window requiring the court; provided, that eaves may project up to two feet from a wall adjoining a court.

    Exceptions: Courts are not required for live/work quarters or for residential units in mixed-use projects.

(M)    The maximum height of a fence or wall shall be eight feet.

(N)    A six-foot solid masonry, wood or concrete wall shall adjoin the property line of the site of a new ground-floor residential use abutting an existing nonresidential use or the property line of a new nonresidential use abutting the site of an existing ground-floor residential use. However, no wall shall be required where the portion of the site within 10 feet of the property line is occupied by planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line. A wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height.



(N) REQUIRED WALLS – RESIDENTIAL USE ABUTTING NONRESIDENTIAL USE

(The diagram is illustrative)

(O) In a CC, CO, CG, or CW district, a triangular yard adjoining both sides of a driveway crossing a street property line shall have a depth of five feet at the edge of the driveway and a width measured on both sides of the driveway of 50 feet, or the distance to the intercepting property line, whichever is less. At least 50 percent of each yard shall be planting area. Visible yards shall have a three-foot planting strip along interior property lines within 50 feet of a street property line; this strip shall be counted in determining compliance with the 50 percent planting strip requirement.

(O) DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY

(The diagram is illustrative)

(P)    See Chapter 17.74 BMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

(Q)    See BMC 17.70.250, Satellite antennas and microwave equipment.

(Ord. 07-21 § 6; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 20, 21, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.28.040 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require design review (see Chapter 17.108 BMC). All projects shall require development plan review (see Chapter 17.112 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.32
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Sections:

17.32.010    Specific purposes.

17.32.020    IL, IG, IW and IP districts – Land use regulations.

17.32.030    IL, IG, IW and IP districts – Property development regulations.

17.32.040    Review of plans.

17.32.010 Specific purposes.
A. In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of industrial district regulations are to:

1. Provide appropriately located areas consistent with the general plan for a broad range of manufacturing and service commercial uses;

2. Strengthen the city’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city and surrounding communities;

3. Provide a suitable environment for various types of industrial uses, and protect them from the adverse impacts of inharmonious uses;

4. Reserve areas for port terminals and water-related industry;

5. Encourage technologically oriented industrial uses including biotechnology, information technology, “green” technology, clean technology, nanotechnology and laboratory uses; except vivarium, which is prohibited. Vivarium is a facility that engages in the keeping and/or raising of living animals for the purpose of observation, testing, or research;

6. Ensure that the appearance and effects of industrial uses are compatible with the character of the area in which they are located;

7. Minimize the impact of industrial uses on adjacent residential districts;

8. Ensure the provision of adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.

B. The additional purposes of each I district are as follows:

1. IL Limited Industrial District. To protect areas appropriate for business and commercial services and light manufacturing from adverse effects of retail uses or of general industrial uses by preventing conversion of prime sites to general office use;

2. IG General Industrial District. To provide sites for the full range of manufacturing, industrial processing, general service, and distribution uses deemed suitable for location in Benicia; and to protect Benicia’s general industrial areas, to the extent feasible, from disruption and competition for space from unrelated retail and commercial uses that could more appropriately be located elsewhere in the city. Performance standards will minimize potential environmental impacts;

3. IW Water-Related Industrial District. To protect sites for port-priority uses and to provide opportunities for water-related industry and marine services supporting the Port of Benicia. Performance standards will minimize potentially adverse environmental impacts;

4. IP Industrial Park District. To provide sites in landscaped settings for industrial office centers, research and development facilities, limited industrial activities (including production and assembly, but no raw materials processing or bulk handling), and small-scale warehousing distribution. (Ord. 13-15 § 5; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.32.020 IL, IG, IW and IP districts – Land use regulations.
In the following schedule, the letter “P” designates use classifications permitted in industrial districts. The letter “L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations described by the “Additional Use Regulations” which follow. The letter “U” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a use permit. The letters “P/U” designate use classifications permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requiring a use permit on the site of a conditional use. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Use Regulations” following the schedule. Where letters in parentheses are opposite a use classification heading, referenced regulations shall apply to all use classifications under the heading.

IL, IG, IW, and IP Districts: Land Use Regulations 

P    –    Permitted

U    –    Use Permit

L    –    Limited (See “Additional Use Regulations”)

–     –    Not Permitted

 

IL

IG

IW

IP

Additional Regulations

Residential

 

 

 

 

(L)

Work/Live Quarters

U

–

–

–

(A)

 

Public and Semipublic

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Day Health Care

U

U

–

U

(B)

Clubs and Lodges

L18

L18

–

L18

 

Cultural Institutions

U

U

–

U

 

Day Care, General

U

U

–

U

(B)

Government Offices

U

U

U

U

 

Heliports

L1

L1

L1

L1

 

Maintenance and Service Facilities

P

P

P

–

 

Public Safety Facilities

L20

L20

L20

L20

 

Religious Assembly

U

U

–

U

(K)

Utilities, Major

U

U

U

U

 

Waste Facility

–

U

–

–

 

Utilities, Minor

P

P

P

P

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Business

P

P

–

P

(M)

Ambulance Services

P

P

–

P

 

Animal Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

 

Animal Boarding

L20

–

–

–

 

Animal Hospitals

L20

L20

–

–

 

Artists’ Studios

P

–

–

L20

 

Banks and Savings and Loans

L2

L2

–

L2

 

Building Materials and Services

P

P

L12

L20

 

Cannabis Retail Operation

–

–

–

–

(O)

Catering Services

P

P

–

P

 

Commercial Filming

L20

L20

L20

L20

 

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

L5

L21

–

L5

 

Game Center

L8

L8

–

L8

 

Communication Facilities

P

P

P

P

 

Eating and Drinking Establishments

L4

L4

L4

L4

 

Mobile Food Vending

P

P

P

P

(N)

With Wine and Beer Service

L4

L4

L4

L4

 

With Full Alcoholic Beverage Service

U

U

U

U

 

With Take-Out Service

L4

L4

L4

L4

(D)

Limited

L4

L4

L4

L4

(D)

Food and Beverage Sales

L6

L6

–

L7

 

Funeral and Interment Services

L9

–

–

–

 

Horticulture, Limited

P

P

–

–

 

Laboratories

P

P

–

P

 

Maintenance and Repair Services

P

P

L12

P

 

Marine Sales and Services

–

–

P

–

 

Nurseries

P

P

–

U

 

Offices, Business and Professional

–

–

–

L13

 

Personal Improvement Services

L14

L14

–

L14

 

Personal Services

L10

L10

–

L10

 

Research and Development Services

P

P

L12

P

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile Washing

U

L15

–

–

(E)

Service Stations

U

L16

L12

U

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair

L17

L17

–

–

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals

U

L11

–

–

 

Vehicle Storage

U

U

L12

–

 

Warehousing and Storage, Limited

P

P

L12

U

 

 

Industrial

 

 

 

 

 

Industry, Custom

P

P

L12

P

 

Industry, General

–

L19

L12

U

 

Industry, Limited

P

P

L12

P

 

Small-Scale

P

P

L12

P

 

Industry, Research and Development

P

P

L12

P

 

Industry, Technology

P

P

L12

P

 

Port Terminals

–

–

P

–

 

Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage

 

 

 

 

 

Wholesaling and Distribution

P

P

L12

U

 

Warehousing and Transportation

P

P

L12

U

 

Trucking Terminal/Freight Transfer Station

U

U

L12

–

 

Package Distribution

P

P

L12

U

 

 

Agricultural and Extractive Uses

 

 

 

 

(J)(L)

Mining and Processing

–

U

–

–

 

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

P/U

P/U

P/U

(F)(G)(H)(L)

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

 

 

(G)(J)(L)

Animal Shows

U

U

–

–

 

Christmas Tree Sales

P

P

–

–

 

Circuses and Carnivals

–

U

–

–

 

Retail Sales – Outdoor

U

U

U

–

 

Swap Meets – Nonrecurring

U

U

–

–

 

Trade Fairs

U

U

U

U

 

 

Nonconforming

 

 

 

 

(I)

 

Other Uses

 

 

 

 

 

Cannabis Cultivation Operation

U

U

U

U

(O)

Cannabis Distribution

U

U

U

U

(O)

Cannabis Manufacturing Operation

U

U

U

U

(O)

Cannabis Microbusiness

U

U

U

U

(O)

Cannabis Testing Laboratory

U

U

U

U

(O)

IL, IG, IW, and IP Districts: Additional Use Regulations

L-1    Allowed with a use permit and heliport permit from the California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics if located 1,000 or more feet from a residential district.

L-2    Only automatic teller machines allowed.

L-3    Use permit required only for equipment rentals and retail sales.

L-4    Permitted as a secondary use in a building occupying no more than 2,500 square feet of the building area. A community development director use permit is required for secondary uses occupying building areas greater than 2,500 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet, or where the use is the primary use of a building. Not permitted for uses larger than 5,000 square feet.

L-5    Only health fitness clubs and tennis/racquetball clubs are permitted as the principal use in a structure, subject to a use permit. Other activities regulated under this use classification are permitted as a secondary use within a building, occupying no more than 1,000 square feet of the building floor area.

L-6    Use permit required for establishments occupying more than 1,000 square feet.

L-7    Only delicatessens and food stores occupying fewer than 1,000 square feet are permitted.

L-8    Only game centers with five or fewer games permitted; also see BMC 17.70.290, Game centers.

L-9    Only crematories, columbariums, and mausoleums allowed.

L-10    Only beauty shops and barbershops permitted.

L-11    New or used automobile, truck or motorcycle retail sales shall be permitted only as an accessory to wholesale operations.

L-12    Only water-related uses allowed.

L-13    Medical/dental offices, insurance brokerage offices, and real estate brokerage offices not permitted.

L-14    Only business and trade schools permitted.

L-15    Only truck tractor and trailer washing permitted.

L-16    Only stations offering controlled services to individual uses within an industrial area are allowed, subject to a use permit.

L-17    Only truck and equipment repair primarily serving industrial activities are permitted by right; a community development director use permit is required for automobile repair and for repair services that cater to the general public. If the following conditions are met, the community development director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of a zoning permit:

1.    The proposed use is located in an existing structure on a major arterial or on a street which connects to a major arterial, and is readily accessible to residential and commercial areas;

2.    No outdoor repair or maintenance activities are proposed in conjunction with the use;

3.    No outdoor storage of vehicles or equipment will take place during nonbusiness hours;

4.    The applicant can demonstrate that the proposed site will meet zoning ordinance parking requirements.

L-18    Only trade union halls, including their accompanying business offices, are permitted.

L-19    General industrial uses are permitted by right except that a use permit is required for oil and gas refining.

L-20    Community development director use permit required. If the following conditions are met, the community development director may waive the use permit requirement and approve the use upon issuance of a zoning permit:

1.    The proposed use is located in an existing structure which is entirely enclosed, and no outside facilities are proposed;

2.    For animal hospitals, or where boarding or overnight care facilities are proposed, the use is located in a soundproofed and air-conditioned facility.

L-21    Health fitness clubs, tennis/racquetball clubs, and recreational facilities such as batting cages, indoor golf driving ranges, and firing and archery ranges are permitted within a structure, subject to a use permit when occupying more than 1,000 square feet. All activities regulated under this use classification are permitted when occupying no more than 1,000 square feet of the building floor area.

(A)    See BMC 17.70.020, Relocated buildings (use permit required).

(B)    Limited to facilities accessory to manufacturing, wholesaling, or distribution, and not exceeding 25 percent of the floor area occupied by the principal use.

(C)    Limited to facilities accessory to manufacturing, wholesaling, or distribution, and not exceeding 25 percent of the floor area occupied by the principal use.

(D)    See BMC 17.70.090, Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

(E)    See BMC 17.70.110, Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

(F)    See BMC 17.70.050, Nonresidential accessory structures.

(G)    See Chapter 17.104 BMC, Use Permits and Variances.

(H)    Maximum: One dwelling unit per site as caretaker’s housing.

(I)    See Chapter 17.98 BMC, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(J)    See BMC 17.70.260, Hazardous materials.

(K)    No day care facilities or schools shall be permitted as part of a religious assembly facility.

(L)    Evaluate a nonindustrial or noncommercial project against the following criteria when considering findings for use permits or variances:

(1)    Will the project create substantial conflicts with existing industrial and commercial traffic?

(2)    Will the project be subject to excessive glare, noise or vibration from adjacent industrial/commercial uses? (Refer to general plan for noise criteria, Chapter 4, p. 178.)

(3)    Will the project be exposed to hazardous materials or risks that would create health and safety hazards for persons occupying or visiting the project?

(4)    Will the project be located on an arterial street, or located in an area which would bring nonindustrial traffic onto local streets?

(M)    An adult business offering live entertainment shall be subject to the requirements of Chapters 5.44 and 17.102 BMC.

(N)    Mobile food vending shall be subject to the requirements of BMC 17.70.380, Mobile food vendors.

(O)    See Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License, and Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis.

(Ord. 18-05 §§ 24 – 26; Ord. 16-01 § 10; Ord. 15-02 § 5; Ord. 14-06 § 3; Ord. 13-15 § 6; Ord. 11-04 § 6; Ord. 11-02 § 6; Ord. 09-01 § 6; Ord. 05-05 § 1; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 94-8 N.S.; Ord. 93-11 N.S. § 8, 1993; Ord. 93-3 N.S. § 5, 1993; Ord. 92-18 § 8, 1992; Ord. 92-15 § 9, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 17, 1992; Ord. 90-5 N.S. § 5, 1990; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.32.030 IL, IG, IW and IP districts – Property development regulations.
The following schedule prescribes development regulations for the IL, IG, IW and IP districts. The first four columns prescribe basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Development Regulations” following the schedule.

IL, IG, IW and IP Districts: Development Regulations 

Use Classifications

IL

IG

IW

IP

Additional Regulations

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)

20,000

20,000

40,000

20,000

(A)(B)

Minimum Lot Width (ft.)

100

100

100

100

(A)

Minimum Yards:

 

 

 

 

 

Front (ft.)

See Note N

25

(C)

Side (ft.)

–

–

–

10

(C)(D)

Corner Side (ft.)

10

10

5

25

(C)

Rear (ft.)

–

–

–

10

(C)(D)

Maximum Height of Structures

50

–

–

50

(E)(F)

Maximum Lot Coverage

50%

75%

75%

50%

 

Maximum FAR

0.8

1.0

1.0

0.6

 

Minimum Site Landscaping

10%

10%

5%

15%

(G)(H)

Fences and Walls

–

–

–

–

(I)(J)

Off-Street Parking and Loading

–

–

–

–

(K)(L)

Signs

See Chapter 17.78 BMC

 

Outdoor Facilities

See BMC 17.70.200

(M)

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

See BMC 17.70.210

(M)

Refuse Storage Areas

See BMC 17.70.220

 

Underground Utilities

See BMC 17.70.230

 

Performance Standards

See BMC 17.70.240

 

IL, IG, IW and IP Districts: Development Regulations (Continued)

Use Classifications

IL

IG

IW

IP

Additional Regulations

Nonconforming Structures and Signs

See Chapters 17.98 and 17.78 BMC

 

IL, IG, IW and IP Districts – Additional Development Regulations

(A)    See BMC 17.70.130, Development on substandard lots.

(B)    See BMC 17.70.140, Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

(C)    See BMC 17.70.150, Building projections into yards and courts. Double-frontage lots shall provide front yards on each frontage.

(D)    A 10-foot interior side or rear yard shall adjoin an R district, and structures shall not intercept a 45-degree daylight plane inclined inward from a height of 12 feet above existing grade at the R district property line.

(E)    See BMC 17.70.170, Measurement of height.

(F)    One foot of additional height allowed for each additional foot the building is set back from each property line beyond the minimum yard requirement may be allowed, up to a maximum height of 75 feet; see also BMC 17.70.180, Exceptions to height limits.

(G)    Planting Areas.

(1)    IL District. Required yards shall be planting areas except for necessary drives and walks.

(2)    IG District. Required yards shall be planting areas, except for necessary drives and walks, or may be enclosed by a solid fence or wall at least three feet in height, subject to the discretion of the community development director.

(3)    Exceptions. In calculating the minimum percent of the site area to be landscaped, creeks and adjacent riparian vegetation and slopes to be retained in their natural state shall qualify as planting areas.

(H)    See BMC 17.70.190, Landscaping, irrigation and hydroseeding.

(I)    A six-foot solid masonry or concrete wall shall adjoin the property line of the site of a new nonresidential use abutting the site of an existing ground-floor residential use. However, no wall shall be required where the portion of the site within 10 feet of the property line is occupied by a planting area or by a building having no openings except openings opposite a street property line. A wall within 15 feet of a street property line shall not exceed three feet in height.

(J)    The maximum height of a fence or wall shall be 12 feet, except adjacent to an R or C district, where it shall be eight feet.

(K)    See BMC 17.28.030(O).

(L)    See Chapter 17.74 BMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.

(M)    See BMC 17.70.250: Satellite antennas and microwave equipment.

(N)    The required minimum front yards in the IG, IL, and IW zones shall be as follows:

Building Height Above Curb

Required Setback

Less than 18 feet

15 feet

18 feet to 24 feet

20 feet

Greater than 24 feet

25 feet

(Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 8, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.32.040 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall be subject to design review (see Chapter 17.108 BMC); all projects shall require development plan review (see Chapter 17.112 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.36
OS OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
Sections:

17.36.010    Specific purposes.

17.36.020    Applicability.

17.36.030    Land use regulations.

17.36.040    Development regulations.

17.36.050    Review of plans.

17.36.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of the OS district are to:

A. Provide a suitable classification for large public or private sites permanently designated for park or open space use;

B. Protect public health and safety by limiting lands subject to flooding, slides, or other hazards to open space use;

C. Allow the planning commission and city council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or private open space use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for development of the site. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.36.020 Applicability.
The OS district shall be the base district for the use classifications listed in BMC 17.36.030 where these classifications have a minimum contiguous site area of two acres, including alley, streets or other rights-of-way. Open space use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the regulations of the base and overlay districts in which they are located. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.36.030 Land use regulations.
In the following schedule, the letter “P” designates use classifications permitted in OS districts. The letter “L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Use Regulations” which follow. The letter “U” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.104 BMC. The letters “P/U” designate use classifications permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requiring a use permit on the site of a conditional use. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column refer to the “Additional Use Regulations” following the schedule.

OS District: Land Use Regulations 

P    –    Permitted

U    –    Use Permit

L    –    Limited (See “Additional Use Regulations”)

–     –    Not Permitted

 

OS

Additional Regulations

Residential

 

 

Single-Family Residential

P

(A)(B)

Supportive Housing

P

(A)

Transitional Housing

P

(A)

 

Public and Semipublic1

 

 

Cemetery

U

(F)

Government Offices

L1

(F)

Parks and Recreation Facilities

P

(G)

Public Safety Facilities

P

(F)

Religious Assembly

U

(F)

Utilities, Major

U

(F)

Waste Facility

U

(F)

Utilities, Minor

P

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

Commercial Filming

U

(G)

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

U

(C)(F)

Eating and Drinking Establishments

 

 

With Take-Out Service

L2

(F)

Horticulture, Limited

L3

(G)

 

Agricultural and Extractive Uses

 

 

Animal Husbandry

P

(G)

Crop Production

P

(G)

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

(C)(D)(G)

Donation and Collection Bins

L4

(H)

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

Animal Shows

U

(G)

Circuses and Carnivals

U

(G)

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

(G)

 

Nonconforming

 

(E)

 

Other Uses

 

 

Cannabis Related Uses

–

Not permitted

1.    Refer to BMC 17.16.040 for use definitions.

OS District: Additional Use Regulations

L-1    Permitted as part of a park or recreational facility, public safety facility, or utility.

L-2    Only “limited” facilities, as defined in Chapter 17.16 BMC, allowed by use permit.

L-3    Use permit required, and no on-site retail sales permitted.

L-4    Only permitted when accessory to a duly permitted religious assembly.

(A)    Not permitted on lands outside the urban growth boundary as delineated on the general plan land use diagram. On lands inside the urban growth boundary, limited to one primary dwelling unit and one accessory dwelling unit per site, subject to the requirements of BMC 17.70.060, Accessory dwelling units.

(B)    See BMC 17.70.300, Animals.

(C)    See BMC 17.70.290, Game centers.

(D)    Limited to facilities incidental to an open space use.

(E)    See Chapter 17.98 BMC, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(F)    Not permitted on lands outside the urban growth boundary as delineated on the general plan land use diagram, amended by approval of Measure K by a vote of the people, November 4, 2003.

(G)    Allowed only if no urban services are provided.

(H)    See BMC 17.70.410, Donation and collection bins.

(Ord. 19-04 § 4; Ord. 18-05 §§ 27, 28; Ord. 16-01 § 11; Ord. 14-11 § 6; Ord. 11-02 § 7; Ord. 04-8 § 1; Ord. 01-6 N.S, 2001; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.36.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations shall be as specified by the use permit; provided, that if the use permit fails to regulate an element regulated by an abutting base district, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to each portion of the OS district. For existing uses which do not have a use permit, or for uses that do not require a use permit, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to the use. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 22, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.36.050 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require design review (see Chapter 17.108 BMC); all projects shall require development plan review (see Chapter 17.112 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.40
PS PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC DISTRICT
Sections:

17.40.010    Specific purposes.

17.40.020    Applicability.

17.40.030    Land use regulations.

17.40.040    Development regulations.

17.40.050    Review of plans.

17.40.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of the PS public and semipublic district are to:

A. Allow consideration of a large public or semipublic use separately from regulations for an underlying base zoning district that may or may not be appropriate in combination with the public or semipublic use;

B. Allow consideration of establishment or expansion of a large public or semipublic use at rezoning hearings rather than at use permit hearings only, and give notice to all of the extent of a site approved for a large public or semipublic use by delineating it on the zoning map;

C. Allow the planning commission and city council to consider the most appropriate use of a site following discontinuance of a large public or semipublic use without the encumbrance of a base zoning district that may or may not provide appropriate regulations for reuse of the site. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.40.020 Applicability.
The PS district shall be the base district for the use classifications listed in BMC 17.40.030 where these have a contiguous site area of two acres or more, including alleys, streets, or other rights-of-way. Public and semipublic use classifications on sites of less than two acres shall be subject to the regulations of the base and overlay districts in which they are located. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.40.030 Land use regulations.
In the following schedule, the letter “P” designates use classifications permitted in PS districts. The letter “L” designates use classifications subject to certain limitations prescribed by the “Additional Use Regulations” which follow. The letter “U” designates use classifications permitted on approval of a use permit, as provided in Chapter 17.104 BMC. The letters “P/U” designate use classifications permitted on the site of a permitted use, but requiring a use permit on the site of a conditional use. Letters in parentheses in the “Additional Regulations” column reference the “Additional Use Regulations” following the schedule.

 

PS District: Land Use Regulations

P    –    Permitted

U    –    Use Permit

L    –    Limited (See “Additional Use Regulations”)

–     –    Not Permitted

 

PS

Additional Regulations

Public and Semipublic

 

 

Adult Day Health Care

U

 

Cemetery

U

 

Clubs and Lodges

U

 

Convalescent Facilities

U

 

Cultural Institutions

U

 

Day Care Center

U

 

Detention Facilities

U

 

Emergency Shelter

L2

 

Government Offices

P

 

Heliports

L1

 

Hospitals

U

 

Maintenance and Service Facilities

U

 

Park and Recreation Facilities

P

 

Public Safety Facilities

U

 

Religious Assembly

U

 

Residential Care, General

U

 

Schools, Public or Private

U

 

Utilities, Major

U

 

Waste Facility

U

 

Utilities, Minor

P

 

 

Commercial Uses

 

 

Commercial Filming

U

 

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

U

(A)

 

Accessory Uses

P/U

 

Donation and Collection Bins

L3

(C)

 

Temporary Uses

 

 

Animal Shows

U

 

Circuses and Carnivals

U

 

Commercial Filming, Limited

P

 

Trade Fairs

U

 

 

Nonconforming

 

(B)

 

Other Uses

 

 

Cannabis Related Uses

–

Not permitted

PS District: Additional Use Regulations

L-1    Allowed with use permit and heliport permit from California Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics if located more than 1,000 feet from an R district.

L-2    See BMC 17.70.390, Emergency shelter.

L-3    Only permitted when accessory to a duly permitted club, lodge, cultural institution, religious assembly or school.

(A)    See BMC 17.70.300, Animals.

(B)    See Chapter 17.98 BMC, Nonconforming Uses and Structures.

(C)    See BMC 17.70.410, Donation and collection bins.

(Ord. 19-04 § 5; Ord. 18-05 §§ 29, 30; Ord. 16-01 § 12; Ord. 14-11 § 7; Ord. 11-04 § 7; Ord. 11-02 § 8; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.40.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations shall be as specified by the use permit; provided, that if the use permit fails to regulate an element regulated by an abutting base district, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to each portion of a PS district. For existing uses which do not have a use permit, or for uses that do not require a use permit, the regulations of the nearest base district shall apply to the use. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 23, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.40.050 Review of plans.
Certain projects shall require design review (see Chapter 17.108 BMC); all projects shall require development plan review (see Chapter 17.112 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.44
PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Sections:

17.44.010  Specific purposes.

17.44.020  Land use regulations.

17.44.030  Development regulations.

17.44.040  Initiation.

17.44.050  Required plans and materials.

17.44.060  Planning commission action.

17.44.070  Status of PD plan.

17.44.080  Status of specific plan.

17.44.090  Zoning map designation.

17.44.100  Development plan review.

17.44.010 Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of the PD planned development district are to:

A. Establish a procedure for the development of parcels of land in order to reduce or eliminate the rigidity, delays, and inequities that otherwise would result from application of zoning standards and procedures designed primarily for small parcels;

B. Ensure orderly and thorough planning and review procedures that will result in quality urban design;

C. Encourage variety and avoid monotony in large developments by allowing greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access, light, open space, and amenity;

D. Provide a mechanism whereby the city may authorize desirable developments consistent with the general plan without inviting speculative rezoning applications, which, if granted, often could deprive other owners of development opportunities without resulting in construction of the proposed facilities;

E. Encourage allocation and improvement of common open space in residential areas, and provide for maintenance of the open space at the expense of those who will directly benefit from it;

F. Encourage the preservation of serviceable existing structures of historic value or artistic merit by providing the opportunity to use them imaginatively for purposes other than those for which they were originally intended;

G. Encourage the assembly of properties that might otherwise be developed in unrelated increments to the detriment of surrounding neighborhoods. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.020 Land use regulations.
No use other than an existing use shall be permitted in a PD district except in accord with a valid PD plan or specific plan. Any permitted or conditional use authorized by this title may be included in an approved PD plan or an adopted specific plan, consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.030 Development regulations.
A. Residential Density. The total number of dwelling units in a PD plan shall not exceed the number permitted by the general plan density for the total area of parcels designated for residential use and for open space. The density bonus provisions of BMC 17.70.270 shall apply.

B. Performance Standards. The performance standards prescribed by BMC 17.70.240 shall apply.

C. Other Development Regulations. Other development regulations shall be as prescribed by the PD plan or specific plan. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 24, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.040 Initiation.
An amendment to reclassify property to PD shall be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent, the planning commission, or the city council. If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join in the application, and a map showing the extent of ownerships shall be submitted with concept plans and materials. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.050 Required plans and materials.
In addition to the plans and materials required to accompany an application for a zoning map amendment by Chapter 17.120 BMC, an application for rezoning to a PD district shall include a PD plan or specific plan incorporating the materials required for design review by Chapter 17.108 BMC. The community development director also may require one or more of the following items, based on the type, location, and potential impacts of proposed development:

A. A map showing proposed district boundaries and the relationship of the district to uses and structures within a 300-foot radius of the district boundaries;

B. A map or aerial photo of the proposed district and 100 feet beyond its boundary showing sufficient topographic data to indicate clearly the character of the terrain; the type, location, and condition of mature trees and other natural vegetation; and the location of existing development;

C. The proposed pattern of land use, with acreage and residential density computations;

D. The proposed street and lot pattern. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.060 Planning commission action.
The planning commission shall consider an application for reclassification to a PD district as prescribed in Chapter 17.120 BMC and shall at the same time consider the proposed PD plan or specific plan accompanying the application. A recommendation of the commission to reclassify to a PD district shall be accompanied by a resolution approving a PD plan or recommending a specific plan. The commission may require either a PD plan or a specific plan. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.070 Status of PD plan.
A PD plan shall be effective on the same date as the ordinance creating the PD district for which it was approved and shall expire two years after the effective date unless a building permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued. An approved PD plan may specify a development staging program exceeding two years.

The commission may renew a PD plan for one or two years as specified in the decision or renewal, if it finds the renewal consistent with the purposes of this chapter. Application for renewal shall be made in writing to the community development director not less than 30 days or more than 120 days prior to expiration. Denial of a request for renewal or for revision of a PD plan shall be subject to appeal, as prescribed in Chapter 17.124 BMC. An application for approval of a new PD plan or for a revision of a PD plan shall be considered by the planning commission at a public hearing with notice given as prescribed for a use permit in Chapter 17.104 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.080 Status of specific plan.
A specific plan adopted by resolution of the city council shall be administered as prescribed by the council, consistent with the Government Code, Section 65450 et seq. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.090 Zoning map designation.
A PD district shall be noted by the designation of "PD," followed by the number of the PD district based on order of adoption. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.44.100 Development plan review.
Plans for a project in a PD district shall be accepted for development plan review as prescribed by Chapter 17.112 BMC only if they are consistent with a valid PD plan or specific plan. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.46
USE REGULATIONS SUMMARY
(Repealed by Ord. 15-02)

Chapter 17.48
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS SUMMARY
(Repealed by Ord. 15-02)

Chapter 17.50
HD HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.50.010  Specific purposes.

17.50.020  Applicability and zoning map designator.

17.50.030  Land use regulations.

17.50.040  Development regulations.

17.50.050  Slope/density formula.

17.50.060  Hillside development plan required.

17.50.070  Initiation.

17.50.080  Required plans and materials.

17.50.090  Hillside development plan – Minimum lot size – Maximum number of dwelling units.

17.50.100  Approval of a hillside development plan.

17.50.110  Lapse of hillside development plan approval.

17.50.120  Development plan review.

17.50.010 Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of the HD hillside development overlay district are to:

A. Maintain an environmental equilibrium consistent with existing vegetation, soils, geology, slopes, and drainage patterns, and to preserve the natural topography, including swales, canyons, knolls, ridgelines, and rock outcrops, wherever feasible;

B. Avoid development that would result in unacceptable fire, flood, slide, or other safety hazards;

C. Avoid unwarranted, high maintenance costs for public facilities;

D. Provide a mechanism for flexible design of residential development projects in hillside areas so that development may be concentrated in those areas with the greatest environmental carrying capacity and areas with low environment carrying capacity developed at very low density or reserved as permanent open space;

E. Avoid residential densities that would generate traffic requiring extensive grading to provide an adequate street system. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.020 Applicability and zoning map designator.
The HD hillside development overlay district may be combined with any R district and applied to property, portions of which have a natural gradient in excess of 20 percent (20 feet of vertical distance for each 100 feet of horizontal distance). It may be initiated by an applicant or by the city under the procedures established in Chapter 17.120 BMC, Amendments. Each HD hillside development overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map by adding the designator "-HD" to the base district designation, and a hillside development plan shall be required for all development, consistent with the provisions of BMC 17.50.060 et seq. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.030 Land use regulations.
Land use regulations shall be those of the base district with which the HD district is combined. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations shall be those of the base district with which an HD district is combined, unless modified by another overlay district; provided, that the requirements in the following schedule shall be in addition and shall govern where conflicts arise. The first column of the schedule prescribes basic requirements for permitted and conditional uses. Letters in parentheses in the "Additional Regulations" column refer to the "Additional Development Regulations" following the schedule.

HD District: Development Regulations

 

Basic Regulations

Additional Regulations

Minimum Lot Area

 

(A)

Minimum Site Area Per Unit (sq. ft.)

 

(B)

Minimum Yards:

 

 

Front (feet)

15

(C)(D)

Side (feet)

10 percent of width;

5 feet min.;

10 feet max.

(D)

Corner Side (feet)

10 percent of width;

10 feet min.;

15 feet max.

(D)

Rear (feet)

25

(D)

Maximum Height (feet)

30

(E) (F) (G)

Screening of Mechanical Equipment

 

(H)

Exterior Structural Supports

 

(I)

Driveways and Off-Street Parking

 

(J)

HD District: Additional Regulations

(A) See BMC 17.50.090, Hillside development plan – Minimum lot size – Maximum number of dwelling units.

(B) As determined by slope/density formula in BMC 17.50.050.

(C) If the existing lot elevation at the rear of the normally required front yard (20 feet) at its centerline is 10 feet above or below the elevation of the adjoining street, the minimum front yard shall be 10 feet, but the garage proscenium shall be set back at least 20 feet from the front property line.

(D) See BMC 17.70.150, Building projections into yards and courts.

(E) See BMC 17.70.170, Measurement of height.

(F) Structures within 20 feet of the front property line shall not intercept a 1:1 daylight plane inclined inward from a height 20 feet above existing grade at the front setback line.

(G) See BMC 17.70.180, Exceptions to height limits.

(H) See BMC 17.70.210, Screening of mechanical equipment.

(I) Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors and decks not enclosed by walls and more than 15 feet high may be approved only if the community development director finds that no alternative type of construction is feasible, and fire-safety and design considerations have been adequately addressed.

(J) Driveways that are not entirely visible from both ends shall have passing turnouts. All driveways shall comply with minimum widths and maximum grades prescribed by the standard engineering specifications adopted pursuant to BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction. A dwelling unit adjoining a street having parking prohibited on both sides shall provide a minimum of two independently accessible off-street parking places for guests. Required parking for guests may be in a required front yard if the existing lot elevation is 10 feet above or below street elevation at the rear of the normally required front yard, or within 100 feet of every dwelling unit. The provisions of this subsection shall apply only to lots created or developed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

(F) MINIMUM FRONT YARD: HILLSIDE OVERLAY DISTRICT

(The diagram is illustrative)

 

HD DISTRICT: SLOPE DENSITY RELATIONSHIP

Average Slope (percent)

Yield (Units per Gross Acre)

0 –

10

 

7

 

11

 

6.70

 

12

 

6.40

 

13

 

6.10

 

14

 

5.80

 

15

 

5.50

 

16

 

5.20

 

17

 

4.90

 

18

 

4.60

 

19

 

4.30

 

20

 

4.00

 

21

 

3.70

 

22

 

3.40

 

23

 

3.10

 

24

 

2.80

 

25

 

2.50

 

26

 

2.20

 

27

 

1.90

 

28

 

1.60

 

29

 

1.30

 

30

 

1.00

 

31

 

.90

 

32

 

.80

 

33

 

.70

 

34

 

.60

 

35

 

.50

 

36

 

.40

 

37

 

.30

 

38

 

.20

 

39

 

.10

 

40

or more

.05

(Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.050 Slope/density formula.
A. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted by an HD plan shall be determined by the formula: N = A x Y, where:

"N" is the maximum number of units;

"A" is gross developable area in acres inclusive of any public right-of-way and easements established by a parcel map or subdivision map consistent with an HD plan but exclusive of any existing rights-of-way; and

"Y" (yield in units per net acre) is 7.00 for an average slope between 0 and 10 percent. For average slopes between 10 and 30 percent, the yield shall decline 0.30 per acre for each one percent increase in slope. For slopes between 30 and 39 percent, the yield shall decline 0.10 per acre for each one percent increase in slope; for average slopes of 40 percent or more, the yield shall be 0.05 per acre.

B. Slope shall be calculated by the formula:

S =

I x L x (.00229)

, where

A

S

=

Average ground slope in percent, calculated for the entire site, to be divided and rounded to the nearest whole number.

I

=

Contour interval in feet. The contour interval shall be 10 feet or less.

L

=

The combined length in feet of all contour lines within the site.

A

=

Gross area for the site in acres prior to further subdivision.

.00229

=

The factor for conversion of square feet to acres times 100 percent.

(Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.060 Hillside development plan required.
A. A project in an HD district for which a grading permit is required shall have an approved HD hillside development plan prior to issuance of a grading permit or approval of a subdivision map.

B. An HD plan that will permit a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by the city council.

C. An HD plan that will only permit a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by the planning commission, with the commission’s decision appealable to the city council. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.070 Initiation.
An application to approve an HD hillside development plan shall be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent. If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join the application, and a map showing the extent of ownership shall be submitted with the application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.080 Required plans and materials.
An HD plan shall include any or all of the following items deemed necessary by the community development director to determine compliance with the purposes of this chapter:

A. A map of the HD plan area showing sufficient topographic data to indicate clearly the nature of the terrain and the type, location, and condition of mature trees and other natural vegetation.

B. A fully dimensioned site and circulation plan delineating proposed uses, building locations and density, public and private streets, and parking areas, and a conceptual grading plan indicating the nature and general extent of grading proposed. A tentative map prepared pursuant to BMC Title 16, Subdivisions, may be substituted for this requirement.

C. A soil engineering report including, but not limited to, data regarding the nature, distribution, and strengths of existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; design criteria for any identified corrective measures; and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed. The investigation shall be compiled by a California-registered soil engineer.

D. A geology report including, but not limited to, the surface and subsurface geology of the site; degree of seismic hazard; conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development; opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed; and design criteria to mitigate any identified geologic hazards. The investigation and report shall be compiled by a California-registered geologist or engineering geologist.

E. A hydrology report including, but not limited to, the hydrologic conditions on the site; possible flood inundation with existing development and with future development under the general plan and the HD plan; downstream flood hazards, including cumulative impacts of development in the drainage basin; natural drainage courses; conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development; opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site to be developed; and design criteria to mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards, including cumulative impacts consistent with these regulations. This report shall account for all runoff and debris from tributary areas and shall provide consideration for each lot or dwelling unit site in a proposed hillside development project. The investigation and report shall be compiled by a California-registered civil engineer experienced in hydrology and hydrologic investigation.

F. A three-dimensional scale model of the project site of a scale sufficient to evaluate the project as prescribed by the community development director. The community development director may waive this requirement if circumstances warrant.

G. A landscape plan consistent with the provisions of BMC 17.70.190. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.090 Hillside development plan – Minimum lot size – Maximum number of dwelling units.
The city council or the planning commission, as the case may be, may approve an HD plan including lots smaller than those required by the base district, but shall not approve a total number of dwelling units on a parcel or in a subdivision greater than permitted by the slope/density formula established in BMC 17.50.050. Restrictions on the number of dwelling units permitted shall be recorded with a subdivision map or prior to issuance of a zoning permit. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.100 Approval of a hillside development plan.
A. General Procedures. An application for approval of an HD hillside development plan shall be processed as a use permit application in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC with the responsibilities for approval as prescribed in BMC 17.50.060.

B. Required Findings. The planning commission or the city council, as the case may be, shall approve or conditionally approve a proposed hillside development plan upon finding that it:

1. Conforms to the general plan;

2. Complies with the land use and development regulations of the base zoning district, the HD overlay district, and any other overlay districts applied to the property; and

3. Can be adequately, reasonably and conveniently served by public services, utilities and public facilities. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.110 Lapse of hillside development plan approval.
An HD plan shall become void two years following the date of approval unless actions specified in the conditions of approval have been taken or unless the initial approval was for a stated period longer than two years. An HD plan may be renewed by the planning commission or the city council, whichever approved the plan, upon application 30 but not more than 60 days prior to expiration if the planning commission or the city council finds that circumstances have not changed to make the plan inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.50.120 Development plan review.
Plans for a project requiring an HD plan shall be accepted for development plan review only if they are consistent with a valid HD plan and with all other applicable requirements of this code. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.54
H HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.54.010    Specific purposes.

17.54.020    Applicability and zoning map designator.

17.54.030    Land use and development regulations.

17.54.040    Criteria for establishment of H district.

17.54.050    Criteria for designating landmark buildings.

17.54.060    Conservation plan required.

17.54.070    Application requirements.

17.54.080    Review and approval.

17.54.090    Establishment of H districts and landmark designation.

17.54.100    Demolition and design review procedures.

17.54.120    Maintenance of structures and premises.

17.54.010 Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of the H historic overlay district are to:

A. Implement the city’s general plan;

B. Deter demolition, destruction, alteration, misuses, or neglect of historic or architecturally significant buildings that form an important link to Benicia’s past;

C. Promote the conservation, preservation, protection, and enhancement of each historic district;

D. Stimulate the economic health and residential quality of the community and stabilize and enhance the value of property;

E. Encourage development tailored to the character and significance of each historic district through a conservation plan that includes goals, objectives, and design criteria. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.020 Applicability and zoning map designator.
The H historic overlay district may be combined with any zoning district. Each H overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map by adding an “-H” designator to the base district designation followed by the number of the district based on the order of adoption. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.030 Land use and development regulations.
A. The land use and development regulations applicable in an H district shall be as prescribed for the base district with which it is combined unless modified by another overlay district; provided, that the requirements of the district conservation plan shall govern where conflicts arise.

B. Exceptions for Historic and Architecturally Significant Structures.

1. The community development director may grant a use permit for an exception to the land use regulations of the base district with which an H district is combined when such an exception is necessary to permit the preservation or restoration of an historic or architecturally significant building, structure or site.

2. Applications for such use permits shall be filed with the community development director on a form provided. The community development director shall refer all applications for an exception under this section to the historic preservation review commission (HPRC) for a report and recommendation. In making a decision, the community development director shall make a written finding that shall specify the facts relied upon in rendering his decision. A copy of this written finding, together with all evidence presented to the community development director, shall be filed in the planning department. The written finding and decision shall be mailed to the applicant and shall be subject to appeal to the planning commission. Decision-making authority on such use permits may be deferred to the planning commission at the option of the community development director. Upon their decision in such instances, an appeal may be made to the city council as prescribed in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-59 § 1; Ord. 05-03 § 4; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.040 Criteria for establishment of H district.
A. A portion of a base district shall be eligible for inclusion in an H district if one or more of the following criteria, rigorously applied, are met:

1. The area possesses character, interest, or value as part of the heritage of the city.

2. The area is the location of a significant historical event.

3. The area is identified with a person or group that contributed significantly to the culture and development of the city.

4. Structures within the area exemplify a particular architectural style or way of life important to the city.

5. Structures within the area are the best remaining examples of an architectural style in a neighborhood.

6. The area or its structures are identified as the work of a person or group whose work has influenced the heritage of the city, the state, or the United States.

7. The area or its structures embody elements of outstanding attention to architectural or landscape design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship.

8. The area is related to a designated historic building or district in such a way that its preservation is essential to the integrity of the building or district.

9. The area’s unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood.

10. The area has potential for yielding information of archaeological interest.

11. The area’s integrity as a natural environment strongly contributes to the well-being of the people of the city.

B. Portions of a base zoning district that do not meet the above criteria may be included in an H district if inclusion is found to be essential to the integrity of the district. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.050 Criteria for designating landmark buildings.
Individual buildings may be designated as historic or architecturally significant landmarks if one or more of the criteria set forth in BMC 17.54.040 are met. A landmark so designated shall be eligible for the same review procedures as buildings and structures within an H district. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.060 Conservation plan required.
Prior to filing an application for an H district, the applicant shall prepare an historic district conservation plan with the assistance of the planning department. Each conservation plan shall contain:

A. A map and description of the proposed district, including boundaries; the age, setting, and character of structures; urban design elements and streetscapes; major public improvements; and proposed objectives to be achieved;

B. A statement of the architectural or historical significance of the proposed district;

C. A list of specific alterations that should be subject to design review in order to protect the architectural or historical character of the proposed district;

D. A set of specific performance guidelines for new construction and alterations necessary to preserve the character of the proposed district;

E. Proposed rules and regulations for design review. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.070 Application requirements.
A. Filing of Petition. An application for an H district or landmark designation may be initiated by the planning commission or city council, or by filing a petition requesting establishment of the district with the community development director, accompanied by the required fee. If initiated by petition, the application shall include:

1. The proposed conservation plan for the district as prescribed by BMC 17.54.060;

2. A form bearing the signatures of the owners of 51 percent of the land area within the proposed district.

B. Application Contents. An application for a landmark designation shall contain:

1. A map showing the location of the building or structure and building plans or photographs of the building exterior;

2. A statement of the architectural or historical significance of the proposed building and description of the particular features that should be preserved; and

3. Except when initiated by the city, the consent of the owner or authorized agent to the proposed designation is required. For purposes of this section, each condominium owner’s association shall be deemed the property owner of common areas.

Prior to accepting the application as complete, the community development director may request additional information, plans or materials deemed necessary to support the application. A planning commission public hearing on the petition shall be held within 90 days of the date the petition is accepted as complete. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.080 Review and approval.
A. Neighborhood Workshop. The planning department shall conduct a neighborhood workshop in the proposed district to explain the proposal and the amendment process to neighborhood residents. Notice of the workshop shall be given in the same manner prescribed for zoning map amendments by BMC 17.120.040.

B. Notice and Public Hearing. After the neighborhood workshop, the proposed district shall be the subject of public hearings before the planning commission and the city council. The hearings shall be set, noticed, and conducted as prescribed by Chapter 17.120 BMC.

C. Contents of Public Notice. In addition to the information prescribed by Chapter 17.120 BMC, notice of a public hearing for the establishment of an H district or designation of a landmark shall include a statement that original petitioners have the right to withdraw their support of the district at any time prior to the hearing, and that property owners who have not signed the petition have the right to do so prior to the date of the hearing. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.090 Establishment of H districts and landmark designation.
A. Required Findings. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.120 BMC, the planning commission and city council shall find that the proposed district or landmark has a significant architectural or historical character that can be preserved and enhanced through appropriate controls on new development and alterations to existing buildings and landscaping.

B. Adoption of Conservation Plan. An ordinance establishing an H district shall include an historic district conservation plan in the form submitted or as revised by the planning commission or city council. The plan’s performance guidelines may modify the land use and development regulations of the base zoning district, but shall not significantly alter the regulations. A performance guideline shall be found to be a significant alteration of base district regulations if it substantially prevents property from being used in accord with the provisions of the base district, or creates a substantial number of nonconforming uses or structures.

C. Effects on Projects Initiated Prior to Effective Date. No provision of this chapter shall apply to projects initiated prior to the effective date of an ordinance establishing an H district or designating a landmark. Such projects shall be considered nonconforming uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.98 BMC. For the purposes of this subsection, a project shall be deemed initiated if an application, plans, and materials for concept or development plan review have been filed and accepted as complete.

D. Amendments to Adopted Conservation Plans. Procedures for an amendment to an adopted conservation plan shall be initiated in the same manner as an application for a zoning map amendment (Chapter 17.120 BMC). (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.100 Demolition and design review procedures.
A. In General. Except as modified by an adopted conservation plan, design review in an H district or of a proposed alteration, enlargement or demolition of a designated landmark shall be conducted as prescribed by Chapter 17.108 BMC. Design review and approval shall be the responsibility of the community development director or the historic preservation review commission, as the case may be.

The building official shall not issue a permit for construction, alteration, enlargement, or demolition of a building or structure located in an H district or of a designated landmark without the prior approval of the community development director or the historic preservation review commission. Prior approval of the community development director or the historic preservation review commission is not required for permit applications of an emergency nature to rehabilitate an unsafe building or to demolish the structure for the same reasons.

B. Criteria. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.108 BMC, the community development director or historic preservation review commission, as the case may be, shall consider the proposed demolition, new construction, or alteration in the context of the adopted conservation plan and the architectural or historical value and significance of the site and structure in relation to the overlay district. These considerations shall include the visual relationship of proposed architectural design elements to the surrounding area, including scale, height, rhythm of spacing, pattern of windows and doorways, building siting and relationship to landscaping, roof pitch, architectural style, and structural details, materials, colors, and textures.

C. Required Findings. No demolition permit shall be issued for demolition of any historic structure within an H district or for demolition of a designated landmark without prior review and approval by the historic preservation review commission. Demolition permits for nonhistoric structures within the H district may be approved by the community development director. To assist any evaluation by the historic preservation review commission, the community development director shall submit a report and recommendation to the historic preservation review commission.

1. For Demolitions.

a. If, after review of the request for a demolition permit, the historic preservation review commission determines that the structure itself has historical, architectural or cultural interest or value, the commission may withhold approval for demolition for 180 days (from the date of commission action) or until environmental review is completed, whichever occurs later.

During the 180 days, the historic preservation review commission may direct the planning department to consult with recognized historic preservation organizations and other civic groups, public agencies and interested citizens; make recommendations for acquisition of property by public or private bodies or agencies; explore the possibility of moving one or more structures or other features; and take any other reasonable measures.

At the end of the 180-day period, the demolition permit shall be issued if environmental review determines there will not be a significant impact on the environment and all requirements of this title are met or, if there may be substantial environmental damages, that specific economic, social or other considerations make infeasible the mitigation measures or alternatives identified during environmental review.

b. If, after review of the request for a demolition permit, the historic preservation review commission determines that the building or structure has no substantial historical, architectural, or cultural interest or value, a building permit for demolition may be issued.

2. For New Construction or Alterations. The director or the commission shall not grant design approval for new construction or alterations unless it finds that the proposed new construction or alteration will be compatible with and help achieve the purposes of the H district.

3. For Removal or Alteration of Certain Landscape Materials. The director’s or commission’s approval shall be required for removal or alteration of landscape materials identified as significant resources by the historic district conservation plan. Removal or alteration of such landscape materials shall require a finding that the proposed removal or alteration will not affect the character of the H district, or that the safety of persons or property requires the removal or alteration. No provisions of this subsection shall be construed as restricting routine maintenance of landscape materials.

D. Economic Hardship Waiver. If an applicant for design concept or design approval presents evidence of inability to meet the cost of complying with a condition of approval, the director or the commission may grant the approval with the requirement that all conditions be met within a period of up to five years. If such conditions are not met within five years, the property owner shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of Chapter 17.128 BMC.

E. Effective Date – Appeals. Decisions of the director or commission shall be final on the tenth business day after the date of the decision, unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 07-59 § 2; Ord. 93-1 N.S. § 5, 1993; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.54.120 Maintenance of structures and premises.
All property owners in H districts and owners of designated landmarks shall have the obligation to maintain structures and premises in good repair. Structures and premises in good repair shall present no material variance in apparent condition from surrounding structures in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Good repair includes and is defined as the level of maintenance that ensures the continued availability of the structure and premises for a lawfully permitted use, and prevents deterioration, dilapidation, and decay of the exterior portions of the structure and premises. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.58
S SHORELINE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.58.010    Specific purposes.

17.58.020    Applicability and zoning map designator.

17.58.030    Land use regulations.

17.58.040    Development regulations.

17.58.050    Guarantees of public access.

17.58.060    Development plan review.

17.58.010 Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of the S shoreline protection overlay district are to:

A. Conserve and protect natural resources along the city’s shoreline;

B. Minimize grading and alteration of drainage patterns;

C. Protect development from geologic and other shoreline-related hazards;

D. Provide maximum public access to and along the shoreline;

E. Achieve a visually pleasing and compatible relationship between buildings and structures, parking areas, walkways and planting areas, and the natural environment;

F. Provide appropriate standards and criteria for reviewing proposals for new construction, exterior additions and alterations, relocation of buildings, and other development subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.58.020 Applicability and zoning map designator.
The S shoreline protection overlay district may be applied to the unzoned tidal areas or may be combined with any district bordering the city’s shoreline. The S district boundaries shall be shown on the zoning map by adding the designator “-S” to the base district designation. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.58.030 Land use regulations.
Land use regulations shall be those of the base district with which the S district is combined. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.58.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations shall be those of the base district with which the S district is combined unless modified by another overlay district; provided, that the following additional review criteria shall apply and shall govern where conflicts arise:

A. All development shall be compatible with the established physical scale of the area and shall not encroach on major view corridors.

B. To the extent feasible, trees, vegetation and sensitive wildlife habitats shall be protected, the need for filling the bay or any marshes or mud flats shall be minimized, and no mature trees, as defined by this title, shall be removed unless approved by the committee on views, under the provisions of Chapter 17.82 BMC.

C. All buildings and structures shall be sited and designed to assure stability and structural integrity for their expected economic life span and to minimize alterations to natural landforms. Development within 100 feet of any cliff or bluff line shall follow the recommendations of a geologic report prepared by a registered geologist or engineering geologist and approved by the building official.

D. Underground utilities shall be provided unless underground installation would have a substantial adverse impact on the environment.

E. Maximum feasible public access to and along the shoreline shall be provided.

A development project that requires planning commission or historic preservation review commission approval shall be reviewed by these commissions for consistency with these criteria. For all other projects, the community development director shall be responsible for reviewing for consistency with these criteria prior to issuing a zoning permit. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.58.050 Guarantees of public access.
Approval of permits for development within the S district shall require guarantees of public access as prescribed by this section. Nothing in this section shall constitute a waiver of possible historic rights to public use at the site of an access guarantee.

A. Access Requirements. Prior to any discretionary approval or the issuance of a zoning permit for the following developments, the access provisions required by this section shall be found legally sufficient:

1. Development on a parcel shown on the Benicia general plan parks and recreation map or on the Benicia waterfront plan as the site of a principal pathway, an accessway or a trail segment;

2. Development on a parcel on which a lateral accessway extending 25 feet inland from mean high tide or to the toe of the bluff would be reachable or potentially reachable by a required vertical or lateral accessway, as determined by the community development director. Lateral accessways shall be required where they would be accessible from a vertical accessway on a site that is developed or would be developed with visitor-serving commercial facilities;

3. A subdivision between the first public road and Southampton Bay, Suisun Bay, or the Carquinez Strait;

4. A visitor-serving commercial facility between the first public road and the bay or strait.

B. Legal Instruments Required. Prior to approval of a final subdivision map or issuance of a zoning permit or a use permit, the applicant for development on a parcel on which access is required shall record one or a combination of the following documents as specified in the conditions of approval or shall pay an in-lieu fee.

1. Offer of Dedication. The applicant shall submit a preliminary title report and shall record an irrevocable offer to improve and to dedicate the required accessway to the city as an easement or fee interest free of prior liens and encumbrances. The offer shall be valid for 20 years. Institutions or individuals holding an encumbrance on the property shall execute agreements subordinating their claims to the offer. Title insurance may be required when deemed necessary by the community development director to ensure that the offer is an enforceable option.

2. Outright Grant of Fee Interest or Easement. If the city is willing to accept the offer made in subsection (B)(1) of this section, a grant of an easement or fee title shall be required.

3. Deed Restrictions. Deed restrictions specifying accessway maintenance, improvements, and conditions of public use may be recorded in lieu of an offer of dedication.

4. Offer to Sell at Appraised Value. Where a designated accessway on a single parcel requires parking or other land area in addition to land required for vertical and lateral accessways and the excess land required consists of more than two percent of the total remaining parcel area between the first public road and the bay or strait, only the land required for vertical and lateral accessways shall be required to be improved and offered for dedication without financial consideration. The designated remaining land area shall be offered at the appraised value as of the date of approval of the permit with the offer to remain open for 20 years, at interest equal to the prevailing mortgage rate for similarly situated land.

5. In-Lieu Fee Payments Required. As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or zoning or use permit on a parcel between the first public road and the bay or strait, or in a subdivision containing parcels between the first public road and the bay or strait where no access is required on that site by the general plan or the waterfront plan, an in-lieu fee shall be paid. The amount to be paid shall be determined by a schedule adopted by the city council by resolution. In-lieu fees shall be paid to the Benicia coastal access fund to be used for a specific public project identified in a coastal access program adopted pursuant to subsection (D) of this section. Fees collected shall be committed within five years after payment thereof.

C. Procedure. All discretionary approvals and zoning or use permits subject to conditions of approval pertaining to public access and open space or conservation easements shall be subject to the following procedures:

The city attorney shall review and approve all legal documents specified in the conditions of approval of a zoning or use permit for public access and conservation/open space easements.

1. Prior to a discretionary approval or issuance of a zoning or use permit, the community development director shall forward a copy of the permit application, findings of approval and copies of the legal documents to the city attorney for review and approval of the legal adequacy and consistency with the requirements of the city.

2. The city attorney shall have 30 days in which to complete the review and notify the community development director and the applicant of recommended revisions, if any.

3. The community development director or planning commission may approve the permit upon expiration of the 30-day period if notification of inadequacy has not been received from the city attorney within that time period.

4. If the city attorney has recommended revisions to the permit, the permit shall not be issued until the deficiencies have been resolved to the satisfaction of the city attorney.

D. Coastal Access Program. The city council, upon recommendation by the planning commission, may adopt a coastal access program, pursuant to this section, to be used as a guideline for review of development proposals that are required or proposed to include accessways. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.58.060 Development plan review.
Plans within the S shoreline district shall be accepted for development plan review only if they comply with the review criteria and requirements of this chapter and with all other applicable requirements of this code. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.62
NC NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.62.010  Specific purposes.

17.62.020  Area requirements.

17.62.030  Application for designation.

17.62.040  Adoption of district.

17.62.050  Zoning map designator.

17.62.060  Building permits.

17.62.010 Specific purposes.
The NC neighborhood conservation overlay district is intended for property owners to initiate and implement programs for the revitalization or conservation of older areas or districts possessing distinctive features, identity, or character worthy of retention and enhancement. The NC district takes effect through adoption of a plan and a set of regulations that will facilitate maintenance and upgrading of the neighborhood and development of vacant or underused lots while reducing or eliminating incompatible mixes of uses. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.62.020 Area requirements.
Each NC overlay district shall include a minimum contiguous area of four acres, including intervening streets and alleys, and shall contain at least three separate parcels. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.62.030 Application for designation.
A. Owners of 51 percent or more of the land in an area meeting the area requirements of BMC 17.62.020 and one or more of the criteria of BMC 17.62.040(C) may file an application with the city for the designation of the area as an NC neighborhood conservation overlay district. The application may include lots within one or more base zoning districts.

B. The application shall include the following:

1. A statement of purpose and explanation of how the criteria of BMC 17.62.040(C) are met;

2. A map indicating the boundaries of all lots in the proposed NC neighborhood conservation overlay district and the base district(s) contained within the proposed NC district;

3. A neighborhood conservation plan consisting of a map and such other textual and graphic material as may be necessary, indicating land uses, building types and designs, site development regulations, signing, circulation, off-street parking, and modifications in base district regulations. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.62.040 Adoption of district.
A. The planning commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing on the application in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.120 BMC. Following the hearing, the commission may approve the neighborhood conservation plan if it implements the purposes for which designation of the NC district is proposed, and shall transmit the application and the approved plan to the council.

B. The city council shall hold a hearing as provided by BMC 17.120.070 on any application and plan transmitted to it by the planning commission.

C. Following the hearing, the city council may adopt an NC neighborhood conservation overlay district for the area described in the application if the area meets one or more of the following criteria:

1. Distinctive building features, such as period of construction, style, size, scale, rhythm, mass, color and material;

2. Distinctive features or articles associated with the streetscape, such as light fixtures and devices, signs, benches, curb markers, kiosks, and bollards;

3. Distinctive site planning and natural features, such as lot platting, street layout, setbacks, alleyways, sidewalks, creek beds, parks, and gardens;

4. Distinctive land uses or land use patterns, such as mixed or unique uses or activities, not permitted by base district regulations without modification.

D. The city council shall adopt each neighborhood conservation overlay district by ordinance pursuant to Chapter 17.120 BMC. The adopting ordinance shall include a reference to the approved neighborhood conservation plan for the district, a statement of purposes, and a list of the modifications to the base district regulations. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.62.050 Zoning map designator.
Each NC neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map by an "-NC" designator applied to the base district designations, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and referenced to the enacting ordinance. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.62.060 Building permits.
Building permits approved in an NC neighborhood conservation overlay district shall be consistent with the adopted NC district ordinance and the approved neighborhood conservation plan. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.66
IS INTERIM STUDY OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.66.010  Specific purpose and applicability.

17.66.020  Zoning map designator.

17.66.030  Land use regulations.

17.66.040  Development regulations.

17.66.050  Expiration of IS district ordinance – Renewal.

17.66.060  Resubmittal of development proposals.

17.66.010 Specific purpose and applicability.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purpose of the IS interim study overlay district is to allow discretionary review of development proposals in areas where changes in zoning regulations are contemplated or under study. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.66.020 Zoning map designator.
It may be initiated as prescribed by Chapter 17.120 BMC. Prior to approving an amendment reclassifying land to an IS district, the planning commission and city council shall approve a study plan that identifies regulatory problems and states land use and development issues to be resolved for the area proposed for reclassification. The IS district may be combined with any base district. Each IS district shall be shown on the zoning map with an "-IS" designator, numbered and identified sequentially by order of enactment and reference to the enacting ordinance. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.66.030 Land use regulations.
A. Use Permit Required. Approval of a use permit shall be required for establishment of a new or expanded use in an IS district, and may be approved for any use classification permitted or conditionally permitted in the base district with which the IS district is combined.

B. Required Findings. In addition to the findings required for use permits by Chapter 17.104 BMC and additional findings that may be required for specific use classifications, approval of a use permit in the IS district shall require a finding that the proposed use will not conflict with the land use and development policies established for the area at the time the IS district was adopted. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.66.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations for the IS district shall be specified by a use permit or shall be those of the base district with which the IS district is combined. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.66.050 Expiration of IS district ordinance – Renewal.
An ordinance establishing an IS district shall contain a provision terminating the IS designation one or two years from its effective date. An ordinance establishing an IS district may be amended, reenacted, or superseded by a zoning map amendment adopted as prescribed by Chapter 17.120 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.66.060 Resubmittal of development proposals.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 17.104 BMC, a use permit application that has been denied, or approved subject to conditions unacceptable to the applicant, may be resubmitted on or after the effective date of zoning map or regulation amendments superseding an IS district designation. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.68
MP MASTER PLAN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Sections:

17.68.010  Specific purposes.

17.68.020  Applicability and zoning map designator.

17.68.030  Land use regulations.

17.68.040  Development regulations.

17.68.050  Initiation.

17.68.060  Required plan and materials.

17.68.070  Minimum lot size – Maximum number of dwelling units.

17.68.080  Approval of a master plan.

17.68.090  Amendments to adopted master plan.

17.68.100  Expiration and renewal – Changed plans.

17.68.110  Development plan review.

17.68.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of the MP master plan overlay district are to:

A. Ensure orderly planning for the development of large, unsubdivided areas of the city consistent with the general plan;

B. Maintain an environmental equilibrium consistent with existing vegetation, soils, geology, topography, and drainage patterns;

C. Avoid premature or inappropriate development that would result in incompatible uses or create public service demands exceeding the capacity of existing or planned facilities;

D. Encourage sensitive site planning and design. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.020 Applicability and zoning map designator.
The MP master plan overlay district may be combined with any base district and applied to an area at least 40 acres in size. It must be applied to any new industrial or business park developments on properties under common or single ownership which aggregate to 40 or more acres. It may be initiated by the city council or the planning commission or by a petition of property owners under the procedures established by Chapter 17.120 BMC, Amendments. Each MP master plan overlay district shall be shown on the zoning map by adding an "-MP" designator to the base district designation, and a master plan shall be required for all development, consistent with the provisions of BMC 17.68.060. (Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.030 Land use regulations.
Land use regulations shall be those of the base district with which the MP district is combined unless modified by another overlay district; provided, that no new or expanded use requiring a use permit may be approved unless a master plan has been approved. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.040 Development regulations.
Development regulations shall be those of the base district with which an MP district is combined, unless modified by another overlay district or an approved master plan. If an HD hillside overlay district has been applied to any property under an MP district, the development regulations of BMC 17.50.040 shall apply and residential density shall be calculated by the slope/density formula of BMC 17.50.050. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.050 Initiation.
An application to approve a master plan shall be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent. If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners shall join the application, and a map showing the extent of ownership shall be submitted with the application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.060 Required plan and materials.
Each master plan shall set forth for a specific area of land a land use and circulation system concept that is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan, compatible with the environment, and capable of being served by existing and planned public facilities and utilities.

A. The following plans and materials shall be submitted; provided, that the community development director may waive submission of items deemed unnecessary:

1. A map showing proposed master plan boundaries and the relationship of the area to uses and structures within a 300-foot radius of the plan area boundaries;

2. A map of the master plan area showing sufficient topographical data to indicate clearly the character of the terrain and the type, location, and condition of mature trees and other natural vegetation;

3. A site plan indicating the existing and proposed uses, gross floor area, lot coverage, height, parking and density, and a circulation plan; and

4. A preliminary development schedule indicating sequence and timing of development.

B. Guidelines for the physical development of the property, including illustrations of proposed architectural, urban design, and landscape concepts shall be submitted.

C. On slopes over 10 percent, single line sections showing the relationship of the building to the topography. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.070 Minimum lot size – Maximum number of dwelling units.
The planning commission or community development director, as the case may be, may approve a master plan including lots smaller than those required by the base district, but shall not approve a total number of dwelling units on a parcel or in a subdivision greater than permitted by the slope/density formula established in BMC 17.50.050. Restrictions on the number of dwelling units permitted shall be recorded with a subdivision map or prior to issuance of a zoning permit. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.080 Approval of a master plan.
A. General Procedures. An application for approval of a master plan shall be processed as a zoning map amendment in accord with the provisions of Chapter 17.120 BMC.

B. Required Findings. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.120 BMC, the planning commission and the city council shall find that the proposed master plan:

1. Conforms to the general plan;

2. Substantially complies with the land use and development regulations of the base zoning district and does not significantly alter the regulations; and

3. Can be adequately, reasonably and conveniently served by public services, utilities and public facilities.

C. Amended Zoning Map Designator. Adopted master plans shall be indicated on the zoning map by adding a number to the "-MP" designator based on order of adoption and reference to the ordinance approving the plan. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.090 Amendments to adopted master plan.
Procedures for an amendment to an adopted master plan shall be initiated in the same manner as an application for a zoning map amendment prescribed by Chapter 17.120 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.100 Expiration and renewal – Changed plans.
A. Expiration. A master plan shall become void two years following the date of approval unless actions specified in the conditions of approval have been taken or unless the original approval was for a stated period longer than two years.

B. Renewal. An approved master plan may be renewed for a period approved by the planning commission after a duly noticed public hearing. Application for renewal shall be made in writing between 30 and 60 days prior to lapse of the original approval.

C. Changed Plans. A request for change in conditions of approval or boundaries of a master plan shall be treated as a new application for a zoning map amendment. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.68.110 Development plan review.
Plans for a project requiring a master plan shall be accepted for development plan review only if they are consistent with an approved master plan and with all other applicable requirements of this code. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.70
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Sections:

17.70.010    Specific purposes and applicability.

17.70.020    Relocated buildings.

17.70.030    Exterior materials in R districts.

17.70.040    Religious assembly yard requirements.

17.70.050    Accessory uses and structures.

17.70.060    Accessory dwelling units.

17.70.070    Home occupations.

17.70.080    Swimming pools and hot tubs.

17.70.090    Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.

17.70.100    Live entertainment.

17.70.110    Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.

17.70.120    Maximum dwelling unit occupancy.

17.70.130    Development on substandard lots.

17.70.140    Development on lots divided by district boundaries.

17.70.150    Building projections into yards and courts.

17.70.160    Front yards in R districts.

17.70.170    Measurement of height.

17.70.180    Exceptions to height limits.

17.70.190    Landscaping, irrigation, and hydroseeding.

17.70.200    Outdoor facilities.

17.70.210    Screening of mechanical equipment.

17.70.220    Refuse storage areas.

17.70.230    Underground utilities.

17.70.240    Performance standards.

17.70.250    Wireless communications facilities.

17.70.260    Hazardous materials.

17.70.270    Affordable housing density bonus and other incentives.

17.70.280    Manufactured homes.

17.70.290    Game centers.

17.70.300    Animals.

17.70.310    Fences and walls.

17.70.320    Inclusionary housing.

17.70.330    Electric transmission line easements.

17.70.340    Stream setbacks.

17.70.350    Formula businesses.

17.70.360    Retail sales larger than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.

17.70.370    Cottage food operations.

17.70.380    Mobile food vendors.

17.70.390    Emergency shelter.

17.70.400    Outdoor entertainment.

17.70.410    Donation and collection bins.

17.70.010 Specific purposes and applicability.
This chapter contains land use and development regulations, other than parking, loading, and sign regulations, that are applicable to sites in all or several districts. These regulations shall be applied as specified in Division II, Base District Regulations; Division III, Overlay Zoning Districts; and as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.020 Relocated buildings.
In addition to the requirements of BMC Title 15, Buildings and Construction, a use permit for relocation of a building shall be required. This permit, to be issued by the community development director, shall establish conditions necessary to ensure that the relocated building will be compatible with its surroundings in terms of architectural character, height and bulk, and quality of exterior appearance. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.030 Exterior materials in R districts.
In all R districts, the exterior walls of all structures, other than accessory structures, shall have a nonmetallic finish. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.040 Religious assembly yard requirements.
Yards, height and bulk, and buffering requirements for religious assemblies shall be as specified by a use permit; provided, that the minimum interior side yard shall be 15 feet and the minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet. Yards adjoining street property lines shall not be less than required for a permitted use. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.050 Accessory uses and structures.
A. In R Districts.

1. Timing. Accessory structures shall not be established or constructed prior to the start of construction of a principal structure on a site, unless authorized by an exception to criteria to accommodate overall development on a parcel with site constraints. Construction trailers may be placed on a site at the time site clearance and grading begins. Construction trailers shall be removed within 30 days following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure.

2. Location. Accessory structures shall not occupy a required yard or court, or project beyond the front building line of the principal structure on a site. Subject to an exception to criteria in the RS zone, a detached garage may protrude past the front building line of the principal structure but may not be located within a required front yard; provided, that the design of the detached garage is compatible with the existing residence in terms of architectural design, building materials, roof slopes, colors, and exterior finishes. No accessory uses may be permitted off site.

3. Maximum Height. The maximum wall height of an accessory structure shall be 12 feet, subject to the provisions of this subsection. Maximum peak height shall be determined on the basis of roof pitch as provided herein.

a. Fifteen feet where the roof pitch is below 4:12.

b. Eighteen feet where the roof pitch is between 4:12 and 6:12.

c. Twenty feet where the roof pitch exceeds 6:12.

4. Setbacks. An accessory structure in a required rear yard shall be located at least five feet from a rear or side property line. A minimum 10-foot distance shall be maintained between an accessory building and any other building on the site; provided, however, that the community development director may authorize an exception to criteria to reduce the separation between buildings to five feet.

5. RS Districts. In an RS district, the total gross floor area of accessory structures more than four feet in height shall be counted in computing lot coverage and shall meet the lot coverage requirements of BMC 17.24.030, except that the total area of any one accessory building shall not exceed the total area of the primary residential structure on the same site.

6. Patio Covers. A patio cover open on at least two sides and complying with all other provisions of this subsection may be attached to a principal structure and shall not be subject to requirements for courts opposite required windows.

7. Swimming Pools. An unenclosed swimming pool, including related equipment, may occupy a required rear yard or side yard but shall not be within five feet of a property line.

8. Decks. No deck that is 30 inches or more in height shall be located in a required yard.

9. Decorative Archways. A decorative archway may occupy a required front yard, provided it meets the driveway visibility requirements of BMC 17.74.150. No more than one archway per frontage may be constructed. Any decorative archway shall have a maximum height of eight feet, a maximum width of eight feet, and a maximum depth of four feet.

B. In C, I, OS and PS Districts. Accessory structures shall comply with all regulations applicable to the principal structure on a site. Off-site accessory uses shall be allowed only with a use permit issued by the community development director.

C. In PD District. The location of accessory structures shall comply with the adopted PD or specific plan for a PD district. (Ord. 19-02 § 3).

17.70.060 Accessory dwelling units.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to achieve the goals of the city’s housing element and of the California Government Code by permitting accessory dwelling units, thereby increasing housing opportunities for the community through use of existing housing resources and infrastructure.

B. Zoning. One accessory dwelling unit per parcel is permitted by right in all residential districts (RS, RM, and RH) and mixed use districts of the downtown mixed use master plan, and on lots with a primary single-family dwelling, subject to compliance with the requirements of this section. An accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this section shall be deemed to be an accessory use or accessory structure and shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the general plan and zoning designation for the lot.

C. General Standards. An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the following general standards:

1. Public utility and services, including emergency access, shall be adequate to serve both the primary dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit.

2. The accessory dwelling unit may be rented but shall not be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the primary dwelling.

3. The rented unit shall not be leased for any period less than 30 days.

4. An executed deed restriction, on a form provided by the city, shall be required pursuant to subsection (G) of this section.

5. An existing primary dwelling unit may be designated as an accessory dwelling unit if a new primary dwelling unit is built in compliance with applicable standards and requirements of this title.

D. Development Standards.

1. Floor Area.

a. Attached Units. The floor area of an attached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 50 percent of the total floor area of the primary dwelling unit or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. However, if the primary dwelling has an existing floor area of less than 1,200 square feet, an attached accessory dwelling unit may have a maximum floor area of 600 square feet subject to compliance with all other zoning standards.

b. Detached Units. The total floor area for a detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or the size of the existing primary dwelling unit, whichever is less.

2. Bulk Standards.

a. An accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable floor area ratio, lot coverage and site landscaping standards of the district in which it is located.

b. For lots less than 6,000 square feet in area, a five percent increase in lot coverage over the base allowance is permitted subject to an exception to criteria if such increase is necessary to accommodate additional floor area for a new accessory dwelling unit.

c. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable minimum yard, build-to line and setback standards of the district in which it is located.

d. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable yard, setback, build-to line and building separation standards for accessory structures or ancillary buildings; provided, however, that the required minimum side and rear setback shall not exceed five feet.

e. Any existing accessory structure or ancillary building may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit regardless of whether it conforms to the current zoning requirement for building separation or setbacks; provided, however, that any expansion of the structure shall conform to the current applicable zoning standards.

3. Height.

a. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the height standards of the district in which it is located, subject to compliance with the design standards of this section.

b. A detached accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable height standards for accessory structures provided in BMC 17.70.050 or ancillary structures as provided in the downtown mixed use master plan, but shall not exceed the height of the primary dwelling.

c. The community development director may grant an exception to criteria to increase the wall and/or peak height of a detached accessory dwelling unit up to five feet if the structure would comply with all other applicable design standards, and the director finds that such increase is necessary to support the feasible construction of an accessory dwelling unit.

4. Foundation. An accessory dwelling unit shall be placed on a permanent foundation.

E. Design Standards.

1. In a mixed use district, an accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the standards of the downtown mixed use master plan form-based code.

2. A deck, balcony or platform attached to or associated with a detached accessory dwelling unit shall be oriented away from an adjoining residential side yard.

3. Dormers shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the side wall below and shall not cumulatively occupy more than 30 percent on any side of the building.

4. If a gable roof or turned gable roof is present, the gable end shall be oriented in a direction parallel to the side property line in order to minimize shadow effects on the adjoining lot.

5. The roof pitch for an accessory dwelling unit shall be 4:12 or greater. However, if the primary residence has a predominantly flat roof, a similar pitch may be employed on the accessory dwelling.

6. In the H historic overlay district, an accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the following additional requirements:

a. Detached accessory dwellings and building additions shall be located behind the primary dwelling and shall not exceed the height or footprint of the primary dwelling.

b. An attached accessory dwelling unit shall not result in a rooftop addition or any increase in building height.

c. A building addition for an attached accessory dwelling unit shall be inset or separated by a connector that is offset at least 18 inches from the parallel side or rear building wall to distinguish it from the primary dwelling. A building addition for an attached ADU shall not extend beyond the side wall of the primary dwelling.

d. Exterior building and trim materials shall be horizontal wood siding or shingles. However, if stucco is the predominant finish for the primary residence, then a stucco exterior may also be applied to the accessory dwelling. Synthetic stucco (e.g., EIFS or DryVit) is prohibited.

e. The exterior walls of an accessory dwelling shall utilize the same base and trim colors as the primary residence.

f. The roof shall utilize the same material and color as the primary residence and shall match the primary residence in overall appearance.

g. Gutters shall not be constructed of plastic or PVC materials and shall apply a similar profile as gutters located on the primary residence.

h. Windows shall be taller than they are wide or shall match the proportions of the primary dwelling’s windows. Windows in small spaces, such as bathroom windows, may be horizontally oriented.

i. Window pane divisions shall be true or simulated divided lites (muntins applied to both the interior and exterior of the glass).

j. Window frames shall be painted or factory-finished. No metallic finishes such as silver or bronze anodized aluminum are permitted.

k. Dormers shall not face an adjoining side yard.

F. Parking. No additional off-street parking stalls shall be required for an accessory dwelling unit.

G. Recordation of Deed Restriction. An executed deed restriction, on a form provided by the city, shall be submitted to the city prior to issuance of a building permit and shall be recorded prior to final occupancy. The deed restriction shall stipulate all of the following:

1. That the rented unit shall not be rented for any period less than 30 days at a time; and

2. That the accessory dwelling shall not be sold separately from the primary dwelling. (Ord. 19-02 § 4; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 07-60 § 1; Ord. 04-2 § 2; Ord. 99-7; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 12, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 14, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.070 Home occupations.
A. Permit Required. A home occupation in a dwelling unit, garage or accessory building shall require a home occupation permit obtained by filing a completed application form with the community development director. The community development director shall issue the permit upon determining that the proposed home occupation complies with the requirements of this section.

B. Contents of Application. An application for a home occupation permit shall contain:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2. A complete description of the proposed home occupation, including number and occupation of persons employed, amount of floor space occupied, provisions for storage of materials, and number and type of vehicles used.

C. Required Conditions. Home occupations shall comply with the following regulations:

1. There shall be no stock-in-trade other than products fabricated on the premises.

2. A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a building and shall occupy no more than 500 square feet of floor area. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.

3. The existence of a home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site.

4. No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed on-site or report to work at the site in the conduct of a home occupation.

5. No kilns shall be permitted, and a home occupation shall comply with the performance standards prescribed by BMC 17.70.240; provided, that no noise shall be perceptible at or beyond the property line.

6. Not more than one truck, with a maximum capacity of one ton, incidental to a home occupation shall be kept on the site. The number of parking spaces available to a dwelling unit housing a home occupation shall not be reduced to less than two.

7. A home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount in the district.

8. No motor vehicle repair, beauty shop nor barber shop shall be permitted, and a home occupation shall not include an office nor sales room open to visitors without prior appointments, and there shall be no advertising of the address of the home occupation that results in attracting persons to the premises.

9. No cannabis-related uses including, but not limited to, retail, testing/laboratory, manufacturing, commercial cultivation, shall be allowed.

D. The permit for a home occupation that is not operated in compliance with these regulations shall be revoked by the community development director after 30 days’ written notice unless the home occupation is altered to comply. (Ord. 18-05 § 31; Ord. 13-06 § 4; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.080 Swimming pools and hot tubs.
Swimming pools and hot tubs shall be fenced, as required by Chapter 15.25 BMC. Additional fencing, separation, or fixed windows shall be required where, in the judgment of the building official, such features are needed for safety. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.090 Eating and drinking establishments with take-out service.
The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to eating and drinking establishments with take-out service other than limited take-out service, as defined:

A. No Walk-Up Service in CC and CG Districts. Food shall be delivered to patrons within a car or within a building, or enclosed or covered outdoor eating area.

B. Minimum Separation. Establishments shall not be closer than 500 feet to a public or private school, park, or playground in an R, OS, or PS district.

C. Litter Control. Identifiable containers and napkins shall be used for all carry-out food, and all litter resulting, including litter on adjacent property and public rights-of-way, shall be promptly removed. A use permit may require the operator to retain a contract litter cleanup service if the community development director determines that a litter problem exists. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.100 Live entertainment.
The following regulations shall apply to any use offering scheduled live entertainment, as defined, more than three times per calendar year:

A. Exits not limited to emergency use only shall not be opposite an R district adjoining the site.

B. A use permit shall establish conditions ensuring that no litter problem will exist.

C. A use permit for live entertainment shall apply only to the type of entertainment approved, and a different type of entertainment shall require approval of a new use permit. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.110 Service stations, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing.
The following supplementary development regulations shall apply to the service station, vehicle/equipment repair, and automobile washing use classifications.

A. Minimum Separation. Minimum separation between site boundaries shall be 500 feet, except that one such use may be located at each corner of a street intersection.

B. Site Layout. Conditions of approval of a zoning or use permit may require buffering, screening, planting areas, or hours of operation necessary to avoid adverse impacts on properties in the surrounding area.

C. Planting Areas. Perimeter planting areas shall be as required for parking lots by Chapter 17.74 BMC, except where a building adjoins an interior property line. Required interior planting areas may adjoin perimeter planting areas.

D. Storage of Materials and Equipment. The provisions of BMC 17.70.200, Outdoor facilities, shall apply, except that a display rack for automobile products no more than four feet wide may be maintained on each pump island of a service station. If display racks are not located on pump islands, they shall be placed within three feet of the principal building, and shall be limited to one per street frontage. Storage of inoperative vehicles is prohibited. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.120 Maximum dwelling unit occupancy.
To ensure consistency with the density policies of the general plan and with the rights of individuals living as a household but not related by blood or marriage, occupancy by persons living as a single household in a dwelling unit shall be limited as follows:

A. A dwelling unit shall have 150 square feet of gross floor area for each of the first 10 occupants and 300 square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of 20. In no case shall a dwelling unit be occupied by more than 20 persons.

B. A zoning permit shall be required for occupancy of a dwelling unit by more than 10 persons 18 years or older. The community development director shall not issue a zoning permit unless evidence is presented that all vehicles used by occupants will be stored on the site in conformance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.130 Development on substandard lots.
A. A legally created lot having a width or area less than required for the district in which it is located may be occupied by a permitted or conditional use if it has a width of 25 feet or more and an area of 2,500 square feet or more; provided, that on the effective date of regulations that made it substandard it was in single ownership separate from any abutting lot. No substandard lot shall be further reduced in area or width.

B. Except as provided below, a substandard lot shall be subject to the same yard and density requirements as a standard lot; provided, that in an R district one dwelling unit may be located on a substandard lot that meets the requirements of this section. In an R district, the required interior side yard for a single-family residence, on a building site which is substandard in width, may be reduced to as much as 10 percent of the lot width, and a street side yard may be reduced to as much as 20 percent of the lot width, except that no site may have a yard width of less than three feet. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 29, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.140 Development on lots divided by district boundaries.
The regulations applicable to each district shall be applied to the area within that district, and no use other than parking serving a principal use on the site shall be located in a district in which it is not a permitted or conditional use. Pedestrian or vehicular access from a street to a use shall not traverse a portion of the site in a district in which the use is not a permitted or conditional use. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.150 Building projections into yards and courts.
Projections into required yards shall be permitted as follows:

A. Fireplaces or chimneys: 18 inches.

B. Uncovered porches, terraces, platforms, decks, subterranean garages, and patios not more than 30 inches in height: four feet in a corner side yard and six feet in a front yard. There is no minimum setback requirement for these structures in the rear or interior side yards.

C. Cornices, eaves, and ornamental features: two feet.

D. Stairs, canopies, awnings, sunrooms, and covered porches: six feet into a front or rear yard, three feet into a corner side yard, and two feet into an interior side yard.

E. Balconies and bay windows: two and one-half feet into a front or rear yard, two feet into a corner side yard, and 18 inches into an interior side yard.

F. In the RS district, where the rear property line of a site adjoins an area of permanent open space, the following projections will be permitted:

1. Attached decks above the first floor level: six feet into a rear yard.

2. Detached decks more than 30 inches and not more than 48 inches in height: 12 feet into a rear yard, except that such a deck shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of five feet. (Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 13, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 15, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.160 Front yards in R districts.
Where lots comprising 40 percent of the frontage on a blockface in an R district are improved with buildings, the required front yard shall be the average of the front yard depths for structures other than detached garages or carports on each developed site in the same district on the blockface. In computing the average, the actual depth shall be used up to a maximum depth 10 feet greater than the normally required front yard for any site having a yard depth exceeding the minimum requirement. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 30, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.170 Measurement of height.
Height shall be measured from finished grade at all points on the site to a warped plane an equal height above all points on the site. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.180 Exceptions to height limits.
Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, elevator penthouses, water tanks, flagpoles, monuments, theater scenery lofts, radio and television antennas, transmission towers, fire towers, and similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances, covering not more than 10 percent of the ground area covered by the structure to which they are accessory, may exceed the maximum permitted height in the district in which the site is located if the site is outside the shoreline area defined in BMC 17.24.030(K), subject to the following regulations:

A. In an RS district, a chimney may exceed the permitted height by two feet, but a use permit shall be required for any other structure exceeding the permitted height in the district and shall not be issued for height in excess of 20 feet above the district height limit.

B. In an RM or RH district, a structure may exceed the district height limit by not more than eight feet if no portion intercepts an inclined daylight plane sloping inward from the nearest lot line at a 45-degree angle from the height of the highest building wall permitted adjoining a required yard; provided, that a chimney may intercept the daylight plane. A use permit shall be required for any structure exceeding the height limit by more than eight feet and shall not be issued for height in excess of 20 feet above the district height limit.

C. In a C, I, PS, or OS district, a structure may exceed the district height limit by 10 feet, and a use permit may be approved for features extending more than 10 feet above the district height limit.

D. For projects to be acted on by the planning commission, requests for approval of height use permits shall be acted on by the planning commission. For projects which require action by the historic preservation review commission only, requests for approval of height use permits shall be acted on by the historic preservation review commission. For projects to be acted on by the community development director only, the historic preservation review commission shall act on the height use permit application. Applications for higher light poles in the I districts shall be acted on by the community development director. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.190 Landscaping, irrigation, and hydroseeding.
A. General Requirement. Minimum site landscaping and required planting areas shall be installed in accord with the standards and requirements of this section, which shall apply to all projects for which a zoning permit is required except single-family residences.

1. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape designer, a licensed landscape architect or other qualified person, and no significant or substantive changes to approved landscaping or irrigation plans shall be made without prior written approval by the community development director and the landscape designer.

2. Evidence of completion of required landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be supplied to the planning department on a landscape certification form. This form shall be required to be submitted prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for new construction unless an extension of up to one year is granted by the community development director.

3. For projects consisting primarily of additions to or remodeling of existing buildings for which landscaping is required, a deferred completion agreement shall be executed prior to issuance of the building permit. The agreement shall guarantee installation of the landscaping and any irrigation improvements within one year or prior to occupancy, whichever occurs first.

B. Standards.

1. Required planting areas shall be permanently maintained. As used in this section, “maintained” includes watering, weeding, pruning, insect control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. Any landscaping plant material shown on an approved landscape plan removed for any reason shall be replaced by the property owner within a time frame established by the community development director.

2. Landscape materials shall not be located such that, at maturity:

a. They interfere with safe sight distances for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic;

b. They conflict with overhead utility lines, overhead lights, or walkway lights; or

c. They block pedestrian or bicycle ways.

C. Landscaping Plans Required. Each application for a zoning permit shall include plans and written material describing all existing trees, including species, height, diameter, and condition, and showing how any applicable site landscaping or planting area requirements are to be met. The degree of specificity of such plans and written material shall relate to the type of permit or request for approval being sought.

D. Materials. Landscape plans shall demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme for the overall development by choice and location of materials. To accomplish this, landscape plans shall conform to the following:

1. Plant materials shall be selected for: energy efficiency and drought tolerance; adaptability and relationship to Benicia environment; color, form and pattern; ability to provide shade; soil retention, fire resistiveness, etc. The overall landscape plan shall be integrated with all elements of the project, such as buildings, parking lots and streets, to achieve desirable microclimate and minimize energy demand.

2. Plant materials shall be sized and spaced to achieve an immediate effect and shall normally not be less than a 15-gallon container for trees, five-gallon container for specimen shrubs, and a one-gallon container for mass planting.

3. The use of crushed rock or gravel for large area coverage shall be avoided (except for walks and equestrian paths).

4. Nonturf areas, such as shrub beds, shall be top dressed with a bark chip mulch or approved alternative.

5. Where shrubs or low-level vegetation are used, vegetative matter at maturity shall cover at least 75 percent of actual planted area.

6. Street trees shall be included, conforming to the street tree regulations prescribed in BMC Title 12.

E. Design Standards. Parking lots shall have perimeter planting areas as prescribed by the following schedule and, in addition, shall have five percent of the area, excluding the perimeter planting strips, devoted to planting distributed throughout the parking lot.

Width of Perimeter Planting Strip (feet)

Parking Lot Dimension Adjoining Property Line

Adjoining Street Property Line

Adjoining R District and Residential PD

Adjoining Nonresidential Districts Except IG and IW

Up to 100 feet

5

5

3

More than 100 feet

10

5

5

A parking structure in a C or I district having at-grade parking adjoining a street shall have a 10-foot planting area adjoining the street property line.

1. Where landscaped areas are provided, they shall be a minimum of three feet in width, except window/wall planter boxes. Landscaped areas containing trees shall be a minimum of four feet in their narrowest dimension.

2. The end of each row of parking stalls shall be separated from driveways by a landscaped planter, sidewalk, or other means. Concrete curbs shall separate landscaped areas from parking areas.

3. A minimum of one tree per six spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking lot.

4. Where autos will extend over landscaping, the required planting area shall be increased two feet in depth by decreasing the length of the parking stall by two feet. Where autos will overhang into both sides of an interior landscaped strip or well, the minimum inside curb-to-curb interior planter dimension shall be seven feet.

F. Irrigation Plans. Irrigation plans shall be submitted with applications for building permits and for approval of improvement plans required for BMC Title 16, Subdivisions, and shall contain all construction details for an automatic system including, but not limited to, the following:

1. Location, type and size of lines;

2. Locations, type and gallonage output of heads and/or emitters;

3. Location and sizes of valves;

4. Location and type of controller;

5. Installation details;

6. Location and type of backflow prevention device (as per health code);

7. Available water pressure and water meter outlet size;

8. Irrigation application schedule and flow rates.

G. Hydroseeding. Plans indicating location and type of hydroseeding shall be submitted with applications for building permits and for approval of improvement plans required by BMC Title 16, Subdivisions, when such planting is to be utilized for permanent landscape treatment or for natural area restoration. Hydroseeding plans shall contain installation specifications including, but not limited to:

1. Seed mix and application rate. A native seed mix containing a minimum of 10 percent shrub and perennial seeds shall be utilized in areas where permanent landscape restoration is required. Species selected shall include plant materials native to the area.

2. Fertilizer, mulch materials, soil preparation and watering specifications.

H. Repealed by Ord. 08-03.

I. All required landscape, parking lot, and street trees shall be replaced in accordance with the city’s tree preservation guidelines. (Ord. 08-03 § 3; Ord. 99-1 N.S.).

17.70.200 Outdoor facilities.
A. Where Permitted. Outdoor storage and display of merchandise, materials, or equipment, not including cannabis or cannabis products, shall be permitted in the CC, CW, CG, IL, IG, PS and OS districts subject to approval of a use permit by the community development director. Outdoor food service accessory to an eating and drinking establishment may be permitted subject to approval of a use permit by the community development director in any I, C, OS, or PS district, but no outdoor preparation of food or beverages shall be permitted. A use permit for outdoor storage, display, or food service may require yards, screening, or planting areas necessary to prevent adverse impacts on surrounding properties and the visual character of scenic corridors as identified in the general plan. If such impacts cannot be prevented, the use permit application shall be denied.

B. Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, outdoor storage and display shall be permitted in conjunction with the following use classifications in districts where they are permitted or conditionally permitted:

1. Nurseries, provided outdoor storage and display is limited to plants only, not including cannabis;

2. Vehicle/equipment sales and rentals, provided outdoor storage and display shall be limited to vehicles or equipment offered for sale only.

C. Screening. In districts where outdoor storage and display is permitted, and except for the use classifications excepted by subsection (B) of this section, outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of streets by a solid fence or wall. The height of merchandise, materials, and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. The community development director may require additional screening in highly visible areas and may impose reasonable restrictions on the type of storage or display or the location of outdoor storage and display areas to avoid adverse visual effects. (Ord. 18-05 § 32; Ord. 07-21 § 9; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.210 Screening of mechanical equipment.
A. General Requirement. Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, all exterior mechanical equipment, except solar collectors, and operating mechanical equipment in IG and IW districts located more than 50 feet from an R, C, PS, PD or OS district boundary, shall be screened from view on all sides. Equipment to be screened includes, but is not limited to, heating, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing lines, ductwork, and transformers. Satellite receiving antennas shall be screened as prescribed by BMC 17.70.250. Screening of the top of equipment may be required by the community development director, if necessary to protect a significant view.

B. Utility Meters. Utility meters shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way, but need not be screened on top or when located on the interior side of a single-family dwelling. Meters in a required front yard or in a side yard adjoining a street shall be enclosed in subsurface vaults.

C. Screening Specifications. Screening materials may have evenly distributed openings or perforations not exceeding 50 percent of the surface area and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment so that it is not visible from a street or adjoining lot. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.220 Refuse storage areas.
A refuse storage area screened on all sides by a six-foot solid wood or masonry wall, or located within a building, shall be provided prior to occupancy for all uses other than one-family or two-family dwellings. Locations and horizontal dimensions of refuse storage areas shall be as prescribed by the community development director. The community development director may waive this screening requirement in IG and IW districts for refuse collection and storage equipment, including dumpsters and waste containers that are not visible from public streets. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.230 Underground utilities.
All electrical, telephone, CATV, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to a development site shall be installed underground within the site. Off-site utilities along a project frontage for all new commercial, multifamily, or industrial development shall be undergrounded, unless a deferral is granted by the planning commission for those projects over which it has approval authority, or by the historic preservation review commission for those projects over which it has approval authority, or by the community development director for those projects over which the director has approval authority, in accordance with the deferral requirements of BMC 16.36.020(G)(2). (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 16, 1992; Ord. 89-1 § 31, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.240 Performance standards.
The following performance standards shall apply to all use classifications in all zoning districts:

A. Air Contaminants. All uses shall comply with rules, regulations, and standards of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). An applicant for a zoning permit or a use, activity, or process requiring BAAQMD approval of a permit to construct shall file a copy of the BAAQMD permit with the community development director. Any use, activity or process that requires BAAQMD approval of a permit to operate shall file a copy of such permit with the community development director within 30 days of its approval.

B. Water Pollution. No person or use shall discharge liquids of any kind into a public or private sewage system, watercourse, body of water, or the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (California Administrative Code, Title 23, Chapter 3 and California Water Code, Division 7).

C. Noise. All uses and activities shall comply with the provisions of the Benicia noise regulations (Chapter 8.20 BMC).

D. Glare.

1. From Glass. Mirrored or highly reflective glass shall not cover more than 20 percent of a building surface visible from a street unless an applicant submits surface information demonstrating to the satisfaction of the community development director that use of such glass would not significantly increase glare visible from adjacent streets and property or pose a hazard for moving vehicles.

2. From Outdoor Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall comply with BMC 17.74.170. Site lighting shall be designed and installed to confine direct light rays to the site. Minimum illumination at ground level shall be 0.5 footcandles, and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles in an R district. Security lighting in any district may be indirect or diffused, or shall be shielded or directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting for outdoor court or field games within 300 feet of an R district shall require approval of a use permit.

E. Combustibles and Explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the provisions of the Benicia fire prevention code (Chapter 8.28 BMC).

F. Radioactive Materials. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of radioactive materials shall comply with the provisions of the California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17) and the Benicia fire prevention code (Chapter 8.28 BMC).

G. Hazardous and Extremely Hazardous Materials. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall comply with the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 22, Division 4) and BMC 17.70.260, Hazardous materials.

H. Heat and Humidity. Uses, activities, and processes shall not produce any unreasonable, disturbing, or unnecessary emissions of heat or humidity, at the property line of the site on which they are situated, that cause material distress, discomfort, or injury to the average person.

I. Electromagnetic Interference. Uses, activities and processes shall not cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception in R districts, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site on which they are situated.

J. Evidence of Compliance. The community development director shall require such evidence of ability to comply with performance standards as he deems necessary prior to issuance of a zoning permit.

K. Cannabis Odor Control. All nonresidential structures used for cannabis cultivation and/or other cannabis-related uses shall be enclosed and securely locked, and equipped with odor control filtration and ventilation systems such that the odors of cannabis cannot be readily detected from outside the structure. Residential cultivation of cannabis for personal use shall comply with BMC 17.84.030. Cannabis uses shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License, and Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis. (Ord. 18-05 § 33; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 17, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.250 Wireless communications facilities.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to establish development standards, in accordance with federal law and state rules and regulations, for antenna and wireless communication transmission (hereinafter called “wireless communication facilities”) that:

1. Minimize the potential health, public safety and aesthetic impacts of such facilities on the community;

2. Regulate the placement and design of wireless communication facilities so as to preserve the unique visual character of the community;

3. Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities in industrial and commercial districts and generally discourage the location of such facilities in residential districts;

4. Provide for the managed development of wireless communication facilities in a manner that reasonably accommodates the needs of citizens and wireless communication service providers;

5. Locate such wireless communication facilities where they are least visible from public rights-of-way in the vicinity, while not burdening adjacent property owners with adverse visual impacts; and

6. Protect landmark structures, historically significant structures, architecturally significant structures, landmark vistas or scenery, and view corridors from visually obtrusive wireless communication antennas and associated equipment.

B. Exemptions. Each exempt facility shall fully comply with other applicable requirements of the municipal code to the extent not specifically exempted in this subsection including, but not limited to, adopted building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and fire codes. The following wireless communication facilities are exempt from the standards of this section, except as noted in subsection (C) of this section:

1. Direct broadcast satellite antennas and multipoint distribution services antennas measuring one meter or less in diameter (or diagonal measurement);

2. Television broadcast system antennas designed to receive only television broadcast signals;

3. Satellite earth station antennas designed to receive and/or transmit radio frequency signals directly to and/or from a satellite measuring two meters or less in diameter (or diagonal measurement);

4. Amateur radio antennas. Antennas and antenna structures constructed by or for FCC-licensed amateur radio operators that comply with the following provisions:

a. The antenna structure, when fully extended, measures 35 feet or less in height, and measures 24 inches or less in diameter or width;

b. The antenna boom measures 20 feet or less in length and is three inches or less in diameter;

c. No antenna element exceeds 32 feet in length or two inches in diameter or width, with the exception of mid-element tuning devices which shall not exceed six inches in diameter or width; and

d. The turning radius of any antenna does not exceed 26 feet;

5. Public communication facilities, including personal wireless services, used and maintained by the city, or any fire district, school district, hospital, ambulance service, governmental agency, or similar public or semipublic use;

6. Private, noncommercial wireless communications facilities or systems contained entirely on site for the purpose of serving the premises upon which the facility is located and having no potential visual, noise, thermal or radio frequency interference impacts to surrounding properties or the community;

7. Replacement of duly permitted facilities or equipment of a minor nature that does not increase the number or height of antennas or significantly expand the size or capacity of the equipment cabinet or ancillary related equipment;

8. Any facility specifically exempted from city regulation by the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the provisions of a permit issued by the California Public Utilities Commission.

C. Criteria for Exempt Facilities. The following location and design standards shall apply to all wireless communication facilities that are exempt per subsection (B) of this section:

1. An antenna may be installed on a lot in any zoning district that is not subject to an H historic overlay district.

2. No facility shall be located in a front or street-side yard.

3. No wireless communication facility may be located within 10 feet of interior side and rear property lines; except if the antenna does not exceed six feet in height.

4. No antenna, except for amateur radio antennas as provided in subsection (B)(4) of this section, may exceed 15 feet, as measured from ground level immediately under the antenna to the highest point of the antenna or any appurtenance attached to it; however, the community development director may approve mounting an antenna on the rear half of a roof if no other feasible location exists, and all other applicable criteria of this subsection (C) are met. The justification for rooftop mounting shall be submitted with an application for a zoning permit.

5. The structural base of an antenna, including all bracing and appurtenances, but excluding the dish itself, shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by walls, fences, buildings, landscape, or combinations thereof not less than four feet high, so that the base and support structure are not visible from beyond the boundaries of the site at a height of six feet or below.

6. All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of an antenna or reception of a signal shall be placed underground, except for wires or cables attached flush with the surface of a building or the structure of the antenna.

7. Highly reflective surfaces shall not be permitted. All satellite dish antennas that are not screened shall be painted with as unobtrusive a color as possible.

8. No more than one antenna shall be permitted per parcel unless approved by the community development director.

9. No signage of any kind shall be posted or displayed on a wireless communication facility.

D. Permit Required. A use permit from the planning commission shall be required for the installation of all wireless communication facilities in all districts. In addition, a design review permit shall be required as per Chapter 17.108 BMC. Wireless communication facilities in planned development (PD) zoning district with residential uses shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (I) of this section. All use permit applications shall include:

1. A written definition of the area of service desired for coverage or capacity.

2. Documentation showing that the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity.

3. A map showing all technically feasible alternative sites from which the desired coverage could also be provided, along with an analysis of the feasibility of those alternative sites that compares visual impact with that of the proposed project. At a minimum, this analysis shall identify the location of all existing monopoles within a quarter mile of the proposed site, provide an explanation of why collocation has not been proposed at each of these sites, and assess the potential for building-mounted alternatives.

4. Photo simulations of the proposed project.

5. Written documentation demonstrating that emissions from the proposed wireless communications facility are within the limits set by the FCC.

6. Design that proposes the smallest and least visible antennas possible that will reasonably accommodate the operator’s objectives. The applicant shall disclose which antennas and support structures were evaluated and the process used to select the antenna and support structure.

E. Location Criteria. The following criteria shall apply to the siting and development of all new wireless communication facilities in order to mitigate any potential health, safety, urban design, neighborhood character or public access impacts:

1. Antennas attached to a roof shall maintain a 1:1 ratio for equipment setback (for example, a 10-foot-high antenna requires a 10-foot setback from facade) unless an alternative placement would reduce visual impact; be treated or screened to match mechanical equipment, stairs, elevator towers, or other background features and be camouflaged so that the antennas are not visible from a public right-of-way; and not be mounted in direct line with significant view corridors.

2. Facilities shall not exceed a height of 12 feet above the maximum allowed height limit for the main building in the zoning district in which the facility is located.

3. Facilities shall not reduce existing parking on the site below the zoning district parking requirement.

4. When a monopole is adjacent to a residential use it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. In addition, it shall not exceed 1.5 feet in diameter at its base nor one foot at its top and the antennas shall not extend more than three feet from the center of the pole.

5. Collocation shall occur whenever reasonably feasible and aesthetically desirable. In order to facilitate future collocation of antennas for other service providers, the conditions of approval shall prohibit the applicant from entering into an exclusive lease for the use of the site. Collocation shall be discouraged when it will increase visual impacts. Service providers are encouraged to collocate with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards and other utility structures where the collocation is found to minimize the overall visual impact. Collocation of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered to be an expansion of the nonconforming structure.

6. Any service provider facilities that are developed on vacant sites shall be temporary. When such sites are developed, these facilities shall be removed. Such facilities may be replaced with building-mounted antennas or other types of appropriate facilities, subject to review and approval by the city in accordance with this section.

7. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses, the neighborhood and the zoning district as much as possible. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized.

8. In determining whether to grant or deny approval for a wireless communications facility, the planning commission may require more stringent standards than the development standards of this chapter. The planning commission may attach such conditions as it considers necessary to ensure visual and land use compatibility with the surroundings so as to avoid adverse effects on the health, safety, and welfare of the community’s residents, to protect existing vegetation, and to minimize the proliferation of such facilities.

F. Design Review Standards. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.108 BMC, all wireless communication facilities, including but not limited to, equipment, antennas, poles, dishes, cabinets, structures, towers or other appurtenances shall employ a design that minimizes the visual impact by making use of the following or similar techniques:

1. The proposed facility shall be sited to be screened by existing development, topography or vegetation in such a way as to have the least visual impact possible taking into consideration all technically feasible alternatives.

2. The materials, textures and colors of new or remodeled structures shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials. Facilities shall have a nonreflective finish and shall be painted and/or textured to match the exterior of the building or background.

3. Mounting of facilities on the peaks of roofs or hilltops shall be avoided to the greatest extent possible and all other related equipment shall be screened or hidden from view. Additional new vegetation and its proper irrigation or other screening may be required as a condition of approval.

4. Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or significant details of a building should be covered by appropriate casing manufactured to match existing architectural features found on a building. Where feasible, antennas shall be placed directly above, below or incorporated into vertical design elements.

5. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be placed underground to the greatest extent possible or screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with surrounding backdrop.

6. All wireless communication facilities and associated equipment must be regularly maintained.

7. Any exterior lighting shall be manually operated and used only during night maintenance or emergencies. The lighting shall be constructed, located, and oriented so that only the intended area is illuminated and off-site glare is eliminated.

G. Additional Design Review Criteria for H Overlay District. The following design review criteria shall also be applied to wireless communication facilities within the H overlay district:

1. The proposed wireless communication facility shall respect the visual relationship of architectural design elements in the surrounding area, including scale, height, rhythm of spacing, pattern on windows and doorways, building siting and relationship to landscaping, roof pitch, architectural style and structural details, materials, colors and textures.

2. Wireless communication facilities shall not be placed on a building with a landmark or contributing designation.

3. Antennas mounted on architecturally significant structures or a significant architectural detail of a building shall be covered by appropriate casings that match existing architectural features.

H. Required Findings. To approve a use permit for a wireless communication facility, the planning commission must find that:

1. The proposed location of the project and the conditions under which it would be operated and maintained will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or the general public, and will not be materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.

2. Development of the proposed facility as conditioned will not significantly affect any designated visual resources, environmentally sensitive resources, community character resources; or, that there are no other environmentally equivalent and/or superior and technically feasible alternatives to the proposed wireless communications facility as conditioned (including alternative locations and/or designs) with less visual and/or other resource impacts, and that the proposed facility has been modified by conditions and/or project design to adequately minimize and mitigate its visual and other resource impacts.

3. The proposed facility is in compliance with all FCC regulations.

4. The proposed location and design of the project and the conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with all elements of the Benicia general plan, other pertinent city ordinances and with any specific plan or overlay district that has been adopted for the area.

5. The proposed project will complement and harmonize with the existing and proposed land uses in the vicinity and will be visually compatible with the physical design aspects including scale, height, materials, colors, and texture.

I. Additional Findings for Wireless Communication Facilities in R Districts. Wireless communication facilities are allowed in R districts only if the planning commission finds, in addition to all items in subsection (F) of this section, that:

1. In acknowledgement that an environmental determination has not been made regarding placement of a commercial facility in a residential zoning district, it has been disclosed in a required California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) evaluation for the project that environmental impacts associated with the facility were determined to be less than significant.

2. The proposed antenna is located on a parcel with a nonresidential use.

3. The proposed antenna is located either:

a. More than 35 feet away from the nearest residential use; or at least one foot away from the nearest residential property line for every foot of monopole height, whichever is greater; or

b. More than 20 feet away from the nearest residential property line if the proposed antenna is mounted on an existing utility structure within a utility corridor. (Ord. 15-02 §§ 9, 10; Ord. 06-10 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.260 Hazardous materials.
A. Purpose. The following supplemental regulations are intended to ensure that the use, handling, storage and transport of hazardous substances comply with all applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code and that the city is notified of emergency response plans, unauthorized releases of hazardous substances, and any substantial changes in facilities or operations that could affect the public health, safety or welfare. It is not the intent of these regulations to impose additional restrictions on the management of hazardous wastes, which would be contrary to state law, but only to require reporting of information to the city that must be provided to other public agencies.

B. Definitions. For purposes of this section, “hazardous substances” shall include all substances on the comprehensive master list of hazardous substances compiled and maintained by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to Section 25282 of the California Health and Safety Code.

C. Permit Required. A use permit shall be required for any new commercial, industrial, or institutional use, accessory use, or major addition or alteration to an existing use that involves the manufacture, storage, handling, transport, or processing of hazardous substances in sufficient quantities that would require permits as hazardous chemicals under the Uniform Fire Code adopted by the city, with the following exceptions:

1. Underground storage of bulk flammable and combustible liquids is permitted, subject to the provisions of subsection (E) of this section; and

2. Hazardous substances in container sizes of 10 gallons or less stored or maintained for the purposes of retail or wholesale sales are exempt from these regulations. The community development director or the planning commission may request information on the procedures to be used to process, transport, and store hazardous substances in a safe manner prior to approval of a use permit.

D. Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans. All businesses located in the city and required by Chapter 6.95 of the California Health and Safety Code to prepare hazardous materials release response plans shall submit copies of all such plans, including any corrected plans or revised plans, to the fire department at the same time these plans are submitted to the public agency administering these provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. These submittal requirements shall be a condition of approval of a zoning permit for (1) new development where space may be occupied by such a business, and (2) any alteration or addition to an existing building or structure occupied by a business subject to these provisions of the California Health and Safety Code.

E. Underground Storage Tanks. Underground storage of hazardous substances shall comply with all applicable requirements of Chapter 6.7 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 79.1113(a) of the Uniform Fire Code. Any business located in the city that uses underground storage tanks shall:

1. Notify the city dispatcher of any unauthorized release of hazardous substances immediately after the release has been detected. Such notification shall include the steps being taken to control the release; and

2. Notify the fire chief of any proposed abandoning, closing or ceasing operation of an underground storage tank and the actions to be taken to dispose of any hazardous substances.

These notification requirements shall be a condition of approval of a zoning permit for (1) new development that involves installation of underground tanks, and (2) any alteration or addition to an existing building or structure on a site where underground storage tanks exist.

F. Aboveground Storage Tanks. Aboveground storage tanks for any flammable liquid shall be allowed only at refinery or bulk storage plant locations with the approval of the fire chief. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.270 Affordable housing density bonus and other incentives.
A. Adoption by Reference. The provisions of California Government Code Section 65915 through 65918 regarding affordable housing density bonuses, concessions and other incentives are adopted by reference the same as though fully set forth in this section.

B. Amendments. The following clarifications, which are intended to advance affordability and housing opportunity, shall also apply:

1. Projects Divided by District Boundaries. If the project involves land divided by district boundaries, including noncontiguous properties, the number of dwelling units permitted in the development shall be the sum of the dwelling units permitted in each of the districts. Within the project, the permitted number of dwelling units may be distributed without regard to the underlying density regulations subject to subsection (B)(4) of this section.

2. Construction and Location of Affordable Units. All units that are constructed for very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall meet or exceed the following standards:

a. Distribution. Affordable dwelling units shall be reasonably interspersed among market-rate units within the same development.

b. Comparable Units. Affordable dwelling units must be generally comparable to market-rate units, including total square footage, bedroom size, closet space, amenities, and number of bathrooms, except in quality of interior “finish” materials (for example, floor and wall coverings). Affordable dwelling units shall measure no less than 90 percent of the average square footage of market-rate units with the same number of bedrooms.

c. Comparable Design. Affordable units shall be designed to reasonably reflect the exterior design of market-rate units in the same development.

d. Comparable Amenities. Residents of affordable units may not be charged for amenities not charged to other residents, including, but not limited to, access to recreational facilities, parking, cable TV, and interior amenities like dishwashers and microwave ovens. Optional services for all residents must be the same. Tenants of affordable units cannot be required to purchase additional services.

3. Affordable Housing Density Bonus Agreement. All applicants for projects that receive an affordable housing density bonus, development concession and/or reduction in parking standards shall enter into an affordable housing density bonus agreement with the city of Benicia. All such agreements, prior to execution, are subject to approval by the city attorney. The affordable housing density bonus agreement shall be consistent with all other provisions of this section. Agreements shall also include the following provisions:

a. The total number of units that will be constructed and the number of units that will be made affordable to very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall be clearly stated;

b. The affordable rental units shall remain available to, and occupied and affordable by, very-low- and low-income households for at least 55 years and for moderate-income households at least 10 years or the life of the structure;

c. The units affordable by very-low-, low- or moderate-income households shall be reasonably interspersed throughout the development and shall be identified on building plans submitted to the community development department and described in the application for a density bonus;

d. Units offered for sale shall be subject to an equity sharing agreement consistent with Government Code Section 65915;

e. If reduced parking standards have been applied to the project, the number of bedrooms of each unit shall be identified;

f. The city or designee shall consider the assets and income of prospective households, pursuant to the state’s Housing and Community Development (HCD) standards set forth in the definition of “income eligibility”;

g. The applicant shall provide documented evidence to the city of Benicia community development department that initial occupants of all very-low- and low-income rental units meet the necessary income qualifications. The property owner shall provide an annual report to the Benicia housing authority certifying tenants of qualifying rental units meet the income and rent limit requirements;

h. Every purchaser of an owner-occupied unit shall certify the unit will be the purchaser’s primary place of residence, and every renter shall certify the unit will be occupied by the household renting the unit;

i. Initial sales price and fair market value of units at time of initial sale shall be stipulated for all units constructed for moderate-income owner occupants; and

j. The applicant shall provide documented evidence to the city community development department that initial owner occupants of very-low-income, low-income and moderate-income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus meet the necessary income qualifications. Subsequent sale of affordable units shall be limited to very-low, low- or moderate-income households, as approved by the city community development department.

4. Transfer of Density Permit Requirements. A noticed public hearing shall be required for any proposal to transfer density rights between contiguous or noncontiguous properties if the resulting density exceeds 125 percent of the number of units normally permitted by the base district. The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may approve, such a transfer of density if the following findings can be made:

a. That the project as proposed will materially assist in accomplishing the goal of providing affordable housing opportunities in the city;

b. That the project would not lead to overconcentration of persons and families of moderate, low, or very low income; and

c. That granting the increased density will not adversely affect the general plan, cause significant adverse effects on the environment, adversely affect solar access to the neighboring property, or violate relevant regulations of this code. (Ord. 16-10 § 1).

17.70.280 Manufactured homes.
A. Purpose. Manufactured homes are part of the housing stock of the city of Benicia. It is the intent of the city to provide opportunities for the placement of manufactured homes as residential uses and in manufactured home parks, and to ensure that such manufactured homes are designed and located so as to be harmonious within the context of the surrounding houses and neighborhood. No provision contained herein shall be applied in contradiction to state law.

B. General Requirements. Manufactured homes may be used for residential purposes as follows:

1. If such manufactured homes are located in an approved manufactured home park in conformity with the conditions imposed upon development and use of the manufactured home park; or

2. If such manufactured homes are located in a district that permits single-family dwellings; or

3. If such manufactured homes have been approved by the community development director for a location in an OS district or an I district as caretaker housing.

All manufactured home parks shall have a minimum lot area of four acres and may be allowed only through approval of a PD district under the provisions of Chapter 17.44 BMC. Manufactured homes also may be used for temporary uses, subject to the requirements of a temporary use permit issued under Chapter 17.104 BMC.

4. Design Criteria. A manufactured home shall be compatible in design and appearance with structures in the vicinity and shall meet the following standards:

a. It must be built on a permanent foundation approved by the building official;

b. It must have been constructed in compliance with all city of Benicia permit requirements, subject to permitting by the California Department of Housing and Community Development;

c. The unit’s skirting must extend to the finished grade;

d. The exterior materials of a manufactured home shall be compatible with existing development in the immediate neighborhood by using building materials, window styles, roof slopes, colors, and exterior finishes that are the same or visually similar to those on the primary dwelling unit. Reflective metal finishes are prohibited;

e. The roof must be of concrete or asphalt tile, shakes or shingles, or nonreflective standing seam metal complying with the most recent editions of the California Building Code fire rating approved in the city of Benicia;

f. The roof must have a minimum 2:12 pitch and eaves or overhangs of not less than one foot;

g. Required covered parking shall be compatible with the manufactured home design and with other buildings in the area.

C. Cancellation of State Registration. Whenever a manufactured home is installed on a permanent foundation, any registration of said manufactured home with the state of California shall be canceled, pursuant to state laws and regulations. Before any occupancy certificate may be issued for use of such a manufactured home, the owner shall provide to the building official satisfactory evidence showing that the state registration of the manufactured home has been or will, with certainty, be canceled. If the home is new and has never been registered with the state, the owner shall provide the building official with a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the home. (Ord. 19-02 § 5; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 20, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 32, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.290 Game centers.
Use Permit Required. In addition, the following performance standards shall apply to the operation of game centers, including mechanical or electronic games or any other similar machine or device.

A. Purpose. The intent of these performance standards, in particular the use permit requirement, is to provide a procedure to control the location and operation of game centers, to require adequate adult supervision, and to govern hours of operations so as not to allow school children to patronize game centers during school hours.

B. Use Permit Required. A use permit, to be approved by the planning commission, is required to install, operate or maintain three or more mechanical or electronic games. The use permit is valid only for the number of games specified; the installation or use of additional games requires a new or amended use permit. The planning commission may impose reasonable restrictions on the physical design, location and operation of a game center in order to minimize the effects of noise, congregation, parking and other nuisance factors that may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of the surrounding community.

C. Adult Manager. At least one adult manager, of at least 19 years of age, shall be on the premises during the time a game center is open to the public.

D. Hours of Operation for Minors Between Six and 18 Years of Age. No game center owner, manager or employee shall allow a minor between six and 18 years of age to play a mechanical or electronic game machine during the hours the Benicia public schools are in session, or 9:00 p.m. on nights preceding school days, or 10:00 p.m. on any night. It is the responsibility of the owner or manager of the game center to obtain a current schedule of school days and hours. (Ord. 93-14 N.S. § 5, 1993; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.300 Animals.
A. Purpose. Supplemental regulations governing the care and keeping of animals are intended to provide for the compatibility between such animals and neighboring land uses. These are in addition to the general requirements governing animals established by BMC Title 6.

B. Domestic and Exotic Animals. In an R district, or in conjunction with any residential uses in any other district, domestic and exotic animals, as defined by this title, are subject to the following requirements in addition to the regulations of BMC Title 6.

1. Such animals, except cats, shall not be permitted to run at large, but shall be, at all times, confined within a suitable enclosure or otherwise be under the control of the owner of the property; and

2. Any enclosure shall be located in an interior side or rear yard and set back at least five feet from the property line; and

3. The number of allowed animals, as defined by this title, may not exceed the limits set forth in BMC Title 6 unless the property owner has obtained an animal keepers permit and a staff level use permit.

C. Other Animals.

1. In an R district, or in conjunction with any residential use in a C district, one horse, as defined in BMC Title 6, may be kept for each 20,000 square feet of open space, subject to securing a use permit. Paddock and corral areas shall be at least 20 feet from the property line, and stables shall be at least 40 feet from the property line.

2. In an OS district, livestock, farm animals, domestic animals and exotic animals may be kept on a lot 20,000 square feet or more in area, subject to the following requirements:

a. The number of domestic or exotic animals shall not exceed six;

b. Such animals shall not be permitted to run at large, but shall be, at all times, confined within a suitable enclosure; and

c. Any enclosure shall be set back at least 25 feet from the property line. (Ord. 08-02 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.310 Fences and walls.
All fences and walls shall be constructed in a sound and workmanlike fashion using new or good used material, and shall be maintained erect and in a state of good repair. Any dilapidated, dangerous, or unsightly fence or wall shall be repaired or removed. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.70.320 Inclusionary housing.
A. Findings. The city finds that Benicia is experiencing a housing shortage for very-low- and low-income households. A goal of the city is to ensure development of an adequate supply and mix of new housing to meet future housing needs. Policies within the current housing element (as amended May 2003) provide incentives to developers producing affordable housing, including: density bonuses, permit processing “fast tracking,” relaxation of minimum lot standards, waiver of covered parking requirements, and modification of development standards.

Very-low- and low-income households that include persons who work and/or live within the city are typically unable to locate housing at prices they can afford and are excluded from living in the city. The city finds that the high cost of newly constructed housing does not provide housing affordable by very-low- and low-income households, and that continued new development which does not include nor contribute toward lower cost housing will serve to further aggravate the current housing problems by reducing the supply of developable land.

It is the city’s preference that developers comply with this section by actually building the affordable dwelling units required for their project. The lack of land available for affordable housing projects and the additional costs associated with development of affordable housing projects by the city or nonprofit developers requires that any in-lieu fee paid be calculated at a rate to provide sufficient funds to actually build affordable housing.

The city further finds that the housing shortage for persons of very low and low incomes is detrimental to the public welfare, and further that it is a public purpose of the city, and public policy of the state of California as mandated by the requirement for a housing element of the city’s general plan, to make available an adequate supply of housing for persons of all economic segments of the community.

B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enhance the public welfare and assure that further housing development contributes to the attainment of the housing goals of the city by increasing the production of units available to, and affordable by, households of very low and low income, as herein defined. In order to ensure that a balance of housing for all economic segments of the community remains available and is increased as far as possible to meet the need documented in the housing element, the city declares that a percentage of inclusionary units shall be developed in every residential development, or land dedicated for residential development, or an in-lieu fee shall be collected, or some combination of the foregoing shall be required, to support the development of lower-income housing.

C. Definitions.

“Accessory unit” shall mean an accessory dwelling unit as defined in BMC 17.70.060.

“Affordable” shall mean that the relevant dwelling units are available on terms such that the housing cost or affordable rent is 30 percent or less of the income of low- or very-low-income households based on the figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

“Affordable rental restriction agreement” means legal restrictions by which the rents for inclusionary rental units will be controlled to ensure that the rents remain affordable to very-low- or low-income households for a period of not less than 30 years.

“Affordable rents” means housing that is affordable, based upon monthly rent of 30 percent or less of the income of low- or very-low-income households based on the figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

“Area median income” means the most recent area median income adjusted by household size based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

“At one location” means all adjacent land owned or controlled by the developer, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road or other public or private right-of-way, or separated only by other land of the developer.

“Capital improvements” means the fair market value of any improvement, appliance, fixture, or equipment when considered as an addition or fixture to the property (i.e., the amount by which said improvement, appliance, fixture, or equipment enhances the market value of the property) at the time of sale, minus the value of any improvement, appliance, fixture or equipment which the city determines resulted from deferred maintenance costs or building code violations.

“City” means the city of Benicia.

“CPI” or “Consumer Price Index” means the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics annual average CPI-U (Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers) for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Area, for the Housing Series, Home Owners Cost Component.

“Density bonus” means an increase in the number of units per acre otherwise allowed for any particular parcel.

“Developer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity or combination of entities which seeks city permits and approvals. “Developer” also includes developers’ successors in interest to the real property.

“Discretionary permit” means any permit or license issued by the city of Benicia after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section for a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation wherein the city decides to either approve or disapprove a particular activity in accordance with applicable laws including but not limited to a development agreement, amended development agreement, tentative map, use permit, or design review, and excluding minor changes to previously granted approvals.

“Dwelling unit” means a structure or portion of a structure designed for occupancy by one household.

“For-sale unit development” means a development project where units are sold to a buyer who takes title to the unit via a mortgage instrument.

“HCD” means the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

“Housing authority” means the housing authority of the city of Benicia.

“Housing cost” means the monthly mortgage principal and interest, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance covering replacement value of property improvements, property maintenance and repairs, a reasonable allowance for utilities, owner association fees, and space rent if the dwelling is situated on rented land.

“HUD” means the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

“Inclusionary unit” means an ownership or rental dwelling unit as required by this section, which is affordable to very-low- or low-income households.

“Income eligibility” shall mean the countable annual household income and resources of very-low- and low-income households, as defined by HCD at C.C.R. Sections 6914 and 6916, or such other eligibility factors as may be imposed by a state or federal funding source applicable to the dwelling unit.

“In-lieu housing fee” means a fee paid to the city’s affordable housing trust fund to provide affordable housing opportunities to very-low- and low-income households.

“Low-income households,” for the purposes of this section, are defined as those households earning up to 80 percent of the most recent area median income adjusted by household size based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

“Market rate unit” means an ownership or rental dwelling unit which is not restricted to those prices or rents affordable to very-low- or low-income households.

“Percent” or “Percentages.” In applying percent or percentages referred to in this section, any decimal fraction less than 0.50 may be disregarded and any decimal fraction greater than or equal to 0.50 shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

“Resale control agreement” means legal restrictions by which the inclusionary units will be controlled to ensure that the unit remains affordable to very-low- or low-income households for a period of not less than 30 years.

“Residential development” means any development with dwelling units or lots at one location intended and designed for permanent occupancy including, but not limited to, single-family dwellings, apartments, multiple dwelling units, group of dwellings, condominium developments, townhouse developments, cooperatives, or land subdivisions; conversions from nonresidential use to residential use; or conversions from rental units to ownership units. “Residential development” includes any development with dwelling units or lots for which discretionary approvals or building permits have been applied for or granted within any 12-month period that begins after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, which development shall be considered to be a single project for CEQA purposes. “Residential development” does not include remodeling, rehabilitation or maintenance.

“Section 8” means the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Section 8 voucher or home ownership programs pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 1437f, as they may be amended, or any successor program.

“Very-low-income households,” for the purposes of this section, are defined as those households earning up to 50 percent of the most recent area median income adjusted by household size based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

D. General Requirements for New Residential Development.

1. Any residential development of for-sale units where there are 10 or more units shall include 10 percent of the total number of market rate dwelling units within the development as units affordable to, and occupied by, very-low- and low-income households, for a minimum of 30 years from the recordation of each resale control agreement or affordable rental restriction agreement, as the case may be, for the units. One-half of the total number of inclusionary units within the development shall be designated as units affordable to, and occupied by, very-low-income households and one-half of the total number of inclusionary units within the development shall be designated as units affordable to, and occupied by, either very-low- or low-income households. When the number of inclusionary units to be provided is an odd number (e.g., 10 percent of 10 units is one), the odd-numbered unit shall be provided at a level affordable to a household with an income of not more than 60 percent of area median income. The city council may approve an alternative of equivalent value to satisfy all or part of the inclusionary requirement, including payment of in-lieu housing fees, dedication of developable land, or an alternative in-lieu contribution package.

2. For residential development of for-sale units of 10 or more units, building permits shall only be issued subsequent to the execution of a written agreement between the city and the developer or its designee which will assure compliance with the provisions of this section. Such agreement shall specify the timing of the construction of the inclusionary units and/or the provisions of the in-lieu alternative (payment of an in-lieu fee, dedication of developable land, or an alternative in-lieu contribution package acceptable to the city council), the number of inclusionary units at appropriate price or rent levels, the term of affordability, provision for the city’s income certification and screening of potential purchasers and/or renters of inclusionary units, a resale control agreement and/or affordable rental restriction agreement, if applicable, and such reasonable information as shall be required by the city for the purpose of determining the developer’s compliance with this section.

All inclusionary units in a for-sale unit development and/or phases of a development shall be constructed concurrently with or prior to the construction of market rate units, unless the city council determines an alternative phasing schedule to facilitate affordable housing development and the developer enters into a written agreement setting forth terms for satisfaction of the inclusionary housing requirements. Each phase of a development shall include the same or greater proportion of inclusionary units as are required for the total development.

3. Except as otherwise permitted in this section, all inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed within the development and shall be comparable to the design of market rate units in terms of numbers of bedrooms, appearance, materials, and finished quality. The number of bedrooms for the inclusionary units shall be considered comparable if the following minimum requirements are achieved:

a. Five percent of the inclusionary units, with the exception of accessory units referred to in subsection (J) of this section, must be four-bedroom units;

b. Twenty-five percent of the inclusionary units, including accessory units, must be three-bedroom units;

c. Forty percent of the inclusionary units, including accessory units, must be two-bedroom units;

d. Twenty percent of the remaining inclusionary units must be at least one-bedroom units;

e. The remaining inclusionary units may be any bedroom size categories.

The following table demonstrates the inclusionary requirements for projects with 10 or less inclusionary units:

Allocation of Bedroom Mix for Projects with 1 – 10 Inclusionary Units

Total # of Inclusionary Units

# of One-Bedroom Units Required

# of Two-Bedroom Units Required

# of Three-Bedroom Units Required

# of Four-Bedroom Units Required

Optional # of Bedrooms In Addnl. Unit*

1

 

1

 

 

 

2

 

1

1

 

 

3

1

1

1

 

 

4

1

2

1

 

 

5

1

2

1

 

1

6

1

2

2

 

1

7

1

3

2

 

1

8

2

3

2

 

1

9

2

4

2

 

1

10

2

4

3

1

 

* The applicant has the option to determine the number of bedrooms in the additional unit.

The community development director shall have the discretion to adjust the above minimum percentages due to site or design constraints, public funding source restrictions pertinent to very-low- or low-income units for developments containing market rate units with less than four bedrooms, or to comply with all applicable city ordinances; provided, that a mix of units in terms of numbers of bedrooms is achieved which will serve the affordable housing needs of the city as reflected in the city’s housing element, the State Consolidated Plan, and the Benicia housing authority annual and five-year plans.

4. The developer shall have the option, with the approval of the city council, (a) to transfer credit for inclusionary units constructed at one location within the city to another location within the city to satisfy the requirements of this section, (b) to apply credits for extra inclusionary units constructed by the developer within the city that exceed the number of units that the developer is required under this section to construct (“extra unit credits”) to another development in the city constructed by the developer or by an affiliate of the developer, and (c) to transfer extra unit credits to third party developer(s) to be applied to the transferee’s development. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the inclusionary requirements must be satisfied with construction of units of an equivalent number and level of affordability and shall be comparable to the design of market rate units in terms of number of bedrooms, appearance, materials, and finished quality. Except as otherwise provided in this section, these inclusionary units must be constructed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any market-rate unit in the project.

5. The developer shall have the option, with the approval of the city council, in a homeownership development, of constructing rental units in a number sufficient to meet the inclusionary requirements of the project pursuant to this section. Except as herein provided, these inclusionary rental units shall be subject to subsection (E) of this section.

6. The city shall make available the annual maximum rents and the maximum allowable purchase prices, as defined in subsections (E) and (F) of this section. The established prices and rents for inclusionary units shall generally be based on and shall not exceed the following assumptions regarding household size in relation to the number of bedrooms per unit: 1.0 occupant per studio unit; 2.0 occupants per one-bedroom unit; 3.0 occupants per two-bedroom unit; 4.0 occupants per three-bedroom unit; and 5.0 occupants per four-bedroom unit; provided however, that the city shall have the discretion to establish annual maximum rents and allowable purchase prices based on actual or anticipated occupancy of the inclusionary units in order to facilitate maximum affordability levels.

7. To protect the privacy of the families and to the extent permitted by law, the city and its designee(s) shall keep confidential the personal identifying information of the families occupying an inclusionary unit.

E. Inclusionary Unit Requirements for Rental Developments.

1. The inclusionary rental units shall only be offered to and occupied by low- and very-low-income households. Rent for the low-income units shall be determined as follows: The average of the rent of all low-income units in the residential development shall be the price affordable to households with an income of not more than 75 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. In order to achieve this average, no unit may be rented at or above a price affordable to a household with an income at 80 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. In addition, if multiple units affordable to low-income households are required to be produced, at least one unit shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 70 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

Rent for the very-low-income units shall be determined as follows: The average of the rent of all very-low-income units in the residential development shall be the rent affordable to households with an income no more than 45 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. In order to achieve this average, no unit may be rented at or above a price affordable to a household with an income at 50 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. In addition, if multiple units affordable to very-low-income households are required to be produced, at least one unit shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 40 percent of the most recent area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

For residential developments where only one inclusionary unit is required to be built, the unit shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 60 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. For residential developments where two inclusionary units are required to be built, one unit shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 75 percent of the area median income and the other shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 45 percent of the area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County. For residential developments where an odd number of inclusionary units are required to be built, the odd unit shall be rented at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 60 percent of area median income based on figures produced by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for Solano County.

2. The city or its designee(s) shall screen applicants for the inclusionary rental units and certify their income eligibility. The developer or its designee(s) shall retain final discretion in the selection of the very-low- or low-income households; provided, however, that the same rental terms and conditions (except rent levels and income) are applied to tenants of inclusionary units as are applied to all other tenants, except as required to comply with government subsidy programs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, in the screening and selection process for the inclusionary rental units, the city, developer, and/or their designee(s) shall comply with all applicable state and federal fair housing laws. Discrimination based on any subsidies received by the prospective tenant is expressly prohibited.

3. Commencing with issuance of each certificate of occupancy and continuing until expiration of the affordable rental restriction agreement, the developer or its designee(s) shall provide an annual report to the city. The annual report shall provide the following information: (1) the address, including apartment number and zip code; (2) the date of completion of the unit and size of the unit (number of bedrooms); (3) the initial and current rent level of the household; (4) the current income level of the household and the number of persons in the household; (5) the term of the affordability restrictions pursuant to this section or the requirements of any funding source, whichever is more restrictive; (6) the date the affordability restrictions were recorded and the name of the recorded documents; (7) the name and address of the owner and manager (if any); and (8) the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The city or its designee(s) shall monitor that rent level requirements of this section have been met.

4. For residential development of for-rental units where there is no financial assistance from the city or a type of assistance specified in the city’s density bonus law, the provisions cited in subsections (D)(1) through (7) and (E)(1) through (3) shall not apply.

For residential development of for-rental units where the developer receives financial assistance from the city, or a density bonus or other regulatory relief, and/or the developer voluntarily agrees by contract to restrict rents as affordable according to the provisions found herein, subsections (D) and (E) shall apply.

F. Inclusionary Unit Requirements for Ownership Developments.

1. The inclusionary ownership units shall only be offered to, sold to, and sold at prices affordable to households who meet the income eligibility requirements at the time of sale. Prices for the low-income units shall be determined as follows: The average of the price of all low-income units in the residential development shall be the price affordable to households with an income of not more than 75 percent of the area median income. In order to achieve this average, no unit may be priced at or above a price affordable to a household with an income at 80 percent of the area median income. In addition, if multiple units affordable to low-income households are required to be produced, at least one unit shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 70 percent of the area median income.

Prices for the very-low-income units shall be determined as follows: The average of the price of all very-low-income units in the residential development shall be the price affordable to households with an income no more than 45 percent of the area median income. In order to achieve this average, no unit may be priced at or above a price affordable to a household with an income at 50 percent of the area median income. In addition, if multiple units affordable to very-low-income households are required to be produced, at least one unit shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 40 percent of the most recent area median income.

For residential developments where only one inclusionary unit is required to be built, the unit shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 60 percent of the area median income. For residential developments where two inclusionary units are required to be built, one unit shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 75 percent of the area median income and the other shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 45 percent of the area median income. For residential developments where an odd number of inclusionary units are required to be built, the odd unit shall be priced at a price affordable to households with an income of not more than 60 percent of area median income.

To increase the pool of eligible households, a developer may sell the affordable dwelling units (1) to households who have incomes below the specified percentage of area median income and/or (2) at prices below that required by this subsection.

2. The developer or its designee(s) shall notify the city of the availability of the ownership inclusionary units when the units are available for sale. The city or its designee(s) shall advertise the availability of the inclusionary units to the general public. The city or its designee(s) shall review the assets and income of prospective purchasers who have entered into a written contract to purchase one of the ownership inclusionary units. The city or its designee(s) shall certify the income eligibility of prospective purchasers through an application process. The developer or its designee(s) shall retain final approval in the selection of the qualified purchasers. Discrimination based on any subsidies received by the prospective purchaser is expressly prohibited.

3. Prior to close of escrow for each unit, the developer or its designee(s) shall provide a report to the city which includes the following information: (1) the address of the unit and zip code; (2) the size of the unit (number of bedrooms); (3) the sales price; whether the unit is considered very low or low income; and the specified percentage of area median income designated for that dwelling unit; (4) the income level of the purchaser and the number of persons in the household; and (5) the term of the affordability restrictions pursuant to this section or the requirements of any funding source, whichever is more restrictive. Within 10 business days after close of escrow, the developer or its designee(s) shall provide a report to the city which includes the following information: (1) the date the affordability restrictions were recorded with the Solano County recorder’s office and the name of the recorded documents; (2) the name of the owner(s) of the inclusionary unit; and (3) the date of actual or expected occupancy by the household. The above two reports shall be provided for each unit until all units have been sold. The city or its designee(s) shall at least annually monitor purchase prices, number of units at the required affordability levels, owner-occupancy, and the expiration of the terms of affordability.

G. Eligibility Requirement.

1. In establishing eligibility for the rental inclusionary units and ownership inclusionary units, the city or its designee(s) shall consider the assets and income of the household pursuant to HCD standards as set forth in the definition of “income eligibility” in this section.

2. Every purchaser of an inclusionary unit shall certify that the unit is being purchased for the purchaser’s primary place of residence. Every renter of a rental inclusionary unit shall certify that the unit shall be or is being occupied by those renting the unit.

H. Control of Resale.

1. For Sale Units.

a. A resale control agreement setting forth the applicable terms of this section shall be recorded with the Solano County recorder’s office for each for-sale inclusionary unit. In order to maintain the availability of the for-sale dwelling units to be constructed pursuant to the requirements of this section, the city shall impose the following resale conditions for a period of 30 years from recordation of each resale control agreement, which 30-year period shall start over with each resale. The price received by the seller of an inclusionary unit shall be limited to his or her initial purchase price, plus a percentage increase based on any increase in the Consumer Price Index from the date of the property purchase to the date the property is sold, plus an amount to cover capital improvements. The seller shall not levy or charge any additional fees nor shall any “finder’s fee” or other monetary consideration be allowed other than customary real estate commissions and closing costs.

b. The seller of an inclusionary unit shall sell said unit to a household in the same or lower income category as the unit was originally designated. The seller of the unit shall immediately notify the city and the Benicia housing authority upon the listing of the seller’s property for sale. Within 10 days of notification that the property has been listed, the city and the Benicia housing authority shall provide the seller or seller’s agent a list of any qualified and eligible potential purchasers known to the city or the Benicia housing authority.

The city shall have 90 days from the date the property is listed by the seller either to purchase the property and reserve the unit for a household within the same or lower income category as the unit was originally designated; or to find an eligible buyer. The income of the new household shall be certified by the city or its designee(s).

If the city decides not to exercise its purchase option, and the seller is unable to find any eligible buyers after both listing the property and marketing and advertising the sale of the property to buyers in the appropriate income category for a minimum of 90 days, the seller may rent the property to a household within the same or lower income category as the unit was originally designated. The seller shall provide the annual reports required by subsection (E)(3) of this section for as long as the dwelling unit remains rented.

c. The owner of any inclusionary unit shall attach and legally reference in the grant deed conveying title of any such inclusionary unit a declaration of restrictions stating the restrictions imposed pursuant to this section. The city shall provide a form declaration of restrictions, but failure to provide the form does not abrogate the owner’s obligation to record the declaration.

The declaration of restrictions shall include all applicable resale controls, occupancy restrictions, and prohibitions as required by this section.

d. The resale control agreement shall provide that if the unit is no longer owner-occupied the unit shall be occupied by and provided at an affordable rent to a household in the same income category for which the unit was designated. If the unit is rented, the homeowner’s annual report shall include information required by the annual report for rental units, as appropriate.

2. Rental Units. An affordable rental restriction agreement setting forth the applicable terms of this section shall be recorded with the Solano County recorder’s office for each inclusionary rental unit. The affordable rental restriction agreement shall provide that the rental units be made available at specified affordable rents to, and be occupied by, very-low- or low-income persons as required by this section for a period of at least 30 years, and such terms shall be binding on any subsequent purchasers.

The owner of any inclusionary rental unit shall attach and legally reference in the grant deed conveying title of any such inclusionary unit a declaration of restrictions stating the restrictions imposed pursuant to this section. The city shall provide a form declaration of restrictions, but failure to provide the form does not abrogate the owner’s obligation to record the declaration.

The declaration of restrictions shall include all applicable occupancy restrictions, prohibitions, and terms of the affordable rental restriction agreement as required by this section.

I. Land Dedication Option.

1. Dedication. The city council may allow a developer to make an irrevocable offer of dedication to the city of sufficient land to satisfy the affordability requirement under this section. Such land shall be economically feasible and physically suitable for development of the required inclusionary units prior to dedication of the land including, but not limited to: the site shall be of sufficient size, general plan designation, and zoning to accommodate the required inclusionary units; the site shall be fully improved with infrastructure, frontage improvements (curb, gutter, and walk), paved street access, utility (water, sewer, gas, and electric) service connections stubbed at property line(s), and such other improvements as may be necessary for development of the required inclusionary units or required by the city; the site shall be graded to a two-percent back-to-front slope or improved with retaining walls or other improvements to provide an equivalent developable area; and all fees necessary for development of the required inclusionary units shall be paid. The amount of land dedicated shall be sufficient to provide the same number, type, and bedroom distribution of inclusionary units at the same affordability levels that would otherwise be required by this section. Thus, in order to provide a mechanism for financing the construction of the inclusionary units, a developer will be required to provide more land than otherwise required for the physical siting of the inclusionary units or to provide funds to construct the units.

The city shall have the discretion to adjust the number of inclusionary units produced based on such factors as site or design constraints or to comply with all applicable city ordinances. The developer must identify the land to be dedicated no later than the application for tentative map approval, or if not applying for a tentative map, prior to design review approval. The city may approve, conditionally approve or reject such offer of dedication of any specific property. If the city rejects such offer of dedication, the developer or its designee(s) shall be required to meet the affordable housing obligation by other means set forth in this section.

Within one year from the date of conveyance to the city, the city council shall determine, at its discretion, whether the property dedicated to the city pursuant to this subsection shall be (a) developed by the city to produce the required number of inclusionary units; (b) conveyed to the developer or third parties who shall enter into an agreement with the city to produce such inclusionary units; or (c) sold and the sale proceeds deposited in the affordable housing trust fund for use pursuant to subsection (K)(6) of this section. The production of units by the city, developer, or third party shall be completed within two years from the date of the city council’s determination.

2. Developer Option for Dedicated Land. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (I)(1) of this section, if a developer has complied with this section by dedicating land, the developer may obtain an option from the city council to develop the affordable housing units referred to in subsection (I)(1) on the dedicated land by paying an option fee in an amount to be determined by the city council. The term of the option shall be one year from the date such option fee is paid to city. At any time during the option term, the developer may submit plans to develop the affordable housing units on the dedicated land that meet the requirements of this section; provided, that such plans comply with all applicable city ordinances; and provided further, that the developer commits to construct such affordable housing units within two years following the option term, the city council shall reconvey the dedicated land to the developer to allow the construction of such units.

J. Accessory Unit Option.

1. Accessory Units Which May Count Towards Meeting the Developer’s Inclusionary Obligation. For single-family detached ownership developments, accessory dwelling units may be used, at the city’s sole discretion, in meeting the inclusionary units obligation; provided, that the accessory units meet the requirements of subsections (D), (E), and (H) of this section. The deed restriction for such an accessory unit shall prohibit the owner from renting out the accessory unit at a rental rate higher than: for a very-low-income unit, the rent shall be affordable to a household at or below 50 percent of the area median income; for a low-income unit, the rent shall be affordable to a household at or below 80 percent of the area median income. The owner of a deed-restricted accessory unit shall not be required to rent such unit, but if the unit is rented, the allowable rent shall be determined in accordance with this subsection, and rental of the unit shall be subject to the restrictions of subsections (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this section.

2. Accessory Units Which Will Not Count in Determining the Developer’s Inclusionary Obligation. Accessory dwelling units with deed restrictions recorded with the Solano County recorder’s office which prohibit the owner and subsequent purchasers, for a period of not less than 30 years from the date the deed restriction is recorded, from renting out the accessory unit at a rental rate higher than the rent affordable to a household at 80 percent of the area median income, but which do not otherwise comply with subsections (D), (E), and (H) of this section, shall not be counted as inclusionary units; however, such units will not be counted as market rate units in determining the developer’s inclusionary obligation.

K. In-Lieu Fee Option.

1. General. The city council may allow a developer to meet the requirements of this section by paying an in-lieu housing fee. At the time of application for a discretionary or building permit, whichever comes first, a developer desiring to pay the in-lieu fee shall submit a request to pay the in-lieu fee along with a report identifying all overriding conditions impacting the project that prevent the developer from meeting the requirement to construct the inclusionary units; sufficient independent data, including appropriate financial information, that supports the developer’s claim that it is not feasible to construct the required inclusionary units; and a detailed analysis of why the various concessions and incentives identified in subsections (L), (M), (N), (O), (P), and (Q) of this section cannot mitigate the developer’s identified conditions that are preventing him/her from constructing the inclusionary units. The community development director shall review all such requests and prepare a recommendation for the city council. Such requests shall be considered on a case-by-case basis by the council and may be approved, at the council’s sole discretion, if the council determines that there are overriding conditions impacting the project that prevent the developer of a residential development from meeting the requirement to construct inclusionary units and that payment of the in-lieu fee will further affordable housing opportunities.

Dedication of land may, at the discretion of the city council, reduce the level of the in-lieu housing fee payable to the city. The in-lieu fee, or combination of land dedication and in-lieu fee, shall be sufficient to enable the city or its designee(s) to satisfy, within a reasonable time, the inclusionary requirements of the developer’s project by providing sufficient funds, or a combination of sufficient land and funds, for construction of the required units.

2. Time of Payment. If fees are to be paid in lieu of providing affordable housing or dedicating land, the fees shall be paid simultaneously upon issuance of building permits for the market-rate units in the residential development. If building permits are issued for only part of a residential development, the fee amount shall be based only on the number of permitted units. For land subdivisions involving lot sales, fees shall be paid prior to approval of a final subdivision map.

3. Applicable Fee. The amount of the fee shall be based upon the fee schedule in effect at the time of payment of the fee as determined by the city.

4. Amount of In-Lieu Housing Fee. The amount of the in-lieu housing fees shall be determined by a resolution of the city council. The amount of the in-lieu housing fees shall be sufficient to provide the same number, type, and bedroom distribution of inclusionary units at the same affordability levels that would otherwise be required by this section. The in-lieu housing fee also shall include an administrative fee sufficient to cover the costs of administering the in-lieu housing fee.

5. In-Lieu Housing Fee Account. The principal and interest of all in-lieu housing fees collected shall be deposited into a separate interest-bearing account (which should not include an administrative fee) administered by the finance director, or designee(s), to be designated the affordable housing trust fund.

6. Use and Expenditure of Fees. The in-lieu housing fees collected, and all earnings from investment of the fees, shall be expended exclusively for the provision of affordable housing through acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, homeowner and renter assistance, equity sharing programs, or other methods to provide housing affordable to the same or lower income category for which the fees were assessed, as well as administrative costs to implement the inclusionary housing program. Expenditure of in-lieu housing fees for administrative costs shall not exceed 20 percent of the in-lieu housing fees collected.

7. In-Lieu Housing Fees Implementing Guidelines. The city, or its designee(s), shall develop guidelines for the administration of the in-lieu housing fees.

8. Annual Review of In-Lieu Housing Fees. Every fiscal year, the finance director, or designee(s), shall prepare a report for the city council on the collection and disbursement of in-lieu housing fees. The city council shall make findings with respect to any portion of the in-lieu housing fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in the affordable housing trust fund five or more years after deposit of the fees to identify the purpose to which the fees are to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fees and the purpose for which they were charged.

9. Refunds of In-Lieu Administrative Fees. The city shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of the development project or projects on a prorated basis the unexpended portion of the administrative fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection (K)(4) of this section. If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended or uncommitted revenues pursuant to this section exceed the amount to be refunded, the city council, after a public hearing, notice of which has been published pursuant to Section 6061 of the California Government Code and posted in three prominent places within the area of the development project, may determine that the fees shall be allocated for some other purpose for which fees are collected subject to AB 1600 and which serves the project on which the fee was originally imposed.

L. Availability of Government Subsidies. It is the intent of this section that the requirements for inclusionary units affordable by very-low- or low-income households shall not be contingent on the availability of government subsidies. This is not to preclude the use of such programs or subsidies. To the extent a government subsidy or affordable housing program has requirements that conflict with this section, the community development director may modify or waive such conflicting requirement(s) of this section in order to facilitate the development of inclusionary units. This section is also not intended to be an undue burden on the developers of residential projects. Therefore, as detailed in succeeding subsections of this section, incentives are given to provide inclusionary units.

M. Density Bonus. To avoid an undue economic burden or cost to the developer providing inclusionary units or alternatives required by the provisions of this section, the city shall favorably consider the applicability of a density bonus for a proposed residential project or land subdivision, as provided by state and local law; provided, that a density bonus does not conflict with the goals of the city’s general plan or result in significant environmental impacts. Granting of a density bonus shall be considered on a project-by-project basis.

N. Fee Waiver or Reduction for Inclusionary Units. The city may waive or reduce city fees applicable to the inclusionary units of a proposed residential development or subdivision.

O. Modification of Development Standards. For residential development projects or land subdivisions which meet the inclusionary requirements of the section, the city may provide additional incentives consistent with its general plan, housing element, and municipal code, including, but not limited to, waiver or modification of covered parking requirements and certain zoning ordinance development standards and expedited design review.

P. Technical Assistance. In order to increase the feasibility and lower the cost of units affordable to very-low- or low-income households, the Benicia planning department and the Benicia housing authority shall provide assistance on financial subsidy programs to project developers.

Q. Reduction of Amenities and Square Footage. Upon a showing by the developer that it is necessary to achieve the required affordability of the inclusionary units:

1. With community development director approval, the developer may reduce the interior amenity level of the inclusionary units below that of the market rate units provided such dwelling units conform to the requirements of applicable building and housing codes; and

2. With city approval, the developer may reduce the square footage of the inclusionary units below that of the market rate units provided all dwelling units conform to the requirement of applicable building and housing codes.

R. Enforcement.

1. The provisions of this section shall apply to all agents, successors and assignees of a developer once only for development of the site. No discretionary permit or building permit shall be issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section for any project which does not meet the intent of the requirements of this section.

2. In addition to, or in lieu of, the provisions of subsection (R)(1) of this section, the city council shall institute appropriate legal actions or proceedings including, but not limited to, equitable relief for the enforcement of this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the rights of the third party beneficiaries of this section to enforce its provisions.

3. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. Such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this section is commenced, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided herein.

S. Appeals. Decisions under this section shall be final on the tenth business day following the decision unless appealed or reviewed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

T. Performance. Failure of any city official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this section shall not excuse any developer from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 11-03 §§ 1 – 3; Ord. 10-03 §§ 1, 2, 3; Ord. 07-60 § 2; Ord. 00-9).

17.70.330 Electric transmission line easements.
All residential uses, schools, and public buildings shall be set back at least 150 feet from the edge of 230 kilovolt electric transmission line easements. (Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001).

17.70.340 Stream setbacks.
All development shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the top of the bank of streams (both seasonal and perennial) and ravines. No development shall be permitted within the setback. (Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001).

17.70.350 Formula businesses.
In the combined Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan and Solano/Davies Square areas (bounded by Military, N and West and East Second Streets), no more than one establishment of any particular formula business shall be allowed. Approval of a use permit for a formula business requires that the planning commission find that the proposed establishment will:

A. Complement existing uses and enhance the economic health of the surrounding area;

B. Be operated in a nonobtrusive manner that preserves the city’s or area’s distinctive character, ambiance, and small-sized city and historic nature;

C. Not result in a concentration of formula businesses in the vicinity or citywide;

D. Promote diversity and variety to assure a balanced mix of commercial uses available to serve both resident and visitor populations;

E. Contribute to an appropriate balance of local, regional or national-based businesses and small, medium and large-sized businesses in the community; and

F. Avoid an appearance commonly associated with strip retail or shopping centers. (Ord. 12-06 § 1; Ord. 07-12 § 4).

17.70.360 Retail sales larger than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Approval of a use permit for a retail sales establishment larger than 20,000 square feet requires that the planning commission find that the proposed establishment will:

A. Complement existing uses and enhance the economic health of the surrounding area;

B. Be operated in a nonobtrusive manner that preserves the city’s or area’s distinctive character and ambiance;

C. Not result in a concentration of formula and/or retail sales establishments larger than 20,000 square feet in the vicinity or citywide;

D. Promote diversity and variety to assure a balanced mix of commercial uses available to serve both resident and visitor populations;

E. Contribute to an appropriate balance of local, regional or national-based businesses and small-sized, medium-sized and large-sized businesses in the community; and

F. Avoid an appearance commonly associated with strip retail or shopping centers. (Ord. 07-15 § 2).

17.70.370 Cottage food operations.
A. Permit Required. A cottage food operation in a dwelling unit shall require a cottage food operations permit obtained by filing a completed application form with the community development director. The community development director shall issue the permit upon determining that the proposed cottage food operation complies with the requirements of this section. Cottage food operation shall not include the preparation of food products containing cannabis.

B. Contents of Application. An application for a cottage food operations permit shall contain:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

2. A complete description of the proposed cottage food operation, including the type of food to be prepared, number and occupation of persons employed, amount of floor space occupied, provisions for storage of materials, and number and type of vehicles used;

3. A copy of the submitted application and/or issued permit from the Solano County environmental health division for operation of the subject cottage food operation.

C. Required Conditions. Cottage food operations shall comply with the following regulations:

1. The applicant for the cottage food operation permit shall be the individual who conducts the cottage food operation from his or her dwelling unit and is the owner of the cottage food operation. The permit shall not be transferable to another operator, nor transferable to another site.

2. No more than one cottage food employee, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b)(1), shall be permitted, not including an immediate family member or household member of the cottage food operator.

3. The cottage food operation shall be registered or permitted by the Solano County environmental health division in accordance with Section 114365 of the California Health and Safety Code. Cottage food operations shall comply with all California Health and Safety Code requirements.

4. The use shall be conducted within the kitchen of the subject dwelling unit except for attached rooms within the dwelling that are used exclusively for storage or bookkeeping. No more than 25 percent of the dwelling or 500 square feet of floor area, whichever is less, may be used for the cottage food operation, and it shall not be conducted within an accessory building, excepting that the community development director may grant approval of storage or minor processing operations within a garage or accessory building if the applicant demonstrates that the kitchen within the residence is not suitable for the type of food to be produced; the activity complies with Health and Safety Code requirements; and no more than 150 square feet of the garage or accessory building is utilized for the operation. No outdoor storage is permitted.

5. One nameplate sign measuring no more than two square feet may be placed on the premises attached to the main building near the business entrance, indicating the property address, name of the business, hours of operation, contact information, and goods provided. The existence of a cottage food operation shall not otherwise be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site.

6. Except for vehicle parking, no outdoor portions of the premises shall be utilized for cottage food operation including outdoor sales and visitation. No more than one truck, with a maximum capacity of one ton, incidental to the cottage food operation shall be kept on the site. Customer and delivery parking shall not occur by double-parking or blocking of neighboring driveways.

7. The number of parking spaces available to a dwelling unit housing a cottage food operation shall not be reduced to less than the required number of spaces for the dwelling unit. All required parking spaces shall remain available for the purpose of parking vehicles.

8. A cottage food operation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount in the district. Specifically, direct sales of products from the site of the cottage food operation shall be conducted by prior appointment only, and shall be limited to no more than two on-site customers at any given time.

9. Direct sales, cottage food operation related sales and loading activities shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

10. The use shall conform to the noise standards prescribed in Chapter 8.20 BMC.

11. There shall be no on-site consumption of products other than free, small samples.

12. A cottage food operation shall not create persistent odors beyond the property line that are offensive to the reasonable person.

D. No more than one cottage food operation per dwelling unit is allowed.

E. The permit for a cottage food operation that is not operated in compliance with these regulations shall be revoked by the community development director after 30 days’ written notice unless the cottage food operation is altered to comply. (Ord. 18-05 § 34; Ord. 13-06 § 5).

17.70.380 Mobile food vendors.
A. Permit Required. A mobile food vendor shall require a mobile food vending permit obtained by filing a completed application form with the community development director. The community development director shall issue the permit upon determining that the proposed mobile food vending operation complies with the requirements of this section. Mobile food vendors shall not include the preparation or sale of food products containing cannabis.

1. The vendor shall display all current permits, licenses, and certificates on exterior of the vehicle at all times.

2. The vendor shall maintain a county health permit at all times. If the permit expires, or is suspended or revoked, then all sales shall cease until the permit is reinstated.

3. The food vending vehicle shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water, and telecommunications and shall be a self-propelled vehicle.

B. Contents of Application. An application for a mobile food vending permit shall contain:

1. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.

2. A complete description of the proposed mobile food vending operation, including the hours of operation.

3. A site plan showing the proposed location of the mobile food vendor, trash receptacles, parking area, location of parcel access (ingress and egress), and location of restroom facility.

4. Written permission from the property owner (if not self) to occupy the property.

5. Proof of legal access to restroom facilities and access to hand washing facilities for the use of employees within 200 feet of site location per California Retail Food Code, Chapter 10, Section 114315.

6. A copy of the issued permit from the Solano County environmental health division for operation of the subject operation.

7. A certificate of insurance providing general liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000 listing the city as additional insured. A mobile food vending permit shall be issued only for the explicit time period covered by the effective dates of the general liability insurance policy.

C. Location.

1. The location of the mobile food vendor shall be limited to the areas specified in BMC 17.32.020.

2. The maximum number of mobile food vendors located on a parcel shall not be limited except that all provisions of this section shall be met.

3. Mobile food vehicles shall not be parked within 200 feet of an existing brick and mortar restaurant during the hours when such restaurant is open to the public for business.

4. Mobile food vendors shall not occupy parking spaces required to fulfill the minimum off-street parking requirements of the principal property use. A minimum of two parking spaces per food vending vehicle will be required for customer use in addition to the minimum requirement for the principal business for the overall site.

5. The vehicle shall not block any parking required to adequately serve other businesses, driveways, or public right-of-way and shall be oriented in such a way so as the queue does not encroach upon the same.

6. The vendor shall be located within 200 feet of a restroom facility and shall demonstrate legal access for employees.

D. Site Conditions.

1. The site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times.

2. The lot upon which the vendor is parked shall be paved. For purposes of this section, “paved” shall mean asphalt, concrete, pavers, or other permanent surfacing approved by the city engineer.

3. Exterior storage of refuse, equipment or materials associated with the mobile food vendor is prohibited.

4. The vendor shall not discharge items, including but not limited to waste water or other fluids, debris or food, onto the property, sidewalk, gutter, or storm inlets.

5. The vendor shall provide a minimum of two 32-gallon litter receptacles and one 32-gallon recycling receptacle within 15 feet of the vending vehicle and shall remove all refuse from the site and surrounding property on a daily basis.

6. No mobile food vendor shall provide or allow any dining area, including but not limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools, benches, and standup counters, unless approved by the community development director.

E. Alcohol. The serving or consumption of alcohol shall be prohibited at vehicular food vending sites.

F. Hours of Operation. The hours of operation shall not exceed 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. every day. The mobile food vending vehicle shall not be stored on site during nonoperation hours and shall be removed daily.

G. Noise. No mobile food vehicle shall make or cause to be made any unreasonable or excessive noise. The operation of all mobile food vehicles shall meet the city noise ordinance, including generators. No music, other high-decibel sounds, horns, or amplified announcements are allowed to be made from the vehicle.

H. Signs. Signage is only allowed when placed on mobile food vehicle. No separate freestanding signs are permitted. No flashing or blinking lights are allowed on vehicle or related signage when the vehicle is parked.

I. The permit for mobile food vending that is not operated in compliance with these regulations and the approved application shall be revoked by the community development director after 30 days’ written notice unless the mobile food vending operation is altered to comply. (Ord. 18-05 § 35; Ord. 14-06 § 5).

17.70.390 Emergency shelter.
A. Purpose. This section is intended to implement California Government Code Section 65583 by establishing standards to permit emergency shelter facilities for homeless persons or families.

B. Zoning. An emergency shelter is a permitted use in the following areas and districts, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section:

1. Within one-quarter mile of East Military Street and West Military Street, between West K Street and East 7th Street, excluding the RS single-family residential district, the OS open space district, and lands within the Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan zoning districts;

2. Within one-quarter mile of Adams Street, excluding all districts except CO office commercial and CG general commercial districts; and

C. Use Permit. Once the city’s local need for emergency shelter is provided through capacity in existing local facilities and/or multi-jurisdictional agreements in accordance with Government Code Section 65583, any additional beds or emergency shelters will be permitted only on approval of a use permit. The local need for emergency shelters shall be determined based upon the most recently adopted Housing Element or in accordance with Government Code Section 65583.

D. Design Review. Emergency shelters permitted in accordance with subsection (B) of this section are exempt from the design review requirements as provided in Chapter 17.108 BMC, if such facilities are not located or proposed within an historic overlay district. However, once the city’s local need for emergency shelter is provided through capacity in existing local facilities and/or multi-jurisdictional agreements in accordance with Government Code Section 65583, the design review exemption provided in BMC 17.108.020(B) is no longer applicable.

E. Administrative Review. Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, emergency shelters shall be reviewed by the community development director or designee as follows:

1. An emergency shelter shall be approved upon finding that the proposed project conforms to the requirements of this title, including design review as required by Chapter 17.108 BMC, as well as the standards of subsection (F) of this section.

2. Approval or denial of an emergency shelter shall be noticed to the applicant in a “letter of action.” If the application is denied, the letter shall state wherein the project did not meet the standards of this section.

3. Approval of an emergency shelter shall expire two years from the date of approval unless made valid by construction or occupancy of the facility. The director may grant a maximum one-year extension of the two-year approval period.

F.  Standards.

1. Proximity to Other Emergency Shelters. Emergency shelters shall be located at least 300 feet apart as measured from closest property lines.

2. Site Improvements. Site landscaping, exterior lighting and parking facilities shall comply with the provisions of Chapters 17.70 and 17.74 BMC.

3. Outdoor Facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities shall be enclosed by a fence or a natural barrier (e.g., hedge). If smoking is allowed on site, there shall be a designated outside smoking area and the facility shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 9.06 BMC. Outdoor telephone facilities are not permitted.

4. Length of Stay. The length of stay per individual shall not exceed six months.

5. Shelter Capacity. The maximum permitted capacity of an emergency shelter shall be equivalent to the homeless census identified in the most recent adopted Housing Element, less any emergency shelter capacity currently provided within the city. However, the community development director may increase the permitted capacity to serve homeless individuals based upon updated data that is compiled or verified by a qualified individual or community organization, if the data demonstrates an increase in the city’s homeless population. Any proposed shelter that exceeds the permitted capacity shall require a use permit in accordance with subsection (C) of this section.

6. On-Site Waiting and Intake Areas. Client waiting and intake areas shall be screened or enclosed, and clients shall not be allowed to form a queue outside the facility. Hours of client intake shall be posted.

7. Support Facilities. The following facilities shall be provided for the exclusive use of residents and staff:

a. Shower and restroom facilities.

b. Food preparation and/or dining.

c. Laundry.

d. Secure storage for personal belongings.

The facility may also provide recreation, computer, counseling, child day care or other support facilities as appropriate based upon the demonstrated need of the client population.

8. Management Plan. The applicant shall provide a management plan that includes the following components:

a. Homeless outreach plan.

b. Client intake and check-out procedures.

c. Description of supportive services that will be provided.

d. Identification of management personnel and designation of a 24-hour contact person. Facility management and security must be provided on site during hours of operation. Contact information for manager and/or a designated contact person authorized to act on behalf of the manager shall be posted both inside and outside the facility for emergency purposes.

e. Description of neighborhood outreach and communication strategies.

f. Staff training program.

g. Clear operational standards and rules (e.g., standards governing expulsions, designated meal times, and lights-out) necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, including those applicable to use or possession of controlled substances, the use or possession of alcohol, and loitering.

h. Site upkeep and maintenance, including provisions to ensure that the site is maintained free of litter and debris.

i. A statement that the provider will not require participation by clients in any religious or philosophical ritual, service meeting or rite as a condition of eligibility. (Ord. 14-11 § 9).

17.70.400 Outdoor entertainment.
The following standards shall apply to all outdoor entertainment uses:

A. Outdoor entertainment shall only be allowed as an accessory use to a primary business on private property.

B. Noise levels shall be in compliance with the noise regulations identified in Chapter 8.20 BMC (Noise Regulations).

C. A contact for the establishment must be provided to the city. The contact information must be immediately produced upon the request of any city official or affected party.

D. All speakers/amplifiers shall be directed away from surrounding sensitive land uses on adjoining and nearby properties.

E. The approved permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place in the entertainment establishment. The permit and related conditions must be immediately produced upon the request of any city official or affected party.

F. Substantial changes to the existing establishment and/or operation (e.g., expansion of outdoor performance or seating area, relocation of entertainment structures/equipment) must be reviewed by the community development director to determine if additional conditions or a new use permit are necessary. (Ord. 18-16 § 4).

17.70.410 Donation and collection bins.
A. Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of BMC Title 17 (Zoning), the purposes of these regulations include the following:

1. Protect the property rights of the owners of parcels on which the donation and collection bins are located.

2. Provide for the location, placement, design, and maintenance of donation and collection bins in a manner compatible with the community appearance.

3. Ensure that donation and collection bins do not create blight and become a public nuisance due to illegal dumping, unauthorized placement, overconcentration, aesthetic impacts and/or result in vehicle site distance and circulation impediments.

4. Ensure that residents and/or users are fully informed of those who operate the bins so that they can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns.

B. Permit Required.

1. It shall be unlawful to place, operate, maintain or allow a collection and donation bin on any real property prior to obtaining a zoning permit from the community development director.

2. The permit applicant shall be the donation and collection bin operator and the permit may not be transferred, conveyed or otherwise assigned to another person or entity.

3. The permit applicant must comply with the application process and submit an application and all documentation required by the community development department.

4. No permit shall be required for donation and collection bins located completely within a building.

C. Process for Permit Approval.

1. All applications for a donation and collection bin zoning permit shall meet the following:

a. The applicant has submitted a complete and accurate application accompanied by the required documents and applicable permit fee.

b. There are no open citations, unpaid fines or unresolved violations or complaints related to any collection and donation bin managed by the proposed operator.

c. All existing unpermitted bins that are managed by the proposed operator have been removed.

d. Any verified blight on the subject property has been abated and any case of a complaint to the city regarding blighted conditions on the subject property has been closed.

D. Standards. The following standards shall apply to the placement of the donation and collection bins:

1. Location.

a. Only one donation and collection bin may be permitted on a single parcel or shopping center, and not within 1,000 feet from any other collection and donation bin.

b. A donation and collection bin shall not be located in a public right-of-way or within 20 feet of a public street.

c. A donation and collection bin shall not occupy any required off-street parking or loading space nor reduce driveways and aisles below the dimensions specified in Chapter 17.74 BMC.

d. A donation and collection bin shall not occupy or obstruct any pedestrian path of travel, including sidewalks and walkways, or required handicapped accessibility routes.

e. A donation and collection bin shall not block or impede access to required easements, trash enclosure areas or access to trash bins/trash enclosures.

f. A donation and collection bin shall not impede the functioning of exhaust, ventilation, or fire-extinguishing systems.

g. A donation and collection bin shall not be located on required landscaping.

2. Appearance and Design. Collection and donation bins shall have the following physical attributes:

a. Be constructed of a uniform durable and waterproof material with a single nonreflective finish.

b. Have a collection opening that has a tamper-resistant locking mechanism.

c. Not be electrically or hydraulically powered or otherwise mechanized.

d. Shall not exceed the maximum size of 25 square feet.

e. Shall not exceed the maximum height of six and three-quarters feet.

f. Shall have the following information displayed on the front of the donation and collection bin in one-inch typeface visible on the front of the bin:

i. The name, address, 24-hour telephone number, website, and email address of the operator of the donation and collection bin.

ii. The type of material that may and may not be deposited in the bin.

iii. A notice stating that no material shall be left outside the bin.

iv. If the collection and donation bin is owned by a nonprofit organization:

(A) A statement describing the charitable cause that will benefit from the donations;

(B) The federal tax identification number of the nonprofit organization operating the UDCB; and

(C) The statement “This collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization.”

v. If the collection and donation bin is owned by a for-profit entity:

(A) “This donation is not tax-deductible”; and

(B) “This collection box is owned and operated by a for-profit organization.”

g. Notwithstanding subsections (D)(2)(a) through (2)(f) of this section, sign lettering shall not exceed five inches in height.

h. Notwithstanding subsections (D)(2)(a) through (2)(f) of this section, sign area shall not exceed two square feet in size per side.

3. Maintenance.

a. No blight shall be within 20 feet of the bin. Blight includes, but is not limited to, donation/collection overflow, litter, debris, and dumped material.

b. Bins shall be maintained and in good working order. Items to be repaired, removed, and/or abated include, but are not limited to, graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling paint, rust, and broken collection-operating mechanisms.

c. Bins shall be serviced not less than weekly.

d. The operator shall maintain an active email address and a 24-hour telephone service with recording capability for the public to register complaints.

e. Bins cannot be used for the collection of solid waste and/or any hazardous materials.

f. Graffiti shall be removed in a timely manner within a period of three business days unless otherwise extended by the city’s code enforcement officer.

g. No uplighting or illumination of any kind shall be permitted.

E. Violations and Compliance Process. Violations of this chapter shall be handled by the city’s code enforcement officer pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 BMC.

F. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize a right of action against the city, nor shall this section give rise to any cause of action for damages against the city.

G. Exemptions.

1. Donation and collection bins that are located within an entirely enclosed and lawfully constructed and permitted principal building shall not require a zoning permit.

2. Temporary donation and collection bins that are placed by the consent of the property owner and meet all of the following requirements shall not require a zoning permit:

a. Less than 10 square feet in size;

b. Less than four feet in height;

c. Placement on the property for a cumulative period of fewer than 60 days per calendar year;

d. Located within five feet of a primary customer or visitor entrance;

e. Clear information on the exterior of the bin regarding the purpose and duration of the temporary collection.

3. These regulations are not intended to apply to community lending receptacles that are customary to residential areas, such as book-lending boxes. (Ord. 19-04 § 6).

Chapter 17.74
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
Sections:

17.74.010    Specific purposes.

17.74.020    Basic requirements for off-street parking and loading.

17.74.030    Off-street parking and loading spaces required.

17.74.040    Collective provision of parking.

17.74.050    Increased parking in senior citizens’ housing developments.

17.74.060    Reduced parking for other uses.

17.74.070    Parking spaces for the handicapped.

17.74.080    Bicycle parking.

17.74.090    Parking space dimensions.

17.74.100    Application of dimensional requirements.

17.74.110    Aisle dimensions.

17.74.120    Specific parking area design.

17.74.130    Parking access from street.

17.74.140    Driveway widths and clearances.

17.74.150    Driveways and intersections – Visibility.

17.74.160    Parking area screening – Walls and fences.

17.74.170    Lighting.

17.74.180    Parking lot landscaping.

17.74.190    Vehicle parking – Design and location in R districts.

17.74.200    Additional design standards for parking lots and structures.

17.74.210    Location and design of off-street loading spaces.

17.74.010 Specific purposes.
In addition to the general purposes listed in Chapter 17.04 BMC, the specific purposes of the off-street parking and loading regulations are to:

A. Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are provided for new land uses and for major alterations and enlargements of existing uses in proportion to the need for such facilities created by each use.

B. Establish parking standards for commercial uses consistent with need and with the feasibility of providing parking on specific commercial sites.

C. Ensure that off-street parking and loading facilities are designed in a manner that will ensure efficiency, protect the public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from adverse impacts. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.020 Basic requirements for off-street parking and loading.
A. When Required. At the time of initial occupancy of a site, construction of a structure, or major alteration or enlargement of a site or structure, off-street parking facilities and off-street loading facilities shall be provided in accord with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, except that for the purposes of these requirements, “major alteration or enlargement” shall mean a change of use or an addition that would increase the number of parking spaces or loading berths by not less than 10 percent of the total number required prior to the alteration or enlargement.

B. Nonconforming Parking or Loading. No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of the lack of off-street parking or loading facilities required by this chapter; provided, that facilities being used for off-street parking and loading as of the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced in number to less than that required by the provisions of this chapter.

C. Spaces Required for Alteration or Enlargement. The number of parking spaces or loading berths required for an alteration or enlargement of an existing use or structure, or for a change of occupancy, shall be in addition to the number of spaces or berths existing prior to the alteration, enlargement, or change of occupancy unless the preexisting number is greater than the number prescribed in this chapter. In this case, the number of spaces or berths in excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in determining the required number of spaces or berths.

D. Spaces Required for Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site, the number of off-street parking spaces and loading berths to be provided shall be equal to the sum of the requirements prescribed for each use. If the gross floor area of individual uses on the same site is less than that for which a loading berth would be required by Schedule B of BMC 17.74.030, but the aggregate gross floor area of all uses is greater than the minimum for which loading berths would be required, the aggregate gross floor area shall be used in determining the required number of loading berths.

E. Joint Use. Off-street parking and loading facilities required by this chapter for any use shall not be considered as providing parking spaces or loading berths for any other use except where the provisions of BMC 17.74.040, Collective provision of parking, apply or a joint facility exists. Such a facility shall contain not less than the total number of spaces or berths as determined individually, subject to the provisions of subsection (G) of this section, or fewer spaces may be permitted where adjoining uses on the same site have different hours of operation and the same parking spaces or loading berths can serve both without conflict. A determination of the extent, if any, to which joint use will achieve the purposes of this chapter shall be made by the community development director, who may require submission of survey data necessary to reach a decision.

F. Location and Ownership. Parking in an R district required to serve a residential use shall be on the same site as the use served. Parking required to serve a nonresidential use may be on the same or a different site under the same or different ownership as the use served; provided, that parking shall be within the following distances of the use served, measured from the near corner of the parking facility to the entrance of the use served via the shortest pedestrian route:

Customer/Visitor Spaces

Employee Spaces

200 feet

400 feet

Facilities for off-site parking shall be restricted to that use by a recorded deed, lease, or agreement for a minimum period of 10 years from the date a zoning permit requiring the parking is issued; provided, that the community development director may lift the restriction upon finding that substitute parking facilities meeting the requirements of this chapter are provided. No use may be continued if the parking is removed unless substitute parking facilities are provided.

G. R Districts. No off-site parking for a nonresidential use shall be permitted in an R district unless the nonresidential use served is permitted or conditionally permitted in the R district where the off-site facility is to be located.

H. Reserved Parking Spaces for Multifamily Residential Uses. No more than one parking space shall be reserved for the exclusive use of an individual unit unless additional parking is provided above the amount required by BMC 17.74.030. Such additional parking may be assigned for the exclusive use of an individual unit.

I. Common Loading Facilities. The off-street loading facilities requirements of this chapter may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the prescribed number of berths for each use in a common truck loading facility; provided, that the total number of berths shall not be less than the sum of the individual requirements. As a requirement of approval, an attested copy of a contract between the parties concerned setting forth an agreement to joint use of the common truck loading facility shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit.

J. Computation of Spaces Required. If, in the application of the requirements of this chapter, a fractional number is obtained, one parking space or loading berth shall be required for a fraction of one-half or more, and no space or berth shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half.

K. Uses Smaller than 2,000 Square Feet. Deviations from regular parking standards may be approved by the community development director for uses smaller than 2,000 square feet. Circumstances which would warrant such consideration and possible approval include:

1. A shared parking arrangement which meets the findings in BMC 17.74.040.

2. Submission of data substantiating that a particular use meets the findings in BMC 17.74.060.

3. Ample on-street parking.

4. A reduction in the standard parking requirement would result in an on-site benefit such as preservation of heritage trees, substantial landscape screening, a unique structure, or other similar site attributes. (Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.030 Off-street parking and loading spaces required.
Independently accessible off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accord with the following Table 1 and Schedules A and B. For off-street loading, references in Schedule A are to Schedule B, which sets space requirements and standards for different groups of use classifications and sizes of buildings. References to spaces per square foot are to be computed on the basis of gross floor area unless otherwise specified, and shall include allocations of shared restroom, halls and lobby area, but shall exclude area for vertical circulation, stairs or elevators. Where the use is undetermined, the community development director shall determine the probable use and the number of parking and loading spaces required. In order to make this determination, the community development director may require the submission of survey data from an applicant or collected at an applicant’s expense.

Table 1: Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required

Use Classifications

Downtown Mixed Use Districts

Other Districts

Residential

See Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan

See Schedule A

Nonresidential

See Downtown Mixed Use Master Plan

See Schedule A

– First Floor

– Above First Floor

– Loading Spaces

Use Classification

Off-Street Parking Spaces:

Schedule A

Off-Street Parking Spaces:

Schedule B

Group Number

Residential

Group Residential

1 per 2 beds; plus 1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes

1

Work/Live Quarters

1 per unit

 

Multifamily Residential

 

 

Studio units

1.2 spaces per unit

 

One or two bedroom units

1.5 spaces per unit

 

Three or more bedrooms

2.0 spaces per unit

 

At least one space per unit shall be covered.

 

 

Residential Care, Limited

1 per 3 beds

 

Single-Family Residential

2 including 1 covered/unit

 

Senior Citizens’ Housing

0.50 spaces per unit. (Also see BMC 17.74.050)

 

Supportive Housing

Single-family residential projects are subject to single-family residential use parking requirements

Multifamily residential projects are subject to multifamily residential use parking requirements

 

Transitional Housing

Single-family residential projects are subject to single-family residential use parking requirements

Multifamily residential projects are subject to multifamily residential use parking requirements

 

Public and Semipublic

Adult Day Health Care

1 per 7 adults; maximum enrollment based on maximum occupancy load

 

Cemetery

As specified by use permit

 

Clubs and Lodges

1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes

3

Conference and Meeting Facilities

1 per 100 sq. ft. used for assembly purposes or as specified by use permit

2

Convalescent Facilities

1 per 3 patient beds

3

Cultural Facilities

1 per 300 sq. ft.

3

Day Care Center

1 per 7 children; maximum enrollment based on maximum occupancy load

 

Detention Facilities

As specified by use permit

3

Emergency Shelters

1 per 5 beds

 

Family Day Care, Large

1 per 7 children; maximum enrollment based on maximum occupancy load

 

Government Offices

1 per 300 sq. ft.

2

Heliports

As specified by use permit

 

Hospitals

1 per 1.5 beds

3

Maintenance and Service Facilities

1 per 500 sq. ft.

1

Park and Recreation Facilities

As specified by design review and use permit for private facilities

 

Public Safety Facilities

As specified by use permit

3

Religious Assembly:

 

 

In an R District

1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

3

In a C District

1 per 8 fixed seats, or 1 per 100 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

3

Residential Care, General

1 per 3 beds; plus additional specified by use permit

3

Schools, Public or Private

As specified by use permit

1

Utilities, Major

As specified by use permit

1

Commercial

Adult Businesses

1 per 250 sq. ft.

1

Ambulance Services

1 per 500 sq. ft.; plus 2 storage spaces

1

Animal Sales and Services:

 

 

Animal Boarding

1 per 400 sq. ft.

 

Animal Grooming

1 per 400 sq. ft.

 

Animal Hospitals

1 per 400 sq. ft.

 

Animals, Retail Sales

1 per 250 sq. ft.

 

Artists’ Studios

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

 

Banks and Savings and Loans:

1 per 250 sq. ft.

2

Drive-Up Service

Queue space for 5 cars per teller

 

Building Materials and Services

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area

1

Catering Services

1 per 400 sq. ft.

1

Commercial Recreation and Entertainment:

Bowling Alleys

3 per alley; plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of public assembly and retail areas

1

Card Rooms

1 per 25 sq. ft. of card-playing floor area

 

Electronic Game Centers

1 per 400 sq. ft.

 

Skating Rinks

1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. seating area if there are no fixed seats; plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area not used for seating

1

Tennis and Racquetball Clubs

4 per court

 

Theaters

1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

1

Other Commercial Recreation and Entertainment

As specified by use permit

 

Communications

1 per 500 sq. ft.

2

Eating and Drinking Establishments

1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

 

Cocktail Lounge

1 per 3 fixed seats or 1 per 50 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats

 

Mobile Food Vending

2 per vending vehicle, in addition to primary use requirements

3

With Live Entertainment

1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area if there are no fixed seats; plus 1 per 35 sq. ft. of dance floor

1

With Take-Out Service

3 per 100 sq. ft. of gross area; plus queue space for 5 cars for drive-up service

1

Food and Beverage Sales

1 per 200 sq. ft.

1

Funeral and Interment Services

1 per 35 sq. ft. of seating area

1

Horticulture, Limited

1 per 2 acres

 

Laboratories

1 per 500 sq. ft.

1

Maintenance and Repair Services

1 per 500 sq. ft.

1

Marinas

0.8 per berth

1

Marine Sales and Services

1 per 350 sq. ft.

 

Nurseries

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area for first 10,000 sq. ft., 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. thereafter; plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area

 

Offices, Business and Professional

1 per 300 sq. ft.

 

Offices, Medical and Dental

1 per 250 sq. ft.

 

Pawn Shops

1 per 250 sq. ft.

1

Personal Improvement Services:

1 per 250 sq. ft.

 

Dance or Music Studio

1 per 600 sq. ft.

 

Personal Services

1 per 250 sq. ft.

 

Research and Development Services

1 per 400 sq. ft.

 

Retail Sales Not Listed Under Another Use Classification

1 per 200 sq. ft. for less than 5,000 sq. ft.; 1 per 250 sq. ft. over 5,000 sq. ft.

 

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services:

 

 

Automobile Rentals

1 per 400 sq. ft.; plus 2 storage spaces

1

Automobile Washing

1 per 200 sq. ft. of sales, office, or lounge area; plus queue for cars per washing station

 

Service Stations

1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per service bay

 

Service Station with Convenience Store

1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per service bay

 

Vehicle/Equipment Repair

1 per 600 sq. ft. of service bay and storage area

1

Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Rentals

1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of lot area

1

Vehicle Storage

1 per 500 sq. ft.

 

Visitor Accommodations:

 

 

Bed and Breakfast Inns

1 per guest room; plus 2 spaces

 

Hotels and Motels

1 per guest room; plus 1 per 50 sq. ft. of banquet seating area

1

Warehousing and Storage, Limited

1 per 2,000 sq. ft.

 

Warehousing and Storage, Mini storage

2 per office; plus 2 per caretaker’s residence; plus 1 per 10,000 sq. ft. of storage

 

Industrial

Industry, Custom

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

3

Industry, General

1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

1

Industry, Limited

1 per 750 sq. ft.

3

Industry, Research and Development

1 per 500 sq. ft.

3

Industry, Technology

1 per 750 sq. ft.

3

Port Terminals

1 per 2,500 sq. ft. of lot area

 

Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage

1 per 1,500 sq. ft.

1

 

Gross Floor Area

(sq. ft.)

10' x 20' x 10'

Vertical Clearance

12' x 30' x 14'

Vertical Clearance

Use Classification Group 1

 

 

0 to 3,000

 

 

3,001 to 15,000

 

1

15,001 to 50,000

 

2

50,001 and over

 

3

Use Classification Group 2

 

 

0 to 10,000

1

 

10,001 to 20,000

 

1

20,001 and over

1

1

Use Classification Group 3

 

 

0 to 30,000

 

1

30,001 to 100,000

 

2

100,001 and over

 

3

(Ord. 15-02 § 11; Ord. 14-11 § 10; Ord. 14-06 § 6; Ord. 13-15 § 9; Ord. 11-04 § 9; Ord. 07-21 § 10; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 92-18 N.S. § 10, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 21, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 33, 34, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.040 Collective provision of parking.
A. Application. A use permit may be approved for the collective provision of parking serving more than one use of a site. The collective parking may be provided by the private acquisition and development of property or by a public agency in the manner specified by the use permit. A use permit application may include a request to waive all or some of the provisions of BMC 17.74.020(D), (E), (F) and (G). The planning commission may approve such use permit if it finds:

1. That the collective provision of parking and conditions of approval are in accord with the objectives of this title and the purposes of this chapter; and

2. That the collective provision of parking and conditions of approval are consistent with the general plan and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood of such use, nor detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the city; and

3. That the collective parking will comply with all conditions attached to the permit.

B. Reduced Parking. A use permit for collective off-street parking may reduce the total number of spaces required by this chapter. Any applicant shall submit data substantiating a request for reduced parking requirements. A use permit may reduce the number of collective parking spaces required if the following additional findings are made:

1. That parking demand will be less than the requirement in Table 1 or Schedule A in BMC 17.74.030; and

2. That the probable long-term occupancy of the building or structure, based on its design, will not generate additional parking demand.

C. Special Conditions. In lieu of or in combination with all or a part of the parking provided under subsection (A) of this section, approval of the use permit may include conditions requiring the payment of fees, the participation in a future or existing parking district, and/or other mechanisms deemed appropriate by the city to promote the collective provision of parking. The replacement of parking space requirements by such in-lieu fees shall not be considered a reduction in parking or a reduction in the number of spaces required by this chapter. (Ord. 87-26 N.S., 1987; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.050 Increased parking in senior citizens’ housing developments.
The number of spaces required may be increased above the number specified in Schedule A of BMC 17.74.030; provided, that findings are made for each of the following:

A. The extent of parking problems, if any, in the neighborhood;

B. The probability that the prospective residents will have more than two vehicles per dwelling unit;

C. The age and socioeconomic characteristics of prospective tenants;

D. The ability to alleviate and correct unexpected parking problems resulting from the proposed development in the future; and

E. The proximity of public transportation or the availability of a separate transportation system for the residents of the development.

Approval of reduced parking shall require that a covenant be recorded stipulating that all parking requirements of this title will be met in the event of a change in the use of the property. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.060 Reduced parking for other uses.
A use permit may be approved reducing the number of spaces to less than the number specified in the schedules in BMC 17.74.030; provided, that the following findings are made:

A. The parking demand will be less than the requirement in Schedule A or B of BMC 17.74.030; and

B. The probable long-term occupancy of the building or structure, based on its design, will not generate additional parking demand.

In reaching a decision, the planning commission shall consider survey data submitted by an applicant or collected at the applicant’s request and expense. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.070 Parking spaces for the handicapped.
All parking facilities shall comply with the requirements of the California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 2-71) and with the sign requirements of the California Vehicle Code, Section 22507.8. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.080 Bicycle parking.
A. Where Required. Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided as required by this section; the provisions of BMC 17.74.020 shall apply.

B. Number Required.

1. Public and semipublic use classifications: as specified by use permit.

2. Commercial recreation and entertainment: as specified by use permit.

3. All other commercial use classifications: five percent of the requirement for automobile parking spaces, except for the following classifications, which are exempt:

a. Ambulance services;

b. Animal boarding;

c. Animal grooming;

d. Catering services;

e. Commercial filming;

f. Horticulture, limited;

g. Funeral and interment services;

h. Swap meets, recurring;

i. Vehicle/equipment sales and services (all classifications).

C. Design Requirements. For each bicycle parking space required, a stationary object shall be provided to which a user can secure both wheels and the frame of a bicycle with a user-provided six-foot cable and lock. The stationary object may be either a freestanding bicycle rack or a wall-mounted bracket. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.090 Parking space dimensions.
Required parking spaces shall have the following minimum dimensions:

Use

Type of Space

Large Car (ft.)

Small Car (ft.)

Residential

In separate garage or carport housing 6 or fewer cars, or with door at rear of each space

9 x 19

n/a

Residential

In garage or carport housing more than 6 cars with access via aisle, for multifamily residential, or for accessory dwelling unit

9 x 18

7.5 x 15

Nonresidential

All spaces

9 x 18

7.5 x 15

All

Parallel spaces

8 x 22

n/a

(Ord. 19-02 § 6; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.100 Application of dimensional requirements.
A. By Use Type.

1. Residential. For multifamily residential uses, all reserved resident spaces shall be large-car spaces. Up to 30 percent of nonreserved resident spaces may be small-car spaces. The community development director may approve an exception to criteria authorizing up to half of the required resident spaces to be small-car spaces if such spaces are not assigned.

2. Nonresidential. Up to 30 percent of all spaces may be small-car spaces. Customers or visitors shall be deemed to occupy the following proportions of spaces serving nonresidential uses:

a. Visitor accommodations: 90 percent;

b. Manufacturing, distribution, and wholesaling: 10 percent;

c. Offices other than public, medical, banks and savings and loans; other financial services: 15 percent;

d. All other nonresidential: 80 percent.

The community development director may authorize an exception to criteria to adjust parking space size requirements for a specific use based on evidence presented by the applicant.

B. Relation to Aisles.

1. Each parking space adjoining a wall, column, or other obstruction higher than 0.5 feet shall be increased by one foot on each obstructed side; provided, that the increase may be reduced by 0.25 feet for each one foot of unobstructed distance from the edge of a required aisle, measured parallel to the depth of the parking space.

2. An aisle providing access to a parking space perpendicular to the aisle shall extend two feet beyond the required width of the parking space.

DIAGRAM 17.74.100(B)

PARKING SPACES ADJOINING AN OBSTRUCTION

(The diagram is illustrative)

C. Vertical Clearance. Vertical clearance for parking spaces shall be seven feet, except that an entrance may be 6.67 feet and the front five feet of a parking space servicing a residential use may be 4.5 feet.

D. Wheel Stops. All spaces shall have centerline wheel stops 2.5 feet from a fence or wall. When a parking space abuts a landscaped planter, the front two feet of the required length for a parking space may overhang the planter. When a parking space abuts a walkway, the front two feet of the required length of a parking space may overhang the walkway if the walkway is at least seven feet wide; otherwise the full length shall be provided, and a wheel stop shall be installed two feet from the walkway. (Ord. 19-02 § 7; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 35, 1989; Ord 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.110 Aisle dimensions.
Aisle widths adjoining large-car spaces shall be as follows:

Increase in Parking Space Width (ft.)

Minimum Aisle Width for Specified Parking Angle (ft.)

 

90°

75°

60°

45° or less

0.00

24

22

16

12

0.25

23

21

 

 

0.50

22

20

 

 

0.75

21

10

 

 

1.00 or more

20

 

 

 



PARKING REQUIREMENTS

(The diagram is illustrative)

Aisle widths adjoining small car spaces having a base width of 7.5 feet, except where increased by adjoining obstructions, shall be as follows:

Minimum Aisle Width for Specified Parking Angle (ft.)

90°

75°

60°

45° or less

20

17.4

14

11

(Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.120 Specific parking area design.
Where an applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development director that variations on the dimensions otherwise required by this chapter are warranted, to accommodate tandem spaces, for example, a specific parking area design may be approved under the following limitations:

A. The area affected by the specific design shall be for parking by persons employed on the site only. Visitor parking stalls shall meet the dimensions required, with variations permitted only for a valet parking program.

B. The surface area available for parking shall not be less than would be required to accommodate the minimum required number of stalls for large and small cars, with reductions permitted only for tandem parking and valet parking programs.

No use for which a tandem or valet parking program has been approved shall be continued if such a program is abandoned unless the parking area is reconfigured to provide the number of independently accessible spaces required by this chapter. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.130 Parking access from street.
Access to parking spaces, other than four or fewer spaces serving a residential use in an R district, shall not require backing across a street property line. An alley may be used as maneuvering space for access to off-street parking.

All spaces in a parking facility shall be accessible without reentering a public right-of-way unless it is physically impossible to provide for such access. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.140 Driveway widths and clearances.
Driveways shall have the following widths plus a minimum of one foot additional clearance on each side of a vertical obstruction exceeding 0.5 foot in height.

A. Serving a residential use

6 or fewer spaces

8 ft.

7 or 25 spaces

12 ft.

26 or more spaces

12 ft. 1-way

 

20 ft. 2-way

B. Serving a nonresidential use

14 or fewer spaces

12 ft.

15 or more spaces

12 ft. 1-way

 

20 ft. 2-way

In addition, all driveways shall comply with the fire department’s standards for access roads and fire lanes.

(Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.150 Driveways and intersections – Visibility.
Visibility of a driveway crossing a street property line shall not be blocked between a height of three and one-half feet and seven feet for a depth of five feet from the street property line as viewed from the edge of the right-of-way on either side of the driveway at a distance of 50 feet or at the nearest property line intersecting the street property line, whichever is less (see Diagram 17.74.150). For intersections, no structure, including but not limited to fences and gates, shall be maintained higher than three feet above grade within a triangular area bounded by the right-of-way lines and a diagonal line joining points on the right-of-way lines 25 feet back from the point of their intersections.



DIAGRAM 17.74.150

DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY

(The diagram is illustrative)

(Ord. 89-1 § 36, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.160 Parking area screening – Walls and fences.
A parking area for five or more cars serving a nonresidential use shall be screened from an adjoining R district, or a ground-floor residential use, by a solid concrete, solid wood, or masonry wall six feet in height, except that the height of a wall adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be three feet. A carport or open parking area for five or more cars serving a residential use shall be screened from an adjoining lot in an R district, or a ground-floor residential use, by a solid wall or fence six feet in height, except that the height of a wall or fence adjoining a required front yard in an R district shall be three feet. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.170 Lighting.
Outdoor parking and loading area lighting shall not employ a light pole higher than 18 feet in industrial districts, nor higher than 12 feet in other districts; except as provided for in BMC 17.70.180(D). Parking lot light poles in industrial areas within 100 feet of residentially zoned property shall be no higher than 12 feet, unless the light source will be blocked from adjacent residentially zoned properties. No light source shall create a cone of direct illumination greater than 60 degrees from a light source higher than six feet, and shall not directly shine onto an adjacent street or an adjacent lot. Minimum illumination at ground level shall be 0.5 footcandles, and shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles in an R district. No light source within a parking structure in an R district shall be visible from a public right-of-way adjoining an R district. (Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 18, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.180 Parking lot landscaping.
Parking lot landscaping shall be as prescribed by BMC 17.70.190. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.190 Vehicle parking – Design and location in R districts.
The following provisions shall apply to vehicle parking in an R District:

A. Vehicle Parking Surfaces. Parking surfaces for vehicles shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt or permeable paving materials (e.g., porous pavement, vehicle-rated driveway pavers, decomposed granite, and similar materials as approved by the city engineer).

B. Driveways. Driveways shall be paved and shall have widths and clearances prescribed by BMC 17.74.140, subject to the visibility requirements of BMC 17.74.150.

C. Carports. Carports shall be designed and located to minimize the visibility of parked vehicles from a public street. (Ord. 19-02 § 8).

17.74.200 Additional design standards for parking lots and structures.
Parking stalls shall be paved; parking lots shall have paving, drainage, concrete curbs, lighting, space marking, directional signs, litter collection containers, and queuing space for drive-in facilities or ticket-dispensing booths or machines. Maximum driveway grades shall be 16 percent. Wheel stops shall only be permitted where parking spaces directly abut a wall or fence, with no intervening walkway or planter, or along a property line where no perimeter landscaping strip is required. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 37, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.74.210 Location and design of off-street loading spaces.
Required spaces shall not be within a building, but shall be on the site of the use served or on an adjoining site. On a site adjoining an alley, a required loading space shall be accessible from the alley unless alternative access is approved by the community development director. A required loading space shall be accessible without backing a truck across a street property line unless the community development director determines that provision of turn-around space is infeasible and approves alternative access. An occupied loading space shall not prevent access to a required off-street parking space. A loading area shall not be located in a required yard.

Except in a CG or I district, a loading area visible from a street shall be screened on three sides by a fence, wall, or hedge at least six feet in height. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.78
SIGNS
Sections:

17.78.010  Applicable regulations.

17.78.010 Applicable regulations.
The size, height, design, quality of materials, construction, location, elimination and maintenance of signs within the city are regulated by BMC Title 18. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.82
TREES AND VIEWS
Sections:

17.82.010    Specific purposes.

17.82.020    Definitions.

17.82.030    Authority of planning commission.

17.82.040    Unreasonable obstruction of view or sunlight.

17.82.050    Complaint.

17.82.060    Settlement efforts.

17.82.070    Notice and hearing.

17.82.080    Findings required.

17.82.090    Decision.

17.82.100    Payment of cost of correction.

17.82.110    Obligation of the owner.

17.82.120    Effective date of committee decision – Right of appeal.

17.82.010 Specific purposes.
The general plan recognizes the contribution of scenic resources, including both trees and views, to the character and view of the city. Views are important to residents and visitors, contributing to the enjoyment and value of property and providing vistas of Southampton Bay, Suisun Bay, Carquinez Strait and the hillsides. Trees also produce benefits for residents and visitors, contributing to the natural environment by modifying temperatures and winds, replenishing oxygen, controlling soil erosion and providing wildlife habitat; and to the visual environment by providing scale, color, and visual buffers between land uses. However, trees and views, and the benefits derived from each, may come into conflict. The intent of these regulations is to provide guidelines and standards to resolve disputes between neighbors, balancing tree- and view-related values in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.020 Definitions.
A. “Hedge” means any plant material, trees, stump growth, or shrubbery planted or growing in a dense continuous line so as to form a thicket barrier or living fence.

B. “Tree” means a woody perennial plant which usually, but not necessarily, has a single trunk and a height of 15 feet or more, or has a diameter of 12 inches measured at 24 inches above the ground; references herein to “tree” shall include the plural, “any tree or trees.”

C. “View” means a vista of Southampton Bay, Suisun Bay, Carquinez Strait, neighboring communities, surrounding hills, or a nearby or distant wooded area. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.030 Authority of planning commission.
The planning commission shall be responsible for review of all view complaints filed with the city which cannot be satisfactorily resolved at the staff level. The commission is authorized to consult with city officials and with specialists, such as landscape architects or tree surgeons, as the occasion may require; provided, however, that any such consultation be done at no expense to the city. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 38, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.040 Unreasonable obstruction of view or sunlight.
A tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation shall not be maintained on public or private property in the city in such manner as to unreasonably obstruct the view from or the sunlight reaching other property. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.050 Complaint.
A property owner may file with the community development director a written complaint that the view from or sunlight reaching his property is unreasonably obstructed by a tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation, and that efforts to settle the problem amicably have failed. The complainant shall deposit the required fee with the community development director as a deposit, to be returned in any amount not used, against the expense incurred by the community development director under provisions of this section and the expense of advice obtained by the commission from a landscape architect or tree surgeon, and shall agree in writing to pay in full the reasonable amount of such expense. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 39, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.060 Settlement efforts.
Within 30 days after receipt of a complaint, the community development director shall take action he deems appropriate to try to resolve the problem by means of conciliation. If within 60 days after receipt of a complaint the community development director has not resolved the problem, he shall give notice in writing to the parties involved and set the matter for public hearing. The 60-day time limit may be extended at the request of the property owners involved. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 40, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.070 Notice and hearing.
The community development director shall give 10 days’ notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the tree or other obstructing vegetation. Notice shall also be given to other individuals involved, to owners of property adjacent to the property on which the tree is located, and to other persons who, in the community development director’s judgment, might be affected. The notice shall state the location of the tree or other vegetation, and the time and place of hearing, and shall invite written comments to be submitted at or before the hearing. Each party involved may appear on his own behalf or be represented by another person and may present evidence at the hearing. The hearing shall not proceed in the absence of proof that the owner of the tree or other vegetation received notice as provided herein. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 41, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.080 Findings required.
The commission may require correction of an unreasonable obstruction of view or sunlight if it finds:

A. That the view from or the sunlight reaching the property of the complainant is unreasonably obstructed;

B. That such obstruction adversely affects the value or enjoyment of the property of the complainant; and

C. That correction of the obstruction in the manner determined by the commission will not unreasonably detract from the value, privacy or enjoyment of the property on which the tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation is located, or adjacent properties.

In making the findings for subsections (A) and (B) of this section, it is the intent of this section that values of privacy and quiet shall receive equal consideration with values of view and sunlight. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 42, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.090 Decision.
After the hearing, the commission shall render its decision, and the community development director shall send a copy forthwith to each party involved. The decision shall be that correction either is or is not authorized, and shall specify the method of correction, whether by removal or by cutting back, pruning or other alteration of the tree, shrub, hedge or other vegetation. The authorized work of correction shall be done by a licensed tree surgeon if required by the owner of the tree or other vegetation at a time approved by the owner. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 42, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.100 Payment of cost of correction.
The complainant shall pay the entire cost of the authorized correction unless the commission makes an express finding that:

A. The tree or other vegetation constitutes a hazard to the safety of the complainant or his property, and is being maintained by the owner in disregard for the safety of others, in which case the owner may be required to pay up to 100 percent of the cost of correction; or

B. The owner is maintaining a hedge 15 feet or more in height, in which case the commission may allocate the cost of correction; provided, that the owner of the land on which the hedge exists shall not be required to pay more than 25 percent of the cost of such correction. Allocation of costs shall not apply to work done on public property. The city shall not be required to pay for improvement of the view from any private property. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 42, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.110 Obligation of the owner.
Thirty days after the date of the decision of the commission or, if appealed, the decision of the city council, authorizing the correction of an obstruction, it shall be unlawful for the owner of the property on which the trees or other vegetation is located not to allow correction of the obstruction. After the correction is made, the tree or other vegetation shall be maintained as corrected. (Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 43, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.82.120 Effective date of committee decision – Right of appeal.
The commission’s decision shall become final on the tenth business day following its action unless appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-61 § 1; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 44, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.84
CANNABIS
Sections:

17.84.010    Purpose and intent.

17.84.020    Definitions.

17.84.030    Residential cultivation of cannabis.

17.84.040    Cannabis businesses – Use permit and license required to operate.

17.84.050    Cannabis businesses – General provisions.

17.84.060    Use permit for commercial cannabis activities – Requirements.

17.84.070    Criteria to review, issuance and/or denial of use permit for commercial cannabis activities.

17.84.080    Appeal from planning commission determination.

17.84.090    Suspension and revocation by planning commission.

17.84.100    Cannabis businesses – Conditions of operation.

17.84.110    Business license tax liability.

17.84.120    Annual review of cannabis businesses.

17.84.130    No vested rights.

17.84.140    Public nuisance.

17.84.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, manufacturing, sale, delivery, testing and distribution of medical and adult-use cannabis in order to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Benicia. The regulations in this chapter are meant to ensure compliance with the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act, and the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (hereinafter the “state cannabis laws”) and are not intended to and do not interfere with a patient’s right to use medical cannabis as authorized by the state cannabis laws. Nor do these regulations criminalize the possession or cultivation of cannabis for medical or nonmedical purposes as permitted by the state cannabis laws. Cannabis businesses within the city must comply with all provisions of the Benicia Municipal Code for obtaining permits for a cannabis business and must comply with the state cannabis laws and all other applicable local and state laws. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a cannabis business under this chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other dispensary operator, management member, employee, or agent of a cannabis business.

“Cannabis” shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f) and as subsequently amended.

“Cannabis business” shall include:

1. Any business, facility, use, establishment, property, or location, whether fixed or mobile, where a commercial cannabis activity takes place.

2. Any building, facility, use, establishment, property, or location where any person or entity establishes, commences, engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits another person or entity to establish, commence, engage in, conduct, or carry on, any activity that requires a state license under Business and Professions Code Section 26000 and following, including but not limited to cannabis cultivation, cannabis distribution, cannabis manufacturing, cannabis testing and cannabis retail sales, and the operation of a cannabis microbusiness.

“Cannabis product” shall have the same meaning as in Health and Safety Code Section 11018.1.

“Canopy” means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant, encompassing all vertical planes (i.e., stacking of plants), whether contiguous or noncontiguous on any one site. The canopy shall be measured by taking the longest length and widest width of existing plants (including all gaps, walkways, and open areas between plants) and multiplying the longest length by the longest width to get the area of the cannabis canopy. Each level of a stacked cultivation will be calculated as a separate canopy.

“Childcare center” means a licensed day care facility that provides nonmedical care to children under 18 years of age on a less than 24-hour basis, and includes infant centers, nursery schools, preschools, extended day care facilities, large family day care homes, and school age child care centers.

“Commercial cannabis activity” shall include the cultivation, possession, manufacturing, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.

“Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

“Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer or patient. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.

“Distribution” means the procurement, storage, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensees.

“Drug paraphernalia” shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, and as subsequently amended.

“Edible cannabis product” means cannabis that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption.

“Identification card” shall have the meaning set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.712, and as may be amended from time to time.

“Learning center” means a facility that provides appointment- or classroom-based tutoring, test preparation, drivers’ education, instruction in science, technology, engineering, arts and math (STEAM), and similar instruction for school-aged youth, and state-licensed adult day programs for individuals with developmental or physical disabilities.

“Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.

“Medicinal cannabis” or “medicinal cannabis product” shall have the meaning set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 26001(ai), which includes cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician’s recommendation.

“Operator” means any person responsible for management of the cannabis business, any person listed on the cannabis business’s articles of incorporation, any person owning an interest in the cannabis business, and any person that supervises another employee of the cannabis business.

“Owner” shall have that meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(al) and as it may be amended.

“Permittee” means any person issued a use permit for cannabis under this chapter.

“Physician” means a licensed medical doctor, including a doctor of osteopathic medicine as defined in the California Business and Professions Code.

“Property” means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the use permit for cannabis application that is owned, leased or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or permittee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted.

“Public park” means an area of land, owned by a public agency, including local, state and/or federal entities, that provides outdoor recreation facilities and programming or provides open space recreational opportunities.

“Qualified registration list” means the list established through a competitive process to determine the best applicants for use permits for cannabis businesses that have retail components, including microbusinesses.

“School” means any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten or any of grades one to 12, consistent with curriculum content standards adopted by the California State Board of Education, inclusive, but does not include any private school in which education is primarily conducted in private homes.

“State cannabis laws” means and includes California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 through 11362.45, 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) and 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program); California Business and Professions Code Section 26000 et seq. (Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”)); all state laws enacted or amended pursuant to SB-94, Chapter 27, Statutes of 2017; the California Attorney General’s Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use issued in August 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from time to time by action of the Attorney General; California Labor Code Section 147.5; California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 31020 and 34010 through 34021.5; California Fish and Game Code Section 12029; California Water Code Section 13276; all state regulations adopted pursuant to MAUCRSA; any license issued pursuant to MAUCRSA; and all other applicable laws of the state of California regulating cannabis or cannabis products.

“Testing laboratory” means a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products.

“Youth center” shall have that meaning set forth in Section 11353.1 of the Health and Safety Code, as that section may be amended. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.030 Residential cultivation of cannabis.
A. No more than six living cannabis plants for personal use may be cultivated at an individual residential unit. Cultivation must not be visible from a public place, including a public right-of-way, and shall only occur:

1. Inside an occupied and inhabited dwelling unit; or

2. Inside a fully enclosed, locked, and secured accessory structure to an occupied and inhabited dwelling unit located in the rear yard or side yard of the same lot where there is (a) no visual or minimal olfactory evidence of cultivation detectable from the public right-of-way or from adjoining properties, (b) the structure is placed at least five feet from the rear yard and side yard property lines, and (c) the structure is no more than 10 feet tall.

B. The drying and processing of cannabis for personal use shall only occur in a fully enclosed structure and shall not be visible from a public place, including a public right-of-way.

C. Persons cultivating cannabis in a residence shall comply with all applicable building code requirements set forth in the Benicia Municipal Code, there shall be no use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) on the property for purposes of cannabis cultivation, and the cannabis cultivation shall comply with Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(a)(3) as it may be amended. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-04 § 1).

17.84.040 Cannabis businesses – Use permit and license required to operate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, to conduct or carry on (or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on) in or upon property located within the city, the operation of a cannabis business unless that person has first obtained and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid use permit for commercial cannabis activity issued by the city for that property and a valid cannabis public safety license issued by the city to the owner and/or operator of the cannabis business, pursuant to Chapter 9.60 BMC. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.050 Cannabis businesses – General provisions.
A. Cannabis Businesses Allowed.

1. Only those types of cannabis businesses set forth in this section shall be allowed within the city. Any and all cannabis businesses, activities, nonprofits, associations, enterprises, collectives, cooperatives or dispensaries not expressly described herein are expressly prohibited.

a. Cannabis retailer (“retailer”).

b. Cannabis manufacturing operation (“manufacturer”).

c. Cannabis testing laboratory (“testing labs”).

d. Cannabis distributor (“distributor”).

e. Cannabis cultivation operation (“cultivator”).

f. Cannabis microbusiness (“microbusiness”).

g. Cannabis delivery operations (“delivery”).

2. No more than one cannabis retailer is permitted in the city.

3. No more than one microbusiness is permitted in the city.

4. An owner or operator of a cannabis business may own or operate more than one cannabis business within the city.

5. All retail operations shall occur in a fully enclosed permanent structure.

B. Limitations on Location.

1. Permissible Zoning. Subject to limitations described in this chapter or other parts of the zoning ordinance, cannabis businesses may only operate in the zones specified in Division II or Division III of the zoning ordinance.

2. Areas and Zones Where Cannabis Businesses Are Not Permitted.

a. Cannabis Retailers – Applications Received Prior to September 10, 2018. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) of this section, cannabis retail businesses whose retail cannabis proposals were received prior to September 10, 2018, may not operate on a parcel or lot located within 600 feet of a school that is in existence at the time the use permit application for a cannabis business is deemed complete by city staff. This distance shall be calculated as a straight line from any parcel line of the property on which the cannabis business is located to the parcel line of the real property on which the facility, building, or structure, or portion of the facility, building or structure, in which the listed use occurs or is located. Locational restrictions shall apply to an entire parcel if any portion of the parcel is located within the applicable buffer distance.

b. Cannabis Retailers – Applications Received After September 10, 2018. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) of this section, cannabis retail businesses whose cannabis use permit and/or public safety license applications were received after September 10, 2018, may not operate on a parcel or lot located within 600 feet of a child care center, youth center, learning center, any residential district of the city, or public park, any of which were in existence at the time the use permit application for a cannabis business is deemed complete by city staff. This distance shall be calculated as a straight line from any parcel line of the property on which the cannabis business is located to the parcel line of the real property on which the facility, building, or structure, or portion of the facility, building or structure, in which the listed use occurs or is located. Locational restrictions shall apply to an entire parcel if any portion of the parcel is located within the applicable buffer distance.

c. All Other Cannabis Businesses. Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) of this section, a cannabis business may not operate on a parcel or lot located within 600 feet of a school that is in existence at the time the use permit for a cannabis business is issued. This distance shall be calculated as a straight line from any parcel line of the property on which the cannabis business is located to the parcel line of the real property on which the facility, building, or structure, or portion of the facility, building or structure, in which the listed use occurs or is located. Locational restrictions shall apply to an entire parcel if any portion of the parcel is located within the applicable buffer distance.

C. Transfer of Use Permits for Cannabis Businesses.

1. Permit – Site Specific. A permittee shall not operate a cannabis business under the authority of a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity at any place other than the address of the cannabis business stated in the application for the permit. All permits issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be nontransferable to a different location.

2. Transfer of a Permitted Commercial Cannabis Activity. A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of a cannabis business or attempt to transfer a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the planning commission to the permitting requirements of this chapter stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the community development department in accordance with all provisions of this chapter accompanied by the required transfer review application fee.

3. Request for Transfer with a Revocation or Suspension Pending. No use permit for a commercial cannabis activity may be transferred (and no permission for a transfer may be issued) when the community development department has notified the permittee in writing that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked for noncompliance with this chapter and a notice of such suspension or revocation has been provided.

4. Transfer without Permission. Any attempt to transfer a use permit for commercial cannabis activity either directly or indirectly in violation of this chapter is declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.060 Use permit for commercial cannabis activities – Requirements.
A. Except as set forth in this chapter, use permits for commercial cannabis activities shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.104 BMC (Use Permits and Variances). The city council shall establish any necessary use permit procedures, by resolution, specific to commercial cannabis activities.

B. Use Permits for Retail and Microbusinesses. Because only one cannabis retailer and one cannabis microbusiness is permitted, an application period for these businesses shall be established to allow the selection of the best applicants. The competitive process for selection of the best applicants to be placed on the qualified registration list shall be established by resolution of the city council.

C. Use permit applications for cannabis retailers shall include a statement as to whether the use will include delivery of cannabis and cannabis products to locations outside the cannabis retail facility. If delivery services will be provided, the application shall describe the operational plan and specific extent of such service, security protocols, and how the delivery services will comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter and state law.

D. The planning commission shall review and approve or deny all complete use permit applications for commercial cannabis activities by utilizing the criteria for approval or denial set forth in this chapter and by separate resolution of the city council. The planning commission shall only approve as many use permits for cannabis applications as permitted by BMC 17.84.050(A). After reviewing an application, the planning commission shall determine whether to issue the use permit for commercial cannabis activities with conditions, or deny the use permit for commercial cannabis activities.

E. Imposition of Permit Fees. Every application for a use permit for commercial cannabis activities shall be accompanied by an application fee (in an amount established by resolution of the city council) at an amount calculated to recover the city’s full cost of reviewing and issuing said permit and the filing of a complete required application pursuant to this chapter. The application fee shall be in addition to any other fees or costs, such as business license fees, permit fees, fingerprinting, photographing or background check, as may be imposed by the city or other governmental agencies. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.070 Criteria to review, issuance and/or denial of use permit for commercial cannabis activities.
A. Criteria for Issuance. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.104 BMC, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall make all of the following findings in determining whether to grant, modify, or deny a use permit for any cannabis business:

1. The cannabis business applicant has been placed on the cannabis qualified registration list.

2. The use permit for cannabis application is complete and the applicant has submitted all information and materials required.

3. The proposed location of the cannabis business is not likely to have an adverse effect on the health, peace, or safety of persons due to the cannabis business’s proposed proximity to a school.

4. The proposed location of the cannabis business is not likely to have an adverse effect on the health, peace, or safety of persons due to the cannabis business’s proposed proximity to another permitted cannabis business.

5. The design of the storefront or structure within which the cannabis business will operate is architecturally compatible with surrounding storefronts and structures in terms of materials, color, windows, lighting, sound, and overall design.

6. The proposed size of the cannabis business is appropriate to meet the needs of the local Benicia community for access to cannabis and that the size complies with all requirements of the city’s zoning regulations.

7. The location is not prohibited under the provisions of this chapter or any local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation, and no significant nuisance issues or problems are likely or anticipated, and that compliance with other applicable requirements of the city’s zoning regulations will be accomplished.

8. The cannabis business is not likely to have an adverse effect on the health, peace, or safety of persons living or working in the surrounding area, overly burden a specific neighborhood, or contribute to a public nuisance, and will generally not result in repeated nuisance activities including disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity, cannabis use in public, harassment of passersby, excessive littering, excessive loitering, illegal parking, excessive loud noises (especially late at night or early in the morning hours), lewd conduct, or police detentions or arrests.

9. The cannabis business is not likely to violate any provision of the BMC or conditions imposed by a city-issued permit, or any provision of any other local or state law, regulation, or order, or any condition imposed by permits issued in compliance with those laws.

10. The applicant has not made a false statement of material fact or omitted a material fact in the application for a use permit for cannabis, as known at the time of determination on the application.

11. The cannabis business’s site plan has incorporated features necessary to assist in reducing potential nuisance and crime-related problems. These features may include, but are not limited to, procedures for allowing entry; reduction of opportunities for congregating and obstructing public ways and neighboring property; and limiting furnishings and features that encourage loitering and nuisance behavior.

B. Supplemental Findings – Cannabis Manufacturing Operation. In addition to the findings required for the approval of a use permit for cannabis as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall consider the following supplemental findings in determining whether to grant, modify, or deny a use permit for cannabis for a manufacturer:

1. The manufacturing operation, as proposed, may utilize nonvolatile or volatile solvents for purposes of extracting cannabinoids. Extractions using a volatile solvent, including butane, must be conducted in a professional, closed-loop extraction system. All extraction processes used shall comply with the Benicia Municipal Code (BMC) including the fire and life safety code and with state cannabis laws and be recognized as safe pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

2. The manufacturing operation includes adequate quality control measures to ensure any cannabis product manufactured at the site meets industry standards.

3. The manufacturing operation does not pose a significant threat to the public or to neighboring uses from explosion or from the release of harmful gases, liquids, odors or substances.

C. Supplemental Findings – Cannabis Testing Laboratory. In addition to the findings required for the approval of a use permit for cannabis as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, shall consider the following supplemental findings in determining whether to grant, modify, or deny a use permit for cannabis for a testing lab:

1. The owners, permittees, operators, and employees of the testing lab will not be associated with any other form of commercial cannabis activity.

2. The testing lab is accredited by an appropriate accrediting agency as approved by the state and further described in California Code of Regulations, Title 16, Section 5702 and as it may be amended.

3. The testing lab operating plan demonstrates proper protocols and procedures for statistically valid sampling methods and accurate certification of cannabis and cannabis products for potency, purity, pesticide residual levels, mold, and other contaminants according to adopted industry standards.

D. Criteria for Denial. The planning commission shall deny an application that meets any one of the following criteria:

1. Any supervisor, employee, or person having a 10 percent or more financial interest in the cannabis business has been convicted of a felony or a drug-related misdemeanor reclassified by California Penal Code Section 1170.18 (Proposition 47) within the past 10 years. A conviction within the meaning of this section means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere;

2. Any person who is listed on the application or is an owner or operator is a licensed physician making patient recommendations for medical cannabis pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7;

3. Any person who is listed on the application or is an owner or operator is less than 21 years of age;

4. The proposed cannabis business does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or state cannabis laws; and

5. The planning commission is unable to make a required finding contained in this chapter.

E. Planning Commission Determination. If the planning commission denies the application, the planning commission shall specify in writing the reasons for the denial of the application, and notify the applicant that the decision shall become final unless the applicant seeks an appeal pursuant to BMC 17.84.080. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-08 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.080 Appeal from planning commission determination.
An applicant or any interested party who disagrees with the planning commission’s decision to issue, issue with conditions, or to deny or revoke a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity may appeal the planning commission’s decision to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.090 Suspension and revocation by planning commission.
A. Authority to Suspend or Revoke a Use Permit for Cannabis. Any permit issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the planning commission under BMC 17.128.060.

B. In addition to the required findings set forth in BMC 17.128.060(D), a use permit for a commercial cannabis activity may be revoked if it appears to the planning commission that the cannabis business has violated any of the requirements of this chapter, the cannabis business is being operated in a manner which violates the operational requirements or security plan required by the zoning code, the cannabis business is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, the cannabis business has ceased to operate for 30 days or more, or the cannabis business is being operated in a manner which conflicts with or violates state cannabis law.

C. Any use permit for a commercial cannabis activity revoked pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be expired and shall no longer entitle the permittee to any uses authorized by the use permit.

D. Revocation, expiration or nullification of a cannabis public safety license pursuant to BMC 9.60.060 and 9.60.070 shall automatically terminate the use permit for a commercial cannabis activity issued to the licensee and shall terminate the ability of the licensee to operate a cannabis business without initiation of revocation proceedings by the planning commission. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.100 Cannabis businesses – Conditions of operation.
A. All Cannabis Businesses. All cannabis businesses shall be operated, maintained, and managed on a day-to-day basis in compliance with the following operational conditions and requirements:

1. State Licensing. A cannabis business shall maintain a state cannabis license at all times and shall comply with all applicable state licensing requirements, regulations, conditions, and standards. The failure to maintain a state license, revocation of a state cannabis license, or lapse in renewal of a state cannabis license shall be the basis for immediate termination of the right to operate a cannabis business under a city use permit for cannabis.

2. Cannabis Public Safety License. A cannabis business shall maintain a cannabis public safety license, issued under Chapter 9.60 BMC, at all times. The failure to maintain a cannabis public safety license, revocation of a cannabis public safety license, or lapse in renewal of a cannabis public safety license shall be the basis for immediate termination of the right to operate a cannabis business under a use permit for cannabis.

3. Employees. It shall be unlawful for the applicant, owner, operator, or any other person effectively in charge of any cannabis business to employ any person who is not at least 21 years of age.

4. Minors. Persons under the age of 21 years shall not be allowed on the premises of a cannabis business unless they are a qualified patient or a person with an identification card as those phrases are defined by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.79(c) and (f). Persons under the age of 18 years shall not be allowed on the premises of a cannabis business unless they are accompanied by a parent or guardian at all times. The entrance to a cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under the age of 18 are precluded from entering the premises unless they are a qualified patient and they are in the presence of their parent or guardian.

5. Every cannabis business shall display, at all times during its regular business hours, the use permit for cannabis and cannabis public safety license issued for such cannabis business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the cannabis business.

6. No cannabis business shall hold or maintain a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control for the sale of alcoholic beverages, or operate a business on the premises of the cannabis business that sells alcoholic beverages, or otherwise allow alcoholic beverages to be possessed, distributed, or consumed on the premises.

7. No cannabis business shall be a retailer of tobacco products.

8. A cannabis business shall be considered a commercial or industrial use, as the case may be, relative to the city’s parking requirements in Chapter 17.74 BMC in an amount most similar to the uses contained in the parking requirements as determined by the community development director.

9. Smoking, ingesting, or consuming cannabis on the premises of a cannabis business shall be prohibited. A notice prohibiting smoking, ingesting and consuming cannabis shall be clearly and legibly posted in the cannabis business and shall not obstruct the entrance or windows.

10. Operation of a cannabis business shall not result in illegal redistribution or sale of cannabis obtained, or the use or distribution in any manner which violates state cannabis law or this chapter.

11. Odors. All cannabis businesses shall be sited and/or operated in a manner that prevents cannabis odors from being detected off site. All structures utilized for indoor cannabis cultivation shall be equipped and/or maintained with sufficient ventilation controls (e.g., carbon scrubbers) to eliminate nuisance odor emissions from being detected off site.

12. Site Plan.

a. The site plan shall include a lobby waiting area at the entrance to the cannabis business used to receive and screen customers (if applicable), employees, patrons, and guests of the cannabis business and a separate and secure designated area for dispensing cannabis (if applicable) and conducting other operations of the cannabis business.

b. The primary entrance shall be located and maintained clear of barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions so that it is clearly visible from public streets, sidewalks or site driveways.

13. Cannabis businesses shall not be enlarged in size (i.e., increased floor area) without the planning commission’s prior review and approval and an approved amendment to the existing use permit for cannabis applied for and issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

14. Security. The cannabis business shall at all times comply with all elements of its security plan, submitted as a part of its cannabis public safety license application pursuant to BMC 9.60.040.

15. Signage. The cannabis business shall comply with all applicable provisions of BMC Title 18.

16. Additional Conditions. The planning commission may impose additional conditions which it deems necessary to ensure that operation of the cannabis business will be in accordance with the standards and regulations provided in the zoning code, the standards set forth by separate resolution of the city council, and applicable state laws.

B. Supplemental Conditions – Retailers. In addition to the conditions of operation set forth in subsection (A) of this section, a cannabis retail operation shall be operated, maintained, and managed in compliance with the following supplemental conditions:

1. Retailers shall not sell drug paraphernalia and implements that may be used to ingest or consume cannabis except where such sales and operations comply with Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5.

2. Retailers shall not be enlarged in size (i.e., increased floor area) without the planning commission’s prior review and approval and an approved amendment to the existing use permit for cannabis applied for and issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

3. Retailers that sell medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products shall only sell, deliver, or give away medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to individuals authorized to receive medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products in accordance with state cannabis laws. Retailers of medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products shall require such persons receiving medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to provide valid official identification, such as a Department of Motor Vehicles driver’s license or state identification card, each time he or she seeks to purchase medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products.

4. Hours of Operation. Retailers may only operate during the hours between 10:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. The planning commission may further restrict a retailer’s days and hours of operation as a condition of a use permit for cannabis. A retailer shall post its approved days and hours of operation on a sign located on the street frontage of the cannabis business in a manner consistent with the city’s sign regulations set forth in BMC Title 18.

5. Retailers shall not have a physician on site to evaluate patients and/or provide recommendations for the use of medical cannabis.

6. State Seller’s Permit. Retailers shall, at all times during operation, maintain a valid seller's permit required pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001).

C. Supplemental Conditions – Manufacturers. In addition to each of the conditions of operation set forth in subsection (A) of this section, a cannabis manufacturing operation shall be operated, maintained, and managed in compliance with the following supplemental conditions:

1. Manufacturers shall not engage in on-site retail sales of cannabis or cannabis products and shall not be open to the members of the general public.

2. Manufacturers may use extraction processes that employ nonvolatile or volatile solvents. Extractions using a volatile solvent, including butane, must be conducted in a professional, closed-loop extraction system. All extraction processes used shall comply with the BMC including the fire and life safety code and with state cannabis laws and be recognized as safe pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

3. Standard of Equipment. Manufacturing, processing and analytical testing devices used by manufacturers must be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) listed or otherwise certified by an approved third party testing agency or engineer and approved for the intended use by the city’s building official and fire code official.

4. Food Handler Certification. All owners, employees, volunteers or other individuals that participate in the production of edible cannabis products shall be state certified food handlers. The valid certificate number of each such owner, employee, volunteer or other individual must be on record at the property where that individual participates in the production of edible cannabis products.

5. Edible Product Manufacturing. Manufacturers that sell or manufacture edible cannabis products shall obtain a county health permit to sell and/or manufacture cannabis products. Permit holders shall comply with Health and Safety Code Section 13700 et seq. and county health permit requirements.

D. Supplemental Conditions – Cultivators. In addition to each of the conditions of operation set forth in subsection (A) of this section, a cannabis cultivation operation shall be operated, maintained, and managed in compliance with the following supplemental conditions:

1. Cultivators shall not engage in on-site retail sales of cannabis or cannabis products and shall not be open to members of the general public.

2. Outdoor Commercial Cultivation Prohibited. The cultivation of cannabis for commercial purposes may only be done within a fully enclosed space.

3. The cultivation of cannabis for commercial purposes shall be limited to 22,000 square feet of total canopy size per property.

4. Pesticides. The cultivation of cannabis must be conducted in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the use of pesticides. Any fumigation or insecticidal fogging shall comply with the California Fire Code Chapter 26 (Fumigation and Insecticidal Fogging).

5. Screening. Cannabis plants shall not be easily visible from off site.

6. Operational Permit. The cultivation of cannabis may not be conducted without an indoor growing operational permit issued pursuant to BMC 8.28.060.

E. Supplemental Conditions – Microbusinesses.

1. The retail aspect of microbusinesses shall be limited to deliveries only. No on-site customers are permitted.

2. Microbusinesses shall not sell drug paraphernalia and implements that may be used to ingest or consume cannabis except where such sales and operations comply with Health and Safety Code Section 11364.5.

3. Microbusinesses that sell medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products shall only sell, deliver, or give away medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to individuals authorized to receive medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products in accordance with state cannabis laws. Retailers of medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products shall require such persons receiving medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to provide valid official identification, such as a Department of Motor Vehicles driver’s license or state identification card, each time he or she seeks to purchase medicinal cannabis or medicinal cannabis products.

4. Hours of Operation. The planning commission may restrict a microbusiness’s days and hours of operation as a condition of a use permit for cannabis. Microbusinesses shall post their approved days and hours of operation on a sign located on the street frontage of the cannabis business in a manner consistent with the city’s sign regulations set forth in BMC Title 18.

5. Microbusinesses shall not have a physician on site to evaluate patients and/or provide recommendations for the use of medical cannabis.

6. State Seller’s Permit. Microbusinesses shall, at all times during operation, maintain a valid seller’s permit required pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001).

7. Microbusinesses may use extraction processes that employ nonvolatile or volatile solvents. Extractions using a volatile solvent, including butane, must be conducted in a professional, closed-loop extraction system. All extraction processes used shall comply with the BMC including the fire and life safety code and with state cannabis laws and be recognized as safe pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

8. Standard of Equipment. Manufacturing, processing and analytical testing devices used by microbusinesses must be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) listed or otherwise certified by an approved third party testing agency or engineer and approved for the intended use by the city’s building code official and fire code official.

9. Food Handler Certification. All owners, employees, volunteers or other individuals that participate in the production of edible cannabis products shall be state certified food handlers. The valid certificate number of each such owner, employee, volunteer or other individual must be on record at the property where that individual participates in the production of edible cannabis products.

10. Edible Product Manufacturing. Microbusinesses that sell or manufacture edible cannabis products shall obtain a county health permit to sell and/or manufacture cannabis products. Permittees shall comply with Health and Safety Code Section 13700 et seq. and county health permit requirements.

11. Outdoor Commercial Cultivation Prohibited. The cultivation of cannabis for commercial purposes may only be done within a fully enclosed space.

12. The cultivation of cannabis for commercial purposes shall be limited to 22,000 square feet of total canopy size per property.

13. Pesticides. The cultivation of cannabis must be conducted in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing the use of pesticides. Any fumigation or insecticidal fogging shall comply with the California Fire Code Chapter 26 (Fumigation and Insecticidal Fogging).

14. Screening. Cannabis plants shall not be easily visible from off site.

15. Operational Permit. The cultivation of cannabis may not be conducted without an indoor growing operational permit issued pursuant to BMC 8.28.060.

F. Supplemental Conditions – Delivery Operations. In addition to each of the conditions of operation set forth in subsection (A) of this section, a cannabis delivery operation shall be operated, maintained, and managed in compliance with the following supplemental conditions:

1. Delivery of cannabis to locations outside a permitted cannabis retailer shall only be permitted in conjunction with a permitted cannabis retail facility that has a physical location and a retail storefront in Benicia open to the public or a licensed and permitted retail location outside of Benicia. A cannabis retailer shall not conduct sales exclusively by delivery.

2. Delivery of cannabis, whether from a facility located within or outside of Benicia, requires compliance with Chapter 9.60 BMC including obtaining the public safety license.

3. Any person who delivers cannabis shall have in possession a copy of all licenses and permits required by the state of California and the city.

4. A licensed cannabis business which is authorized to conduct deliveries in Benicia shall provide to the chief of police a list of all vehicles to be used for delivery of cannabis and cannabis products, including the vehicle’s make, model, year, license plate number and vehicle identification number. The cannabis business shall update the list prior to any vehicle being added to or removed from service.

5. Payments may be made via credit card, check, other means of cashless payment, or by cash. Customers must be provided the option of making payments by noncash payments. Delivery drivers shall not carry more than a combined total of $3,000 in cash and/or cannabis or cannabis products at any one time while delivering cannabis and/or cannabis products under this chapter.

6. Delivery vehicles shall not be marked or otherwise identified with advertisements, the name of the cannabis business, or any other distinctive marking associated with cannabis.

7. Delivery of cannabis shall be made directly to the residence or business address of the designated recipient. Deliveries to any other location are prohibited.

8. Deliveries of cannabis shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

G. Maintenance, Access to, and Inspection of Records.

1. Every cannabis business shall maintain on site, at the property designated for the operation of the cannabis business, all records of the cannabis business.

2. Financial Records. The cannabis business shall maintain a written accounting record or ledger of all cash, receipts, credit card transactions, reimbursements, (including any in-kind contributions), and any and all reasonable compensation for services provided by the cannabis business, as well as records of all operational expenditures and costs incurred by the cannabis business in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices and standards typically applicable to business records.

3. Record Retention Period. The records required in this subsection shall be maintained by the cannabis business for a period of five years and shall be made available to the city within 24 hours of written request, subject to the authority set forth in subsection (G)(4) of this section.

4. A duly designated city police department or finance department representative may enter and shall be allowed to inspect the premises of every cannabis business as well as the financial and membership records of the cannabis business required by this chapter at any time during the cannabis business’s designated business hours, or at any appropriate time to ensure compliance and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or any other person having any responsibility over the operation of the cannabis business to refuse to allow, impede, obstruct or interfere with an inspection of the cannabis business or the required records thereof. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-10 § 1; Ord. 18-09 § 1; Ord. 18-08 §§ 2, 3; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.110 Business license tax liability.
An operator of a cannabis business shall be required to apply for and obtain a business tax certificate pursuant to Chapter 5.04 BMC as a prerequisite to obtaining a use permit for cannabis pursuant to the terms of this chapter. Cannabis businesses shall be subject to sales tax and other applicable taxes in a manner required by state law. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.120 Annual review of cannabis businesses.
The community development department is hereby authorized to conduct an annual review of the operation of each permitted use permit for a commercial cannabis activity within the city for full compliance with the operational, recordkeeping, nuisance and other requirements of this chapter. A fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be collected in order to reimburse the city for the time involved in the annual review process. The staff may initiate a permit suspension or revocation process for any cannabis business which, upon completion of an annual review, is found not to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or which is operating in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance. Staff may, based upon its annual review of the operation of a cannabis business, place on a planning commission meeting agenda, a proposal to suspend or revoke a use permit for cannabis. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.130 No vested rights.
No person(s) shall have any vested rights to any permit, right or interest under this chapter, regardless of whether such person(s) cultivated, sold, distributed or otherwise engaged in acts related to the use of cannabis prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

17.84.140 Public nuisance.
Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and hereby is declared a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available to the city. (Ord. 19-09 § 1; Ord. 18-03 § 1).

Chapter 17.86
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS
Sections:

17.86.010    Specific purposes.

17.86.020    Definitions.

17.86.030    Use permit required.

17.86.040    Application requirements.

17.86.050    Additional notice required.

17.86.060    Public hearing – When required.

17.86.070    Design and construction standards.

17.86.080    Minimum performance standards.

17.86.090    Abatement.

17.86.100    WECS for common use.

17.86.110    Appeals.

17.86.010 Specific purposes.
This chapter establishes regulations and standards for wind energy conversion systems. The intent is to allow such uses within the city as long as certain standards for design, construction, and performance are met. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.020 Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words shall have the meanings set out in this section:

A. “Dominant wind direction” means the direction from which 80 percent of the energy contained in the wind flows.

B. “Overspeed control” means a mechanism used to limit the speed of blade rotation to below the design limits of the WECS.

C. “Swept area” means the largest area of the WECS which extracts energy from the wind system.

D. “Total height” means the height of the tower and the farthest vertical extension of the WECS.

E. “Wind energy conversion systems (WECS)” is a device designed or used for the purpose of converting wind energy into electrical or mechanical power. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.030 Use permit required.
The installation of a wind energy conversion system requires a use permit in every zoning district.

A. IG General Industrial, IL Limited Industrial and IW Waterfront Industrial Districts.

1. In an IG, IL or IW district, the community development director may issue the use permit or may refer the proposal to the planning commission for a decision.

2. Before the community development director issues a use permit, he shall give notice of the proposed WECS application in the manner provided by Chapter 17.104 BMC and BMC 17.86.050. If one or more written objection is received, the community development director shall refer the proposal to the planning commission for a public hearing and a decision.

B. Other Districts. In all other zoning districts, the planning commission shall act upon the use permit for a WECS. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.040 Application requirements.
An application for a use permit shall be made in writing to the community development director on a form provided by the planning department and shall include the following information:

A. Name and address of applicant, and permission of the owner if the applicant is not the owner;

B. A plot plan and development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe:

1. Property line and physical dimensions of the proposed site,

2. Location, dimensions, descriptions of types, and height of every structure within 150 feet of the WECS tower,

3. Location of the proposed WECS,

4. Location of all above-ground utility lines on-site or within a distance equal to one radius of the total height of the WECS, including the farthest vertical extension of the rotor assembly,

5. Location of each tree that may potentially grow taller than 35 feet during the lifetime of the WECS within a 150-foot radius of the proposed WECS,

6. The location of all transmission facilities proposed for installation, and

7. The location of all road and other service structures proposed as part of the installation. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.050 Additional notice required.
In addition to the notice required by Chapter 17.104 BMC, notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, who own property within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property that is the subject of the application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.060 Public hearing – When required.
Unless the use permit is granted by the community development director as provided in BMC 17.86.030, a public hearing shall be held on the application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.070 Design and construction standards.
The WECS shall conform with the following construction standards:

A. Compliance with Uniform Building Code.

1. The building permit application shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the structural components of the WECS and support structures, including base and footings. The application also shall include engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance of the support structure with seismic and structural design provisions of the Uniform Building Code. Drawings and engineering calculations shall be certified in writing by a California-registered structural engineer.

2. All equipment and materials shall be used or installed in accord with the approved drawings.

3. A soils report shall be submitted on the site of each WECS proposal, and the WECS structure shall be designed for 100-mile-per-hour wind conditions.

B. Compliance with National Electrical Code. The building permit application shall be accompanied by a drawing identifying the location of the metering, protection and control devices, and transformer equipment in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation will conform to the National Electrical Code. The application shall include a statement from a California-registered electrical engineer certifying that the electrical system conforms with good engineering practices and complies with the National Electrical Code. All equipment and materials shall be used or installed in accord with the drawings and diagrams.

C. Rotor Safety. A WECS must be equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the blade below the design limits of the rotor. The application must include a statement by a California-registered mechanical engineer certifying that the rotor and overspeed controls have been designed and fabricated for the proposed use in accord with good engineering practices. The engineer shall certify the compatibility of possible towers and available rotors.

D. Tower Access. Tower-climbing apparatus shall be no higher than 12 feet from the ground. A six-foot-high safety fence, with locked gate, completely enclosing the base of the tower in such a manner as to prevent unauthorized access to the structure may be required by the community development director or the planning commission, as the case may be.

E. Signs. At least one sign shall be posted at the base of the tower warning of high voltage. The generator, alternator, or service entrance shall be posted with the following information:

1. Maximum power output (kw), rated voltage (volts) and current;

2. Normal and emergency shutdown procedures;

3. The maximum wind speed the WECS in automatic, unattended operation can sustain without damage to structural components or loss of the ability to function normally; and

4. Emergency telephone numbers.

F. Size. This chapter authorizes a WECS whose swept area is 500 square feet or less. For conventional propeller WECS, the diameter of blade configuration shall not be greater than 23 feet, unless the planning commission finds that the applicant’s needs on the site justify a WECS having a greater capacity.

G. Height. The maximum allowed total height is 100 feet. The lowest reach of the propeller blade shall be 40 feet from the ground unless, due to unusual circumstances, the planning commission permits a lower reach. In no case may the rotor be less than 15 feet from the ground.

H. Setbacks. The WECS shall meet all side- and front-yard setbacks for the site as prescribed by the applicable zoning regulations.

I. Undergrounding Electrical Lines. Electrical lines serving the WECS shall be installed underground. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.080 Minimum performance standards.
The WECS, as constructed and operated, shall comply with the following minimum performance standards:

A. It shall not raise the noise level above 55 decibels within 300 feet of the tower;

B. No interference with radio or television broadcasting or reception may be caused; and

C. Maintenance and inspection records shall be maintained on the site and shall be made available for inspection by the building official on request. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.090 Abatement.
A WECS that has not produced energy for 90 calendar days for reasons other than lack of wind may be declared abandoned, and the use permit may be revoked after notice to the property owner and tenant and after a hearing before the planning commission. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.100 WECS for common use.
Contiguous property owners may construct a WECS for use in common, subject to this chapter. In such cases, the planning commission may permit a WECS machine to have a diameter blade configuration greater than 23 feet. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.86.110 Appeals.
A decision on a use permit by the community development director or planning commission shall become final on the tenth business day following action, unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-62 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.90
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Sections:

17.90.010    Specific purposes.

17.90.020    Objectives.

17.90.030    Requirements.

17.90.040    Application procedures.

17.90.050    Required reports and information.

17.90.060    Condominium conversion standards.

17.90.070    Tenant benefits and notifications.

17.90.080    Effect of proposed conversions on the city’s low-income and moderate-income housing supply.

17.90.090    Density bonus for including low-income and moderate-income housing.

17.90.100    Findings.

17.90.110    Appeals.

17.90.010 Specific purposes.
The conversion of residential structures from one individual ownership to condominiums or any other form of multiple ownership interests creates special community problems, both social and economic. Conversions may significantly affect the balance between rental and ownership housing within the city, and thereby reduce the variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing; increase overall rents; decrease the supply of rental housing for all income groups; displace individuals and families; and disregard the needs of the prevailing consumer market. The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines to evaluate those problems, including the impact any conversion application may have on the community, and to establish requirements which shall be included in any conversion approval. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.020 Objectives.
This chapter is enacted for the following reasons:

A. To establish procedures and standards for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums;

B. To reduce the impact of such conversions on tenants, who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums, by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for relocation to comparable rental housing and rates;

C. To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase;

D. To ensure that converted housing achieves a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety and is in good condition without hidden needs for maintenance and repair;

E. To provide the opportunity for low- and moderate-income persons to participate in the ownership process, as well as to maintain a supply of rental housing for low- and moderate-income persons; and

F. To assure that adequate rental housing is available in the community. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.030 Requirements.
In addition to the applicable requirements and procedures set forth in BMC Title 16, Subdivisions, conversions of existing rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject to the additional requirements of this chapter.

Such conversions must obtain a use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.104 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.040 Application procedures.
The following procedures and regulations shall apply to condominium conversion applications:

A. Preliminary Applications. Applicants may submit preliminary applications for condominium conversions of residential structures to condominiums. Such applications shall identify the owner or authorized agent, the location and number of units in the building to be converted, and contain information on the vacancy rate of multifamily dwellings of three or more units within the city and the number of tenants who support such a conversion.

Data for determining the city’s annual multifamily rate shall be compiled from a variety of sources including, but not limited to, United States Postal Service surveys, idle utility meter reports, reports from financial institutions and real estate organizations.

B. Department Review. The department shall review preliminary applications for condominium conversions. Preliminary applications may be accepted for further discretionary review if any one of the following factors exists:

1. The vacancy rate of multiple-family developments of three or more rental units within the city, as determined by the community development director, is equal to or more than five percent, unless the conversion will result in a decrease of the vacancy rate to less than five percent.

2. Tenants lawfully in possession of 75 percent of the units indicate in writing to the city their desire (one vote per unit) to convert such units to condominium ownership. To qualify under this provision, the applicant shall submit evidence that tenants have been provided with information on all estimated costs, including, but not limited to, the unit cost, down payment requirements, financing, estimated property management costs, and homeowner association fees. If the conversion is approved, the developer shall provide information to the city on the number of tenants who actually purchased. If at any time during the conversion approval process a sufficient number of tenants decide not to purchase, or if misrepresentation is discovered, the planning commission shall have sufficient grounds for denial of the use permit application.

3. The applicant agrees to sell or rent at affordable prices 25 percent of the units to low- and moderate-income households, with a minimum of 20 percent of the units affordable to low-income households. If the units are to be made available for purchase, the maximum sales price of units intended for low- or moderate-income households shall not exceed two and one-half times the annual median income for such households as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, Section 50093. Resale controls shall be included as a deed restriction as specified by the city council for conversions of five or more units, or the planning commission for conversions of four or fewer units. If the units are to be for rent, the maximum rent allowed shall keep the units within the low- or moderate-income housing stock.

C. Optional Ranking of Applications.

1. If the community development director receives more than one preliminary application during a six-month period pursuant to subsection (B)(1) of this section (vacancy rate) and determines that proposed conversions may reduce the vacancy rate to less than five percent, subsequent applications may be ranked by the department based upon the following criteria:

a. The extent to which the proposed conversion will provide housing opportunities for persons of all income levels in the community;

b. The extent to which the proposed conversion’s deleterious effect on occupying tenants will be mitigated by relocation assistance and other assistance provisions by the applicant; and

c. The extent to which the project is suitable for conversion on the basis of its physical condition and other amenities.

The planning commission shall consider the highest-ranking acceptable applications, the total units not to exceed the maximum number of units permitted to be converted based on the vacancy rate, or the rental percentage. Upon a written request, the applicant shall receive from the city a written explanation of the rank given to the conversion applications.

2. All applications which meet the criteria described in subsections (B)(2) (tenant approval) and (B)(3) (affordable housing) of this section shall be considered by the planning commission regardless of vacancy or rental percentage limitations. If approved, and after conversion, the loss of rental units shall be included in the vacancy and rental calculations. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.050 Required reports and information.
After preliminary applications are accepted for further discretionary review, the applicant shall submit all the information required for a use permit application and a tentative map pursuant to this code. In addition, the applicant shall submit information documenting that the project as a whole will be in good repair on the interior and the exterior when offered for sale. As part of the material necessary for the city to determine this to be the case, and to aid the review of the proposal, the reports and/or information required by this section shall be submitted. The cost of all reports shall be paid by the applicant, and the persons preparing the reports shall be approved by the city. The reports shall include information on what improvements, if any, shall be accomplished by the developer and at what point in the conversion proceedings such improvements shall be completed. All improvements cited in the reports, whether required or voluntary, shall be considered conditions of approval.

The applicant shall be responsible for the remedy of physical conditions within individual units or common areas, noted by a prospective purchaser and/or tenant, which have been missed by inspections or which occur subsequent to the inspections but prior to the close of escrow. In case of disagreement between the applicant and the prospective purchaser as to the actual condition, remedy or cause of deterioration, the burden of proof shall be that of the applicant.

A. Physical Elements Report. A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted, containing the following:

1. A report by a California-licensed structural or civil engineer detailing the structural condition, useful life, and any apparent deferred maintenance of all elements of the property, including, but not limited to, foundations, electricity, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, frames, recreational facilities, sound transmissions of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities, and drainage facilities. Such report also shall describe the condition of refuse disposal facilities; swimming pools, saunas, and fountains; stone and brickwork; fireplaces; and exterior lighting.

2. A report by a California-licensed appliance repair contractor detailing the age, condition, expected size, and the cost of replacement for each appliance and mechanical equipment for heating and cooling. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe appliances and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

3. A report by a California-licensed structural termite and pest control specialist certifying whether or not all attached or detached structures are free of infestation and structural damage caused by pests and dry rot. The report shall describe what procedures would be necessary to eliminate infestation or damage, if present. Such report shall be updated within six months after the close of escrow, and any infestation shall be remedied prior to sale.

4. Existing soils reports shall be submitted for review with a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. As required by the city engineer, a new or revised report shall be prepared by a California-licensed soil engineer on soil or geological conditions on-site or off-site which could adversely affect the project site or structures.

5. A report by a California-licensed painting contractor verifying the condition of the painting throughout the project, including building interior and exterior surfaces and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the paint. A statement that new paint will be applied on all building interior and exterior surfaces may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the brand name of the paint and the exterior colors to be used.

6. A report by a California-licensed roofing contractor verifying the condition of the roofs of all structures and an estimate of the remaining physical life of the roofs and the cost of replacement. A statement that new roof material will be applied may take the place of such report. Such statement shall include the type, grade, and color of the proposed roofing material.

7. A declaration of the covenants, conditions, restrictions, and rules and regulations which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to: the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking and storage areas; and an agreement for common area maintenance, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, and an indication of appropriate responsibilities for the maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. Such documents shall be approved by the city attorney and recorded in the office of the county recorder.

8. Specific information concerning the demographic and financial characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following:

a. The square footage and number of rooms in each unit;

b. The rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous three years;

c. The monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding three years;

d. A complete list of the number of tenants and tenant households in the project, including the following information:

i. Households with persons 62 years or older,

ii. The family size of households, including a breakdown of households with children five years and younger; and between five and 18 years,

iii. Households with handicapped persons,

iv. The length of residence,

v. The age of tenants, and

vi. The designation of low- and moderate-income households and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies. When the subdivider can demonstrate that demographic information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the community development director;

e. The proposed price of each of the units;

f. The proposed homeowners’ association budget, detailed to include fixed costs, operating costs, reserves, administration, and contingencies; and

g. A statement of intent as to the types of financing programs to be made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents.

9. Signed copies from each tenant of the notice of intent to convert, as specified in this chapter. The applicant shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of such notice is not submitted.

B. Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be approved by the planning commission. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the department for review by any interested person.

C. Copies to Purchasers. Prior to any purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, the subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports in their final form as accepted by the planning commission, except that the demographic information required by subsection (A)(8) of this section and copies of the notice to each tenant concerning conversion do not need to be distributed. The developer shall give the purchaser at least five days to review such reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.060 Condominium conversion standards.
A. Compliance with Zoning, Building, Housing, Mechanical, and Fire Codes. All units, as well as the common ownership facilities, shall be brought into compliance with all applicable state and local zoning, building, housing, mechanical, and fire codes adopted for use by the city unless, upon approval of the community development director and prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map, funds have been adequately escrowed to assure completion of such corrective work prior to the closing of escrow of any unit in the project.

B. Parking Requirements. The project shall conform to all applicable parking requirements of Chapter 17.74 BMC.

C. Sound Transmission Characteristics and Energy Conservation. The following methods shall be used to regulate noise transmission:

1. Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors, which are determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be shock-mounted in inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official.

2. Noise Mitigation and Energy Conservation. Energy conservation insulation shall be installed in all heated or cooled buildings, including common ownership structures used for assembly purposes, in accordance with Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, as amended, and in effect on the date building permits are issued for condominium conversion rework. Common walls and common floor/ceiling between units shall be constructed to meet a sound transmission coefficient (STC) rating of 50 or higher.

D. Fire Protection.

1. Smoke Detectors. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an AC-powered smoke detector approved by the State Fire Marshal. Installations shall comply with Uniform Building Code Section 1210(a).

2. Sprinkler and Other Systems. A sprinkler system, fire alarm, and other fire protection devices shall be installed as required by this code.

E. Utilities – Location and Metering.

1. Location. Each dwelling unit shall be served by gas and electric services completely within the lot lines or ownership space of each separate unit. No common gas or electrical connection or service shall be allowed. Easements for gas and electric lines shall be provided in the common ownership area where lateral service connections shall take place.

2. Undergrounding. All new utilities, both on-site and off-site, across property frontage shall be underground.

3. Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. Individual panel boards for electrical current shall be provided for each unit. A plan for the equitable sharing of communal water metering and other shared utilities shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

F. Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit, or, if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof.

G. Condition of Equipment and Appliances. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over the management of the condominium project, the applicant shall provide a one-year warranty to the association that any pool and/or spa and pool and/or spa equipment (filter, pumps, and chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition. The plumbing and electrical systems in both the dwellings and the common ownership areas shall also be covered by a one-year warranty for proper and safe operation and installation in a safe and workmanlike manner. Such warranty shall be offered by an independent homeowner’s warranty service licensed by the California Insurance Commission.

H. Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the planning commission shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety.

I. Contingency Fees. The intent of the city in requiring the creation of a contingency or reserve fund for condominium conversions is to provide a surety for unexpected or emergency repairs to common areas in the interest of the economic, aesthetic, and environmental maintenance of the community, as well as to protect the general welfare, public health, and safety of the community. Upon the close of escrow for each unit, the applicant shall convey to the homeowners’ association’s contingency fund a minimum of $200.00 per dwelling unit. When 50 percent or more of the total units in the project have been sold, the applicant, within 30 days, shall convey such fee for each of the unsold units. Such funds shall be used solely and exclusively as a contingency fund for emergencies which may arise relating to open space areas, exterior portions of dwelling units, and such other restoration or repairs as may be assumed by the homeowners’ association. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.070 Tenant benefits and notifications.
Applications for condominium conversions shall include the following procedures as they relate to tenant notification:

A. Notices of Intent. A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant at least 60 days prior to filing the application for a use permit and a tentative map. Evidence of the receipt of such notice shall be submitted with the application for conversion. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined by Section 664552.9 of the California Government Code, and shall contain not less than the following:

1. The name and address of the current owner;

2. The name and address of the proposed subdivider;

3. The approximate date on which the application and tentative map are proposed to be filed;

4. The approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed;

5. The approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by nonpurchasing tenants;

6. The tenant’s rights of:

a. Purchase,

b. Notification to vacate, and

c. Termination of the lease;

7. A statement of no rent increase;

8. Provisions for special cases;

9. The provision of moving expenses and the tenant’s right to claim any penalty imposed if timely payment is not made;

10. The anticipated price range of the units;

11. The proposed homeowners’ association fees;

12. A statement of the types of financing programs to be made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents; and

13. A copy of the city’s condominium conversion regulations.

B. Notification to Tenants.

1. Mailing. Two separate stamped, preaddressed envelopes for each resident of each unit shall be furnished to the department by the applicant at the time the subdivider submits an application for a use permit for a conversion. The department shall use one envelope to notify the residents by mailing a copy of the planning commission public hearing notice to tenants not less than 10 days prior to the proposed hearing date on the application. The notice shall include notification of the tenant’s right to appear and be heard. The second envelope shall be used by the department to notify the residents of the results of the public hearing by mailing notification of the decision of the planning commission not more than seven days following the planning commission action. Failure of the department to mail such notice shall not invalidate any proceeding or action taken by the city in considering a conversion. The list of names and addresses of the residents of each unit in the conversion project shall be current as of the day of submittal and shall be certified as such by the applicant.

2. Notices to Prospective Tenants. Commencing 60 days prior to the submittal of the application, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing by the subdivider of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit pursuant to Section 66452.8 of the California Government Code.

3. Posting Notices. The notice of intent shall be posted on-site in at least one location readily visible to tenants.

C. Tenants’ Discounts. Any present tenant of any unit at the time of an application for conversion shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a discount of the price offered to the general public. The amount of the discount shall be based on the longevity of each tenant, and shall be ratified by the applicant at the time of conversion.

D. Vacation of Units. Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which the subject unit is occupied, shall have not less than 120 days after the date of the tentative map approval by the city or until the expiration of the tenant’s lease to find substitute housing and to relocate. Tenants shall be permitted to terminate leases or tenancy with one month’s notice at any time after a conversion application.

E. No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased within two months prior to a project application, nor shall the rent be increased for two years from the time of the filing of the project application or until relocation takes place.

F. Special Cases.

1. All nonpurchasing tenants 62 years old or older and all nonpurchasing medically proven permanently disabled tenants shall receive lifetime lease. Rents for such tenants shall not be increased for two years after the filing of the project application.

2. The following nonpurchasing tenants shall receive a minimum of 12 months’ relocation time, measured from the tentative map approval, to find replacement housing:

a. Tenants with low or moderate incomes; and

b. Tenants with minor children in school.

G. Moving Expenses. The subdivider shall provide moving expenses equal to three times the monthly rent to any tenant, in compliance with all the terms of the subject lease and/or financing, who relocates from the building to be converted after city approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the units. When the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to city approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

H. Relocation Assistance. Relocation assistance shall be provided by the subdivider to nonpurchasing tenants for a minimum period of four months following the tentative map approval. Information on available rental units in the same general area with costs comparable to the preconverted apartments shall be provided by the subdivider on a calendar quarterly basis. Copies of the list shall be posted on-site, dated, and provided to the department.

I. Discrimination. No discrimination in the sale of any unit shall be based on race, color, creed, national origin, sex, or age, and a statement to this effect shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions. Projects created exclusively for the purpose of providing senior citizen housing shall be exempted from this requirement.

J. Certificates of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be approved by the community development director and issued by the building official prior to the occupancy of units after sales. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.080 Effect of proposed conversions on the city’s low-income and moderate-income housing supply.
In reviewing requests for the conversion of existing apartments to condominiums, the planning commission shall consider the following:

A. Whether or not the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants, if the conversion is approved, would be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;

B. The role the apartment structure plays in the existing housing rental market. Particular emphasis will be placed on the evaluation of rental structures to determine if the existing apartment complex is serving low-income and moderate-income households;

C. The need and demand for lower-cost home ownership opportunities which are increased by the conversion of apartments to condominiums. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.090 Density bonus for including low-income and moderate-income housing.
Consistent with the requirements of Section 65915.5 of the California Government Code, the city shall offer a density bonus to condominium conversions including low-income or moderate-income housing units or lower-income household units. When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project agrees to provide at least 33 percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons of low or moderate income, as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code, or 15 percent of the total units to lower-income households, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, the planning commission shall either (1) grant a 25 percent density bonus or (2) provide other incentives of equivalent financial value. Any density bonus provided under this section shall be governed by the requirements of BMC 17.70.270.

A. For purposes of this section, “density bonus” means an increase in units of 25 percent over the number of apartments to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion. “Other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the city to make any cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the subdivider, but may include the reduction or waiver of any required fees or the condominium conversion standards prescribed in BMC 17.90.060.

B. An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus was provided under the provisions of BMC 17.70.270. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.100 Findings.
The planning commission may approve an application for a condominium conversion if it finds that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements, in addition to the requirements of BMC 17.104.060:

A. That all the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, this chapter, and other applicable provisions of this code are met;

B. That the proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan, the adopted housing element and any applicable specific plan;

C. That the proposed conversion will conform to the provisions of this code in effect at the time of the project approval, except as otherwise provided in this section;

D. That the overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high standard of appearance, quality, and safety;

E. That the proposed conversion will not displace a significant percentage of low-income or moderate-income, permanently or totally disabled, or senior citizen tenants or delete a significant number of low-income and moderate-income rental units from the city’s housing stock at the time when no equivalent housing is readily available in the Benicia area;

F. That the dwelling units to be converted have been constructed and used as rental units for at least three years prior to the application for conversion. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.90.110 Appeals.
The decision of the planning commission shall be final on the tenth business day following its action, unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-63 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.94
MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSIONS
Sections:

17.94.010    Purpose.

17.94.020    Permit required.

17.94.030    Relocation plan.

17.94.040    Findings for conversion.

17.94.050    Conditions of approval.

17.94.060    Appeals.

17.94.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the mobile home park conversion procedure is to ensure that any conversion of these parks to other uses is preceded by adequate notice, and that relocation and other assistance is provided park residents consistent with the provisions of the California Government Code, Section 65863.7. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.94.020 Permit required.
The conversion of an existing mobile home park to another use shall require a use permit issued in accord with Chapter 17.104 BMC. An application for such permit shall include a description of the proposed new use site and a disposition/relocation plan for existing tenants of the mobile home park. Upon filing an application for conversion, the community development director shall inform the applicant of the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.56 and Government Code Section 65863.8 regarding notification of the mobile home park residents concerning the conversion proposal. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.94.030 Relocation plan.
The relocation plan for tenants of a mobile home park shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval as part of the application for conversion of a mobile home park to another use. The plan shall provide specifically for relocation assistance to full-time, low-income and moderate-income residents of the park for a minimum period of 12 months following approval of a use permit for the conversion. Information on sites available in mobile home parks in the city and adjacent communities shall be provided to all tenants.

A relocation plan shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the availability of medical and dental services and shopping facilities, the age of the mobile home park and the mobile homes, and the economic impact on the relocated tenants.

A. Special Cases. The relocation plan shall specifically provide guarantees that all tenants 62 years old or older and all tenants who are medically proven to be permanently disabled shall not have to pay an increase in rent over the amount currently paid for a period of two years following relocation.

B. Moving Expenses. The relocation plan shall provide for moving expenses, which are equal to the actual cost of relocating a tenant a maximum of 10 miles from the park, to any tenant who relocates from the park after city approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the park. When the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to city approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited.

C. No Increase in Rent. A tenant’s rent shall not be increased within two months prior to filing an application for conversion of a mobile home park, nor shall the rent be increased for two years from the date of filing of the conversion application or until relocation takes place. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.94.040 Findings for conversion.
The planning commission may approve a permit for a mobile home park conversion if it finds that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements in addition to the requirements of BMC 17.104.060:

A. That the proposed use of the property is consistent with the general plan and all applicable provisions of this code are met;

B. That there exists land zoned for replacement housing or adequate space in other mobile home parks for the residents who will be displaced;

C. That the relocation plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of low- and moderate-income individuals or households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the impacts of any long-term displacement. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.94.050 Conditions of approval.
Consistent with BMC 17.104.070, the planning commission shall impose a relocation plan as a condition of approval of a permit for a mobile home park conversion. In addition, the planning commission may establish the date on which the permit for conversion will become effective. Such date shall not be more than three years from the decision of the planning commission; provided, that conversion at an earlier date may be approved if the applicant has complied with all the provisions of an approved relocation plan and submitted evidence of such compliance to the community development director. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.94.060 Appeals.
The decision of the planning commission shall be final on the tenth business day following its action, unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-64 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.98
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Sections:

17.98.010  Purposes.

17.98.020  Continuation and maintenance.

17.98.030  Alterations and enlargements of nonconforming uses and structures.

17.98.040  Abandonment of nonconforming use.

17.98.050  Restoration of a damaged structure.

17.98.060  New occupancy on a site having certain nonconforming site features.

17.98.070  Alteration or expansion of a preexisting use for which a use permit is required.

17.98.010 Purposes.
This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement, their reestablishment after abandonment, and the alteration or restoration after destruction of the structures they occupy. While permitting the use and maintenance of nonconforming structures, this chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming structures by prohibiting their being moved, altered, or enlarged in a manner that would increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards prescribed in this chapter and by prohibiting their restoration after destruction. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.020 Continuation and maintenance.
A. A use, lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or of amendments thereto, that does not conform with the use regulations or the site area per dwelling unit regulations for the district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

B. A structure, lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of this title, or of amendments thereto, that does not conform with the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height, or floor area of structures, driveways, courts, or open space for the district in which the structure is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

C. A use that does not conform with the parking, loading, planting area, screening or animal regulations of the district in which it is located shall not be deemed a nonconforming use solely because of these nonconformities.

D. Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure, the use of which is nonconforming; and on a nonconforming structure. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.030 Alterations and enlargements of nonconforming uses and structures.
A. No structure, the use of which is nonconforming, shall be moved, altered or enlarged unless required by law, or unless the moving, alteration or enlargement will result in the elimination of the nonconformity, except that a structure housing a nonconforming residential use in an R or C district may be altered but not enlarged; provided, that the number of dwelling units is not increased.

B. No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be moved, altered or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space occupied by the nonconforming use.

C. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any part of the structure or site, or another structure or site, which it did not occupy on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or of the amendments thereto that caused it to become a nonconforming use occupying a structure or site, except as permitted in this section.

D. No nonconforming structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, distances between structures, driveways, courts or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. No nonconforming structure shall be moved or enlarged unless the new location or enlargement shall conform to the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, basic floor area, distances between structures, driveways, courts or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located.

E. The nonconforming use of a structure or site shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.

F. No use which fails to meet the performance standards of BMC 17.70.240 shall be enlarged or extended, or shall have equipment that results in failure to meet required conditions replaced unless the enlargement, extension or replacement will result in elimination of nonconformity with required conditions. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.040 Abandonment of nonconforming use.
A nonconforming use that is discontinued or changed to a conforming use for a continuous period of 120 days or more shall not be reestablished, and the use of the structure or site thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located; provided, that this section shall not apply to nonconforming dwelling units. Abandonment or discontinuance shall include cessation of a use regardless of intent to resume the use. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.050 Restoration of a damaged structure.
A. Whenever a structure that does not comply with the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, distances between structures, driveways, courts, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of God, or by the public enemy to the extent of 50 percent or less, the structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed; provided, that restoration is started within six months and diligently pursued to completion.

B. Whenever a structure that does not comply with the standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height of structures, distances between structures, driveways, courts, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is located, or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of God, or by the public enemy to an extent greater than 50 percent, or is voluntarily razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.

C. The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the building official. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.060 New occupancy on a site having certain nonconforming site features.
An applicant for a zoning permit in a C or I district for occupancy of a site or structure that is nonconforming due to lack of screening of mechanical equipment, required walls or fences to screen parking, required paving for driveways, or required planting areas, shall present a schedule for elimination or substantial reduction of these nonconformities over a period not exceeding five years. The community development director may require that priority be given to the elimination of nonconformities that have significant adverse impacts on surrounding properties and shall not require a commitment to remove nonconformities that have minor impact and would be costly to eliminate due to the configuration of the site and the location of existing structures. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.98.070 Alteration or expansion of a preexisting use for which a use permit is required.
No preexisting use, established prior to the enactment of a use permit requirement under this chapter, shall be altered or expanded without first obtaining a use permit for the alteration or expansion. "Expansion" is interpreted as enlargement or extension of the use so as to occupy any part of the structure or site, or another structure or site, which it did not occupy on the effective date of the use permit requirement. "Alteration" is defined as:

A. A change the cost of which equals or exceeds $20,000,000 or equals or exceeds 25 percent of the current assessed valuation of the existing facility or structure, whichever is less; or

B. A change which substantially alters the character or operation of the existing use including, but not limited to, hours of operation or scope of activities or services.

Alteration does not include any project that consists only of maintenance or repair of an existing facility or structure.

The $20,000,000 threshold shall be increased or decreased annually in April, beginning in 1994, by the amount of increase or decrease in the Consumer Price Index. At the option of the project owner or applicant, 25 percent of current appraised value may be substituted for 25 percent of assessed value, based upon an appraisal submitted to the city by the owner or applicant. (Ord. 93-3 N.S. § 5, 1993).

Chapter 17.100
ZONING PERMITS – ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW – FEES AND DEPOSITS
Sections:

17.100.010    Purpose and applicability.

17.100.020    Application for zoning permit.

17.100.030    Duties of community development director.

17.100.040    Effective date – Lapse of permit – Appeals.

17.100.050    Development plans.

17.100.060    Environmental review.

17.100.070    Fees and deposits.

17.100.080    Zoning administrator.

17.100.010 Purpose and applicability.
To ensure that each new or expanded use of a site and each new or expanded structure complies with this title, a zoning permit shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, business license, grading permit, or utility service connection. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.020 Application for zoning permit.
A. An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the planning department on a form provided by the city and shall include a statement that the applicant is the property owner or authorized agent.

B. The community development director may require that applications for a zoning permit for grading that will affect more than 200 cubic yards of earth be accompanied by plans and related materials showing the proposed development, alteration, enlargement, or reuse of the property affected.

C. A zoning permit for grading may be issued by the community development director prior to any discretionary approvals needed for a project for one or more of the following reasons:

1. Emergency situations;

2. Remedial or erosion control purposes;

3. Temporary access roadway or fire lane;

4. Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists;

5. Excavations for utilities;

6. Work conducted in any city street, public right-of-way, or easement when the work is for a public facility, utility, or other public purpose;

7. Surcharge fill to prepare sites for development in an existing subdivision;

8. Where the grading of a site has been specifically approved for borrow or fill as part of a separate project approved by the city;

9. Grading work within industrial zoned property in accordance with all of the following requirements:

a. Grading on existing parcels less than 10 acres in area;

b. Grading with cuts and/or fills of less than four feet;

c. Grading on property where 80 percent or more of area to be graded has existing slopes of less than 10 percent;

10. Grading work within commercial zoned property in accordance with all of the following requirements:

a. Grading of less than 5,000 cubic yards;

b. Grading with cuts and/or fills of less than four feet;

c. Grading on property where 80 percent or more of area to be graded has existing slopes of less than 10 percent.

D. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (C)(9) and (10) of this section, the community development director shall have no authority to issue a permit, for the grading work specified therein, when such work is to occur on land located within that portion of the IW water-related industrial district designated in Ordinance No. 95-14 N.S., on land located within the arsenal historic conservation district as shown in the plan adopted by the city council per Resolution No. 93-156, and on land located within the downtown historic conservation district as shown in the plan adopted by the city council per Resolution No. 90-165, copies of which are maintained on file with the city clerk. Grading permits for work to be conducted on land within the area designated in that ordinance shall be processed according to the provisions of subsection (E) of this section.

E. All other zoning permits for grading issued prior to any other discretionary approvals shall require a use permit from the city council following review by the planning commission in accordance with the notice and public hearing requirements of BMC 17.108.080.

F. Upon receiving an application for a grading permit to be issued under the provisions of subsections (C)(9) or (10) of this section, the community development director shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of intent to issue such permit on the date specified in the notice. The decision of the community development director shall be final, unless appealed by any interested party, under the procedures specified in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-65 § 1; Ord. 96-5; Ord. 92-9 § 22, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.030 Duties of community development director.
The community development director shall issue a zoning permit upon determining that the use or structure complies with this title and that environmental documentation, if any, required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) is complete. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.040 Effective date – Lapse of permit – Appeals.
A zoning permit shall be effective on issuance and shall lapse upon the lapse or revocation of a permit required as a condition of issuance of the zoning permit or until affected by amendment of this title. Denial of a zoning permit shall be subject to appeal by the applicant, as prescribed in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-65 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.050 Development plans.
Any changes to development plans following issuance of a zoning permit but prior to issuance of a building permit shall require a new zoning permit if the changes affect compliance with this title. The community development director may waive the requirement for a new zoning permit if the changes to approved plans are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or additions to the plans, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.060 Environmental review.
A.    1. A project that is not ministerially or categorically exempt from CEQA and is the subject of an application for a discretionary approval, including a general plan amendment, zoning map amendment, design review, use permit, variance, master plan, specific plan, PD plan, HD plan, or NC plan, shall be the subject of a negative declaration or an environmental impact report (EIR). (See city of Benicia environmental review guidelines for more detailed information.)

2. Determination of Lead Agency. The community development director or designee, as the city’s environmental coordinator, shall be the lead city department, the city department having the broadest responsibility for carrying out a public project or recommending approval of a private project. The community development director or designee, as the city’s environmental coordinator, shall designate, as lead agency body, the city body having the broadest discretionary approval responsibilities for a particular project. The terms “lead city department” and “lead agency body” as used in this section shall be interpreted with reference to CEQA Guideline Sections 15050 to 15053 (Title 14, California of Code Regulations, Chapter 3).

3. The community development director’s decision on the applicability of an exemption or the lead agency determination shall be subject to appeal as prescribed in Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. Duties of Responsible Agencies. Individuals and bodies other than the lead agency shall have the powers and responsibilities assigned to responsible agencies by CEQA and CEQA guidelines. (Ord. 07-65 § 3; Ord. 05-04 § 1; Ord. 05-03 § 5; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.070 Fees and deposits.
All persons submitting applications for permits, as required by this title, or filing appeals shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city council’s resolution or resolutions establishing applicable fees and charges. Said resolution or resolutions are hereby incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.100.080 Zoning administrator.
The community development director shall serve as the zoning administrator, or he or she may delegate the function of zoning administrator to any of the qualified professional planners in the planning department. The zoning administrator may conduct hearings and approve, disapprove or approve with conditions any application for which the decision-making authority is specifically assigned to the community development director in the individual chapters of this title. Decisions of the zoning administrator to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove a project may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.44 BMC. The community development director, in consultation with the city manager, may refer a planning application to the planning commission. Referrals may be warranted when a project or proposal involves a significant policy issue, or when an environmental impact report has been prepared. (Ord. 07-65 § 4; Ord 99-1 N.S.; Ord 92-15 N.S. § 14, 1992).

Chapter 17.102
ADULT BUSINESSES: ZONING
Sections:

17.102.010    Purpose.

17.102.020    Definitions.

17.102.030    Location of adult businesses.

17.102.040    Violations.

17.102.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter of the Benicia Municipal Code to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; degradation of the city’s commercial and industrial base; increases in vacancies in residential areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and the deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses. (Ord. 09-01 § 7).

17.102.020 Definitions.
The words and phrases included in this chapter shall employ the definitions found in Chapter 5.44 BMC, Adult Business Licenses and Operating Regulations, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended.

In addition to those definitions set forth in Chapter 5.44 BMC, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

A. “Park” shall mean a city park so designated on the general plan or zoning map of Benicia.

B. “School” shall mean any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. (Ord. 09-01 § 7).

17.102.030 Location of adult businesses.
A. Adult businesses, as defined in Chapter 5.44 BMC, shall be:

1. Located exclusively in the C-G, community general zone; IL, limited industrial zone; IG, general industrial zone; and IP, industrial park districts zone.

2. Distanced 500 feet from any residentially zoned property which includes the city’s RS single-family residential; RM medium-density residential; and RH high-density residential. The distance between the adult use and the residentially zoned property shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of the adult use and the nearest property line included within the residential zone, along a straight line extended between the two points, without regard to intervening structures.

3. Distanced 500 feet from any park or school. The distance between the adult use and the park or school shall be measured from the closest exterior wall of the adult use and the nearest property line included within the park or school, along a straight line extended between the two points, without regard to intervening structures.

B. Any person violating or causing the violation of any of these locational provisions regulating adult business shall be subject to the remedies of BMC 17.102.040. (Ord. 09-01 § 7).

17.102.040 Violations.
A. Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including license revocation. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

B. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 09-01 § 7).

Chapter 17.104
USE PERMITS AND VARIANCES
Sections:

17.104.010    Purposes.

17.104.020    Authority of planning commission and community development director.

17.104.030    Initiation.

17.104.040    Notice and public hearing.

17.104.050    Duties of planning commission and community development director.

17.104.060    Required findings.

17.104.070    Conditions of approval.

17.104.080    Effective date – Appeals.

17.104.090    Lapse and renewal – Transferability – Discontinuance – Revocation.

17.104.100    Changed plans – New application.

17.104.110    Temporary use permits.

17.104.010 Purposes.
This chapter provides the flexibility in application of land use and development regulations necessary to achieve the purposes of this title by establishing procedures for approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of use permit and variance applications.

Use permits are required for use classifications typically having unusual site development features or operating characteristics requiring special consideration so that they may be designed, located, and operated compatibly with uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

Variances are intended to resolve practical difficulties or unnecessary physical hardships that may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon; from geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; or from street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity of the site. Cost to the applicant of strict compliance with a regulation shall not be the sole reason for granting a variance.

Variances may be granted with respect to fences, walls, landscaping, screening, site, area, site dimensions, yards, height of structures, courts, distances between structures, open space, signs, off-street parking and off-street loading, frontage, and performance standards.

Authorization to grant variances does not extend to use regulations because the flexibility necessary to avoid results inconsistent with the land use objectives of this title is provided by the use permit process for specified uses and by the authority of the planning commission to determine whether a specific use belongs within one or more of the use classifications listed in Chapter 17.16 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.020 Authority of planning commission and community development director.
The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for use permits or variances subject to the general purposes of this title, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zoning district in which a development site is located, and the provisions of this chapter, unless authority for a decision on a use permit is specifically assigned to the community development director in the individual chapters of this title. The community development director shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove applications for variances related to single-family residences subject to the general purposes of this title, the specific purposes of the base or overlay zone in which a development site is located, and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 15, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.030 Initiation.
Applications for use permits and variances shall be initiated by submitting the following materials to the planning department:

A. A completed application form, signed by the property owner or authorized agent, accompanied by a fee established by city council resolution, plans and mapping documentation in the form prescribed by the community development director;

B. A map showing the location and street address of the development site and all lots within 300 feet of the boundaries of the site; and

C. A list, drawn from the last equalized property tax assessment roll, showing the names and addresses of the owners of record of each lot within 300 feet of the boundaries of the site. This list shall be keyed to the map required in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 17-10 § 21; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.040 Notice and public hearing.
A. Public Hearing Required. The planning commission or the community development director, as the case may be, shall hold a public hearing on an application for a use permit or variance.

B. Time of Hearing. Within three working days after acceptance of a completed application, the community development director shall set a time and place for a public hearing to be held within 60 days.

C. Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the following manner:

1. Posted Notice. Notices shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the site of the project.

2. Mailed or Delivered Notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be mailed to the applicant and all owners of property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site, as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll.

D. Contents of Notice. The notice of public hearing shall contain:

1. A description of the location of the development site and the purpose of application;

2. A statement of the time, place and purpose of the public hearing;

3. A reference to application materials on file for detailed information; and

4. A statement that any interested person or an authorized agent may appear and be heard.

E. Multiple Applications. When applications for multiple use permits or variances on a single site are filed at the same time, the community development director shall schedule a combined public hearing. (Ord. 14-02 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.050 Duties of planning commission and community development director.
A. Public Hearing. The planning commission or community development director, as the case may be, shall conduct the public hearing and hear testimony for and against the application. A public hearing may be continued without additional public notice.

B. Decision and Notice. Within 10 working days of the conclusion of a public hearing, the planning commission or the community development director, as the case may be, shall:

1. Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application;

2. Mail notice of the decision to the applicant and any other party requesting such notice.

C. Limits on Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval of a use permit shall not include use, height, bulk, density, open space, parking, loading or sign requirements less restrictive than those prescribed by applicable district regulations, except as provided in the following sections of the code: BMC 17.70.180, Exceptions to height limits; BMC 17.70.270, Affordable housing density bonus and other incentives; BMC 17.74.040, Collective provision of parking; BMC 17.74.060, Reduced parking for other uses; Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis; and Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License. (Ord. 18-05 § 36; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 16, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 45, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.060 Required findings.
The planning commission or the community development director, as the case may be, shall approve an application for a use permit or variance as it was applied for or in modified form if, on the basis of the application, plans, materials and testimony submitted, the planning commission or community development director finds:

A. For Use Permits.

1. That the proposed location of the use is in accord with the objectives of this title and the purposes of the district in which the site is located;

2. That the proposed location of the conditional use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained will be consistent with the general plan and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in or adjacent to the neighborhood of such use, nor detrimental to properties or improvements in the vicinity or to the general welfare of the city;

3. That the proposed conditional use will comply with the provisions of this title, including any specific condition required for the proposed conditional use in the district in which it would be located.

B. For Variances.

1. That because of special circumstances or conditions applicable to the development site, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, strict application of the requirements of this title deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification;

2. That granting the application will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity of the development site, or to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

3. That granting the application is consistent with the purposes of this title and will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district; and, if applicable,

4. OS District Only. That granting the application is consistent with the requirements of Section 65911 of the Government Code and will not conflict with general plan policies governing orderly growth and development and the preservation and conservation of open space lands. (Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 17, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.070 Conditions of approval.
In approving a use permit or variance, the planning commission or community development director, as the case may be, may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:

A. Achieve the general purposes of this title or the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the site is located;

B. Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;

C. Ensure operation and maintenance of the use in a manner compatible with existing and potential uses on adjoining properties or in the surrounding area. (Ord 92-15 N.S. § 18, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.080 Effective date – Appeals.
A use permit or variance shall become effective at the end of the appeal period, unless appealed to the city council in the case of a decision by the planning commission, or to the planning commission in the case of a decision by the community development director, as provided in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-66 § 1; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 19, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.090 Lapse and renewal – Transferability – Discontinuance – Revocation.
A. Lapse of Approval. A use permit or variance shall lapse two years, or at an alternative time specified as a condition of approval, after its date of approval unless:

1. A building permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued; or

2. A certificate of occupancy has been issued; or

3. The use is established; or

4. The use permit or variance is renewed.

B. Renewal. A use permit or variance may be renewed once for a maximum of one year by the community development director without notice or public hearing if the director determines that the findings made and conditions imposed on the original approval still apply. Application for renewal shall be made in writing prior to the lapse of the original approval, but no more than 120 days prior to that date.

C. Transferability. The validity of a use permit or a variance shall not be affected by changes in ownership, except that use permits for cannabis-related businesses shall not be transferred to new owners and shall be subject to Chapter 17.84 BMC, Cannabis, and Chapter 9.60 BMC, Cannabis Public Safety License.

D. Discontinuance. A use permit or variance shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for six consecutive months.

E. Revocation. A use permit or variance that is exercised in violation of a condition of approval or a provision of this title may be revoked, as provided in BMC 17.128.060. (Ord. 18-05 § 37; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 46, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.100 Changed plans – New application.
A. Changed Plans. A request for changes in the conditions of approval of a use permit or variance, or a change to development plans that would affect a condition of approval, shall be treated as a new application.

B. New Application. If an application for a use permit or variance is disapproved, no new application for the same, or substantially the same, use permit or variance shall be filed within one year of the date of denial of the initial application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.104.110 Temporary use permits.
A temporary use permit authorizing certain temporary use classifications, not including cannabis-related businesses or uses, shall be subject to the following provisions:

A. Application and Fee. A completed application form and the required fee shall be submitted to the community development director. The community development director may request any other plans and materials necessary to assess the potential impacts of the proposed temporary use.

B. Duties of the Community Development Director. The community development director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application within two weeks. No notice or public hearing shall be required.

C. Required Findings. The application shall be approved as submitted or in modified form if the community development director finds:

1. That the proposed temporary use will be located, operated, and maintained in a manner consistent with the policies of the general plan and the provisions of this title; and

2. That approval of the application will not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare.

D. Conditions of Approval. In approving a temporary use permit, the community development director may impose reasonable conditions necessary to:

1. Achieve the general purposes of this title and the specific purposes of the zoning district in which the temporary use will be located;

2. Protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;

3. Ensure operation and maintenance of the temporary use in a manner compatible with existing uses on adjoining properties and in the surrounding area.

E. Effective Date – Duration – Appeals. An approved temporary use permit shall be effective on the date of its approval; a disapproval permit may be appealed by the applicant, as provided in Chapter 1.44 BMC. The permit shall be valid for a specified time period not to exceed one year. A temporary use permit shall lapse if not used within the dates approved and may be revoked by the community development director, effective immediately, upon verbal or written notice for violation of the terms of the permit. The community development director may approve changes in a temporary use permit. (Ord. 18-05 § 38; Ord. 07-66 § 2; Ord. 89-1 §§ 47, 48, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.108
DESIGN REVIEW
Sections:

17.108.010    Purposes.

17.108.020    Applicability.

17.108.030    Sequence of design review.

17.108.040    Scope of design review.

17.108.050    Initiation of design review.

17.108.060    Review responsibilities.

17.108.070    Review process and time limits.

17.108.080    Notice and public hearing by historic preservation review commission.

17.108.090    Effective date – Lapse and renewal – Alterations.

17.108.100    Appeals.

17.108.110    Design review guidelines.

17.108.010 Purposes.
Design review is intended to implement general plan policies. More specifically, the purposes of design review are to:

A. Ensure that the location and configuration of structures are visually harmonious with their sites and with surrounding sites and structures, and do not unnecessarily block scenic views from other buildings or public parks or dominate their surroundings to an extent inappropriate to their use;

B. Ensure that the architectural design of structures, their materials and colors are visually harmonious with surrounding development and with the natural landforms and vegetation of the areas in which they are proposed to be located;

C. Ensure that plans for the landscaping of open spaces conform with the requirements of this title, and that they provide visually pleasing settings for structures on the site and on adjoining and nearby sites and blend harmoniously with the natural landscape;

D. Prevent excessive and unsightly grading of hillsides, and preserve natural landforms and existing vegetation where feasible;

E. Ensure the provision of adequate, safe and efficient parking and circulation areas, which conform to the requirements of this title;

F. Provide a functional, efficient, and attractive site design which is sensitive to existing uses in the area and to the topography and conditions of the site;

G. Ensure that new development is consistent with specific design guidelines developed for use within the community, where applicable, and to any specific plan or planned development plan. (Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 23, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.020 Applicability.
A. In an H Historic Overlay District. Design approval shall be required prior to issuance of a zoning permit for all projects that involve demolition, construction, or changes in exterior colors or materials, except signs.

B. In All Other Districts. Design approval shall be required prior to issuance of a zoning permit for all projects in all other zones that involve new construction or exterior alterations and additions, except single-family residences and related accessory buildings, buildings in the IL, IG, IW, and IP districts that are less than 50,000 square feet, emergency shelters subject to BMC 17.70.390(D), and signs.

C. Accessory Dwelling Units. Accessory dwelling units are exempt from design review. (Ord. 19-02 § 9; Ord. 14-11 § 11; Ord. 13-15 § 10; Ord. 07-21 § 11; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 49, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.030 Sequence of design review.
Design review shall consist of two steps:

A. Preliminary consultation between the project sponsor and the community development director to discuss design guidelines and establish design criteria applicable to the site and use.

B. Design review by the community development director or the historic preservation review commission, as prescribed by this chapter. Approval shall require the findings prescribed in BMC 17.108.040(A). (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.040 Scope of design review.
A. Required Findings. Design approval shall require a finding that the design of a project is consistent with the purposes of this title.

B. Limits on Conditions Required. Changes in a project required as a condition of design approval shall not include use, density, FAR, private open space, parking, or loading requirements more restrictive than those prescribed by applicable district regulations or a valid use permit or variance. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.050 Initiation of design review.
A. Preliminary Consultation. Preliminary consultation shall be initiated by requesting an appointment with the community development director or a designated representative.

B. Design Review. Design review shall be initiated by filing the following with the community development director:

1. A completed application form; and

2. Six sets of the following:

a. A fully dimensioned site plan showing the locations of existing and proposed structures, driveways, walks, walls, fences and open spaces, property lines, right-of-way lines, dedications and easements, and the relation of the site to the surrounding area;

b. A fully dimensioned landscape plan if required by BMC 17.70.190;

c. Architectural drawings, renderings, or sketches drawn to scale showing elevations of proposed structures and describing exterior materials. Perspective drawings or scale models also may be required at the discretion of the community development director;

d. Floor plans showing the proposed use and exterior wall openings;

e. Proposed screening of all exterior equipment and electrical equipment;

f. Proposed exterior lighting fixtures using catalog cuts or sketches; and

g. Samples or descriptions of all proposed exterior materials and paint colors, including surfacing materials for paved areas.

C. Consolidated Review. An applicant may request simultaneous design review and approval of development plans under Chapter 17.112 BMC if:

1. Development plans and materials are submitted in lieu of, or in addition to, plans and materials required for design review;

2. All other requirements for a zoning permit have been met; and

3. The applicant acknowledges in writing an understanding of the risk of loss if development plans are disapproved or substantial redesign is required. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.060 Review responsibilities.
Except as modified by an adopted conservation plan the following review responsibilities will apply:

A. By the Community Development Director. The community development director shall be responsible for design review for projects greater than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in the IG, IL, IW and IP districts, and for projects outside the industrial districts that involve construction of less than 2,500 square feet of floor area.

B. By the Historic Preservation Review Commission. The historic preservation review commission shall be responsible for design review in the RS (nonresidential structures only), RM, RH, C, OS, PS, PD and the H overlay districts, for projects not subject to community development director review. The historic preservation review commission shall hold a public hearing, as provided in BMC 17.108.080, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for design approval. Decisions of the design review commission may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

C. Exceptions to Criteria. The community development director may authorize minor deviations from the zoning standards specified herein: timing of construction for an accessory structure, projection of detached garage in the RS district, separation between buildings per BMC 17.70.050; increased height for an ADU and increased lot coverage for an ADU per BMC 17.70.060; and modifications in vehicle space size requirements per BMC 17.74.100. (Ord. 19-02 § 10; Ord. 13-15 § 10; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 07-67 § 1; Ord. 07-21 § 12; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 99-1 N.S.; Ord. 92-15 N.S. § 20, 1992; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 24, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 51, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.070 Review process and time limits.
A. Prerequisite for Review. Unless an applicant selects consolidated review, as provided in BMC 17.108.050(C), review of development plans shall follow design review.

B. By Community Development Director (IG, IL, IW, and IP Districts). The community development director shall review plans submitted for design approval within 30 days of receipt and shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plans. Within five working days after a decision, notice shall be mailed to the applicant.

C. By Design Review Commission (R, C, OS, PS and PD Districts, and H Overlay District). After a duly noticed public hearing, the design review commission shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the plans. Within five working days of a design review commission decision, the secretary of the commission shall mail notice of the decision to the applicant.

D. Action Required. All decisions shall be based on the findings required by BMC 17.108.040. Any conditions imposed shall be reasonable and designed to assure attainment of the purposes and standards established by this title. (Ord. 13-15 § 10; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 01-6 N.S., 2001; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 24, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. §§ 52, 53, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.080 Notice and public hearing by historic preservation review commission.
A. Time of Hearing. Within three working days after acceptance of a complete application for design review, the community development director shall set a date, time, and place for the hearing. A public hearing shall be held within 60 days of receipt of the application, unless the applicant agrees to a later date.

B. Notice. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter shall be given in the following manner:

1. Posted Notice. Notices shall be posted at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the site of the project.

2. Mailed or Delivered Notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be mailed to the applicant and all owners of property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site, as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll.

C. Public Hearing. At the time and place set for the public hearing, the commission shall hear comments on the proposed design. The commission may continue a public hearing without additional notice. (Ord. 14-02 § 3; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 92-9 N.S. §§ 24, 25, 1992; Ord. 89-1 N.S. § 54, 1989; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.090 Effective date – Lapse and renewal – Alterations.
A. Effective Date. Design review decisions shall become effective at the end of the appeal period, unless appealed as provided in Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. Lapse of Approvals. Design approval shall lapse two years from its effective date unless:

1. A building permit has been issued and construction diligently pursued; or

2. An occupancy permit has been issued; or

3. The approval is renewed.

C. Renewal. The community development director or the historic preservation review commission, as the case may be, may renew design approval for a period of one year upon determining that the findings made remain valid. Application shall be made in writing prior to the lapse of the original approval, but no more than 120 days prior to that date.

D. Changed Plans. The community development director or the historic preservation review commission, as the case may be, may approve changes to approved plans or in conditions of approval without a public hearing upon determining that the changes in conditions are minor and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. Revisions involving substantial changes in project design or conditions of approval shall be treated as new applications. (Ord. 13-15 § 10; Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 07-67 § 2; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 24, 1992; Ord 89-1 N.S. §§ 55, 56, 1989; Ord 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.100 Appeals.
A. Rights of Appeal and Review. Design review decisions of the community development director may be appealed by any interested party to the historic preservation review commission. Design review decisions of the historic preservation review commission may be appealed, by any interested party, to the planning commission.

B. Procedures – Public Hearings. Procedures for appeals shall be as prescribed by Chapter 1.44 BMC.

C. Limits on Appeals. Appeal decisions of the historic preservation review commission shall be final. (Ord. 07-67 § 3; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 24, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.108.110 Design review guidelines.
The historic preservation review commission may adopt guidelines for design review consistent with the purposes of this chapter to facilitate the review process. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 92-9 N.S. § 24, 1992; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.112
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
Sections:

17.112.010    Purposes and applicability.

17.112.020    Prerequisites for review.

17.112.030    Review requirements.

17.112.040    Initiation of development plan review.

17.112.050    Required plans and materials.

17.112.060    Development plan review procedures.

17.112.070    Appeals.

17.112.010 Purposes and applicability.
To ensure that new development complies with all applicable requirements of this title, development plans shall be reviewed prior to issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.112.020 Prerequisites for review.
The development plan shall not be accepted for review until all discretionary approvals are effective, unless an applicant selects the fast-tracking option prescribed in BMC 17.112.060(A). (Ord. 87-4 N.S, 1987).

17.112.030 Review requirements.
Development plans shall be reviewed by the community development director. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.112.040 Initiation of development plan review.
Development plan review shall be initiated by the property owner or an authorized agent by filing, with the community development director, two copies of all plans and materials specified in BMC 17.112.050. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.112.050 Required plans and materials.
The following plans and materials shall be submitted; provided, that the community development director may waive submission of items deemed unnecessary to determine compliance with applicable requirements of this title:

A. A fully dimensioned site plan showing:

1. The architect’s or designer’s name, address, and telephone number,

2. Scale of plan and north arrow,

3. Street address of site and vicinity map showing the relationship of the site to the surrounding area,

4. Existing and proposed property lines, right-of-way lines, dedications, and easements,

5. Locations of existing and proposed structures, driveways, walks and open spaces, and

6. Locations, heights, and materials of existing and proposed walls and fences;

B. A statement describing the proposed use and calculations in tabular form showing compliance with applicable density, coverage, parking, and open space regulations;

C. A fully dimensioned landscape plan if required by BMC 17.70.190;

D. A grading plan showing proposed changes in grade and the total volume of land to be cut or filled, with proposed drainage patterns indicated by arrows;

E. A fully dimensioned parking and loading plan showing:

1. Locations and dimensions of all parking and loading spaces, driveways and vehicular entrances, with proposed traffic circulation patterns indicated by arrows, and

2. Calculations showing the number of parking and loading spaces required by size and the number proposed;

F. Elevations of proposed structures, showing exterior wall openings and describing exterior materials;

G. Floor plans showing the proposed use and exterior wall openings;

H. Locations, dimensions, and heights of all signs. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.112.060 Development plan review procedures.
A. Fast-Tracking Option. Development plan review may be concurrent with one or more discretionary approvals, including use permits, variances, and design review, as prescribed by BMC 17.112.020, if an applicant requests fast-tracking and acknowledges in writing an understanding of the risk of loss if development plans are disapproved or substantial redesign is required.

B. Normal Review. The community development director shall check the plans for compliance with:

1. Standards and requirements of this title;

2. Conditions of approval established by the community development director, planning commission, historic preservation review commission, or the city council.

The community development director shall notify the applicant of any changes required to achieve compliance with applicable standards and requirements and conditions of approval. Upon receipt of evidence that the project will achieve compliance, the director shall signify approval by signing a development plan approval form that shall be incorporated in the master set of plans to be kept on file in the planning department. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.112.070 Appeals.
A decision disapproving plans may be appealed under the procedures established in Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-68 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.116
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

17.116.010    Purpose.

17.116.020    Application requirements.

17.116.030    Department review and recommendation.

17.116.040    Public hearing required.

17.116.050    Planning commission action.

17.116.060    City council action.

17.116.070    Annual review.

17.116.080    Modification and termination.

17.116.090    Administration.

17.116.010 Purpose.
In order to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic cost of development, the Legislature of the state of California adopted Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code, authorizing local governments to enter into development agreements with applicants for development projects. The objective of such an agreement is to provide assurances that, upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in accord with existing policies, rules and regulations, subject to the conditions of approval, thus vesting certain development rights in the property. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and requirements for consideration of development agreements by the city consistent with state law. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.020 Application requirements.
An applicant may propose that the city consider entering into a development agreement pursuant to Article 2.5, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the California Government Code commencing with Section 65864, by filing an application with the planning department. The application shall be accompanied by the following:

A. A proposed agreement, which shall contain the following:

1. A legal description of the property sought to be covered by the agreement,

2. A statement of occurrence in the application by the owner if the applicant is not the fee owner,

3. A description of the proposed uses, height and size of building(s), density or intensity of use, and provision for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes,

4. All proposed conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent city discretionary actions,

5. The proposed time when construction would be commenced and completed for the entire project and any proposed phases, and

6. The termination date for the agreement;

B. A completed initial study form;

C. A statement documenting that the project is consistent with the general plan and all applicable specific plans;

D. Such other information as the planning department may require by policy or to satisfy other requirements of law;

E. The required fee established by city council resolution. (Ord. 17-10 § 22; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.030 Department review and recommendation.
The department shall, at the applicant’s expense and in accord with city procedures for implementation of CEQA, undertake environmental review and, upon completion of such review, transmit the application, together with the department’s recommendations thereon, to the planning commission. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.040 Public hearing required.
Upon receipt of an application, the results of the environmental review, and the recommendations of the department, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given as provided in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the California Government Code, except that in addition to these requirements, notice shall be mailed to the applicant and to each owner of property, as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll, located within 500 feet of the property. In addition, if the application is being processed together with the development project, notice of such intention shall be given as required for consideration of the development project. (Ord. 14-02 § 4; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.050 Planning commission action.
After the public hearing is closed, the commission shall recommend either approval, modification, or disapproval of the proposed development agreement. The commission shall transmit its recommendation to the city council within 30 days. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.060 City council action.
A. Upon receipt of the application, the results of the environmental review, and the recommendations of the department and the planning commission, the city council shall schedule a public hearing on the application. Notice of intention to consider the application shall be given in the same manner as set forth in BMC 17.116.040.

B. If the application is being processed together with the development project, the public hearing on the application may be held concurrently with the hearing on the project.

C. After the public hearing is closed, the city council shall approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed development agreement. An agreement shall not be approved unless the city council finds that the provisions of the agreement, as submitted or as modified, are consistent with the general plan and with any specific plan. Any approval of a proposed agreement shall be made by ordinance, which shall authorize the mayor and the director to sign the agreement on behalf of the city.

D. No agreement shall be signed by the mayor and the director until it has been duly signed by the applicant and owner, if the applicant is not the owner. If the applicant has not signed and returned the approved agreement to the mayor and the director for signing within 30 days of council approval, said application shall be deemed withdrawn by the applicant.

E. Within 10 days after the mayor and the director sign a development agreement and the ordinance becomes effective, the director shall cause a copy thereof to be recorded.

F. All agreement provisions are subject to modification or suspension as set forth in Article 2.5, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code, commencing with Section 65864. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.070 Annual review.
A. All development agreements shall be reviewed by the community development director at least once every 12 months, unless the agreement provides for more frequent review, in which case the agreement shall prevail.

B. The purpose of the review shall be to inquire into the good faith compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of the agreement and for any other purpose specified in the agreement.

C. Prior to each review, the department shall prepare a report relative to all development that has occurred under the agreement subsequent to the last past review and any other matters the department wishes to bring to the director’s attention.

D. If the department report recommends modification or termination of the agreement, or if the community development director proposes to make such a recommendation to the city council, he shall schedule a public hearing on the agreement. If the department report or director’s recommendation involves land use issues, the director shall schedule the hearing before the planning commission. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in BMC 17.116.040. At such hearing the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating his good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the agreement.

E. If, after the public hearing is closed, the community development director, in consultation with the planning commission if land use issues are involved, determines that the agreement should be terminated or modified, the matter shall be referred to the city council for proceedings for termination or modification.

F. Upon receipt of the community development director’s recommendation, the city council shall schedule a public hearing. Notice of intention to modify or terminate the agreement shall be given in the same manner as set forth in BMC 17.116.040.

G. If, after the public hearing is closed, the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant or its successor in interest has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the city council may modify or terminate the agreement. Any modification or termination is subject to the provisions of BMC 17.116.080. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.080 Modification and termination.
Any development agreement may be amended, or canceled in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the applicant (or its successor in interest) and the city, or it may be modified or terminated pursuant to the provisions of BMC 17.116.070. Notice of intention to take any such action shall be given in the manner provided by BMC 17.116.040; provided, however, that the parties may set forth an alternative procedure in the agreement for processing insubstantial amendments. Any significant amendment shall be subject to the provisions of the California Government Code, Section 65867.5. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.116.090 Administration.
The community development director shall prepare and adopt such application forms, checklists, and other documents as considered necessary and desirable to implement these procedures and requirements. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.120
AMENDMENTS
Sections:

17.120.010    Applicability.

17.120.020    Initiation of amendments.

17.120.030    Required application materials for amendments initiated by property owners, residents or business owners.

17.120.040    Public hearing scope and notice.

17.120.050    Duties of planning commission.

17.120.060    Result of planning commission denial.

17.120.070    Duties of city council.

17.120.080    Revisions of proposed amendments.

17.120.090    Resubmittal of application.

17.120.010 Applicability.
This title may be amended by changing the zoning map or the regulations. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.020 Initiation of amendments.
A. Zoning Regulations. Amendments to the zoning regulations shall be initiated by motion of the city council or the planning commission, or by petition of any resident, property owner or business owner in the city.

B. Zoning Map. Amendments to the zoning map shall be initiated by motion of the city council or planning commission or by application of the owner or authorized agent of property for which the change is sought. If property that is the subject of an application is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.030 Required application materials for amendments initiated by property owners, residents or business owners.
A property owner shall initiate a zoning map amendment by filing the following with the community development director:

A. A completed application form;

B. A completed initial study form;

C. A map showing the location and street address of the property that is the subject of the amendment and of all lots of record within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property;

D. A list, drawn from the last equalized property tax assessment roll, showing the names and addresses of the owner of record of each lot within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property (this list shall be keyed to the map required by subsection (C) of this section);

E. The required fee established by city council resolution.

A property owner, resident or business owner shall initiate a zoning text amendment by submitting a description of the amendment accompanied by items described in subsections (A), (B), and (E) of this section. (Ord. 17-10 § 23; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.040 Public hearing scope and notice.
A. Scope. The community development director shall set a date, time, and place for the public hearing and prepare a report to the planning commission on an application of a property owner for a zoning map amendment or a petition of a zoning regulation amendment describing the area to be considered for change and, if warranted, proposing alternative amendments.

B. Notice of Hearing.

1. Normal Procedure. Notice shall be given in accord with Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091, except that in addition to these requirements, notice shall be mailed to the applicant and all owners of property within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site, as shown on the last equalized property tax assessment roll.

2. Zoning Map Amendments – 500 or More Lots. If a proposed zoning map amendment includes 500 or more lots, notice may be given in accord with Government Code Section 65091(c)(3).

C. Contents of Notice. Notices required by this section shall contain:

1. A description of the amendment;

2. A statement of the date, time, and place of the hearing;

3. Reference to the council or commission motion or application and other materials on file with the community development director for detailed information;

4. A statement that any interested party or agent may appear and be heard. (Ord. 14-02 § 5; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.050 Duties of planning commission.
A. Public Hearing. At the time and place set for the public hearing, the planning commission shall consider a report of the community development director and shall hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The planning commission may continue a public hearing without additional notice.

B. Recommendation to City Council. Following the public hearing, the commission shall make specific findings as to whether the proposed zoning regulation or zoning map amendment is consistent with the policies of the general plan and the purposes of this title, and shall recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the proposal as submitted or in modified form. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.060 Result of planning commission denial.
A planning commission recommendation of denial of an application for a zoning map amendment or zoning regulation amendment submitted by petition shall terminate proceedings, unless appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 17.124 BMC. (Ord. 05-03 § 6; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.070 Duties of city council.
A. Hearing Date and Notice. Upon receipt of a planning commission recommendation for approval or conditional approval of an amendment to the zoning regulations or map, the council shall set a date and time for a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The hearing shall be held within 60 days of the date of the commission recommendation. The city clerk shall give notice of such hearing, as required by BMC 17.120.040.

B. Public Hearing. At the time and place set for the public hearing, the council shall hear evidence for and against the proposed amendment. The council may continue a public hearing without additional notice.

C. Council Decision. After the public hearing, the council shall approve, modify, or reject the commission recommendation; provided, that a modification not previously considered by the commission shall be referred to the commission for a report prior to adoption of an ordinance amending the zoning regulations map. Failure of the planning commission to report within 40 days after referral or such longer period as may be designated by the council shall be deemed approval of the proposed modification. Prior to adoption of an ordinance the council shall make findings that the proposed regulation or map amendment is consistent with the policies of the general plan and the notice and hearing provisions of this title. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.080 Revisions of proposed amendments.
A. Revisions. At or after a public hearing, the commission or the council may determine that the public interest would be served by:

1. Revising the boundaries of an area proposed for a zoning map amendment;

2. Considering zoning map designations not originally presented in a motion, application, or commission recommendation;

3. Considering zoning regulation amendments not originally presented in a motion, petition, or commission recommendation.

B. Supplemental Notice. Notice shall be given prior to a hearing on a revised amendment, unless the commission or council finds that the revised amendment will not have impacts greater than those that would result from the amendment in its original form. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.120.090 Resubmittal of application.
Following denial of an application or petition for an amendment to the zoning regulations or the zoning map by the commission or council, no new application or petition for the same, or substantially the same, amendment shall be accepted within one year of the date of denial, unless denial is made without prejudice. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.124
APPEALS AND CALLS FOR REVIEW
Sections:

17.124.010    Purpose and authorization for appeals.

17.124.020    Failure to act.

17.124.030    New appeal.

17.124.010 Purpose and authorization for appeals.
A. Appeals. To avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this title, decisions of the director of community development and the historic preservation review commission may be appealed to the planning commission, and decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. Calls for Review. As an additional safeguard to avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of this title, decisions of the director of community development or the historic preservation review commission may be called up for review by the planning commission, and decisions of the planning commission may be called up for review by the city council in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC. (Ord. 07-69 § 1).

17.124.020 Failure to act.
Failure to act within the time limits prescribed in Chapter 1.44 BMC shall be deemed affirmation of the original decision, provided the requirements specified for development projects in Government Code Section 65956 et seq. have been met. (Ord. 07-69 § 1).

17.124.030 New appeal.
Following denial of an appeal or certification of a decision called for review, any matter that is the same or substantially the same shall not be considered by the same body within one year, unless the denial or certification is made without prejudice. (Ord. 07-69 § 1).

Chapter 17.128
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

17.128.010    Permits, licenses, certificates, and approvals.

17.128.020    Enforcement responsibilities.

17.128.030    Voidable conveyances.

17.128.040    Occupancy permit.

17.128.050    Business licenses.

17.128.060    Revocation of discretionary permits.

17.128.070    Prosecution of violations.

17.128.080    Penalties.

17.128.010 Permits, licenses, certificates, and approvals.
All persons empowered by the municipal code to grant permits, licenses, certificates, or other approvals shall comply with the provisions of this title and grant no permit, license, certificate, nor approval in conflict with said provisions. Any permit, license, certificate, or approval granted in conflict with any provision of this title shall be voided. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.020 Enforcement responsibilities.
The community development director shall enforce all provisions of this title related to discretionary permits and shall have responsibility for revocation of discretionary permits, as provided in BMC 17.128.060. The building official shall enforce the provisions of this title pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration, or addition to any building or structure. All other officers of the city shall enforce provisions related to their areas of responsibility. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.030 Voidable conveyances.
Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell made contrary to the provisions of this title shall be voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, or his heirs, personal representatives, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy, within one year after the date of execution of the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell; but the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell or his assignee, heir, or devisee. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.040 Occupancy permit.
An occupancy permit shall be required for each new residential occupancy or change in an existing occupancy, as provided in BMC Title 15. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.050 Business licenses.
No certificate for a business license tax shall be issued unless the community development director has issued a zoning permit, as provided in Chapter 17.100 BMC. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.060 Revocation of discretionary permits.
A. Duties of Community Development Director. Upon determination by the community development director that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of a use permit, variance, design approval, or other discretionary approval authorized by this title, a revocation hearing shall be set by the director, the planning commission, the historic preservation review commission, or the city council, whichever took final previous action on the permit, except for appeals.

B. Notice and Public Hearing. Notice shall be given in the same manner required for a public hearing to consider approval. If no notice is required for the permit, none shall be required for the revocation hearing; provided, that notice shall be mailed to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Contents of any notice shall be as prescribed by BMC 17.104.040(D).

C. Hearing. The person or body conducting the hearing shall hear testimony of city staff and the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was granted, if present. At a public hearing, the testimony of any other interested person shall also be heard. A public hearing may be continued without additional public notice.

D. Required Findings. The person or body conducting the hearing shall revoke the permit upon making one or more of the following findings:

1. That the permit was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information or misrepresentation;

2. That the terms or conditions of approval of the permit have been violated or that other laws or regulations have been violated;

3. That there has been a discontinuance of the exercise of the entitlement granted by the permit for six consecutive months.

E. Decision and Notice. Within 10 working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the person or body that conducted the hearing shall render a decision, and shall mail notice of the decision to the owner of the use or structure for which the permit was revoked and to any other person who has filed a written request for such notice.

F. Effective Date – Appeals. A decision to revoke a discretionary permit shall become final 10 days after the date of the decision, unless appealed in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

G. Right Cumulative. The city’s right to revoke a discretionary permit, as provided in this section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law. (Ord. 13-07 § 2; Ord. 07-70 § 1; Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.070 Prosecution of violations.
A violation of any provision of this title shall be prosecuted as an infraction. In addition, the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment of any violation in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

17.128.080 Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this title and is convicted of an infraction shall be punished by fines as prescribed in Government Code Section 36900. Each person convicted may be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed or permitted. (Ord. 87-4 N.S., 1987).

Chapter 17.132
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:

17.132.010    Purpose and intent.

17.132.020    Applicability.

17.132.030    Definitions.

17.132.040    Requesting reasonable accommodation.

17.132.050    Required information.

17.132.060    Reviewing authority – Decision.

17.132.070    Required findings for reasonable accommodation.

17.132.080    Effective date – Appeals.

17.132.090    Fee.

17.132.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in zoning and other land use regulations or rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the city. It is the intent of the city, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, to provide people with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.020 Applicability.
Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities. In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. The provisions of this chapter apply to all zoning districts including overlay districts and all adopted local area and specific plans, and to BMC Title 15, Building and Construction, regulations.

A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone that has a record of such impairment. This chapter applies only to those persons who are disabled as defined herein. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning.

“Act” means the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.

“Applicant” means an individual making a request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.

“Disability” means, with respect to an individual, a medical, physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities, as those terms are defined in California Government Code Section 12926; anyone who is regarded as having such a condition; or anyone who has a record of having such a condition. The term “disabled person” does not include a person who is currently using illegal substances, unless he or she has a separate disability. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.040 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
A. In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, the applicant may request reasonable accommodation relating to the various land use, zoning, or rules, policies, practices, and/or procedures of the city. Such a request may include a modification or exception to the requirements for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers. A reasonable accommodation cannot waive a requirement for a use permit when otherwise required or result in approval of uses otherwise prohibited by the city’s land use and zoning regulations.

B. If the applicant needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the community development director will provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant.

C. A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures may be filed on an application form provided by the department at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing.

D. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an applicant’s obligation to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested reasonable accommodation.

E. If the project for which the reasonable accommodation is being requested also requires some other discretionary approval (such as conditional use permit, architectural review, general plan amendment, zoning amendment, subdivision map), then the applicant shall submit the reasonable accommodation application first for a determination by the community development director, before proceeding with the other applications. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.050 Required information.
A. The applicant shall submit a request for reasonable accommodation on a form provided by the planning division. The application shall include the following information:

1. The applicant’s name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address, if available;

2. Address of the property for which the request is being made;

3. The name and address of the property owner, and the owner’s written consent to the application;

4. The current and proposed use of the property;

5. The basis for the claim under the Act, that the fair housing laws apply to the individual(s) with a disability and evidence supporting the claim, including the effects on the person’s limitations as it relates to the request, which may be in the form of a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed healthcare professional, handicapped license, or other appropriate evidence;

6. Description of the requested accommodation, and the rule, policy, practice and/or procedure of the city for which the request for accommodation is being made;

7. Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, site plans, floor plans, or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation; and

8. Such other relevant information as may be requested by the community development director as determined necessary to makes the findings required by BMC 17.132.070, so long as any request for information regarding the disability of the individuals benefited complies with the Act and the privacy rights of the individual(s) affected.

B. Any information identified by the applicant as confidential shall be retained by the city in a manner that respects the privacy rights of the individual with a disability and shall not be made available for public inspection. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.060 Reviewing authority – Decision.
A. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the community development director or their designee.

B. The community development director or their designee shall issue a written decision on a request for reasonable accommodation and may either grant, grant with modification, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with the required findings set forth in BMC 17.132.070. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.070 Required findings for reasonable accommodation.
In making a determination regarding the reasonableness of a requested reasonable accommodation, the approving authority shall make the following findings:

A. The housing which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be used for an individual(s) with a disability protected under the Act.

B. The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual(s) with a disability protected under the Act.

C. The requested reasonable accommodation does not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

D. The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning and building laws, policies and/or procedures of the city.

E. There are no other reasonable alternatives that would provide an equivalent level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to the city’s applicable rules, standards and practices.

F. The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.080 Effective date – Appeals.
A. All written decisions shall give notice of the applicant’s right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth in Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. If an individual(s) needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible.

C. The written decision of the community development director or their designee shall be final unless appealed.

D. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

17.132.090 Fee.
There shall be no fee imposed in connection with a request for reasonable accommodation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-10 § 1).

Title 18
SIGNS1
Chapters:

18.04    General Provisions

18.08    Permits

18.12    General Use Regulations

18.16    Specific Sign Regulations

18.20    Nonconforming Signs

18.24    Prohibitions and Exemptions

18.28    Abatement and Removal

18.32    Repealed

18.36    Overhanging Signs

1
    For statutory provisions authorizing a city to regulate signs and billboards by use of its zoning power, see Government Code § 65850.


Chapter 18.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

18.04.010    Purpose.

18.04.020    Definitions.

18.04.030    Applicability.

18.04.040    Compliance.

18.04.050    Findings.

18.04.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to promote and protect the public health, welfare and safety by advancing the goals, policies and strategies of the General Plan to protect, preserve and enhance the vistas, scenic corridors and highways of the city, as well as the aesthetics, traffic safety and environmental values of the city’s residential communities and commercial/industrial districts by restricting and regulating signs in the city. This title provides regulations regarding the size, height, design, quality of materials, construction, location, elimination and maintenance of permitted signs and sign structures within the city. (Ord. 07-25 § 1; Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-901).

18.04.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

1. “A-board” means a portable sign capable of standing without support or attachment.

2. “Billboard or nonaccessory sign” means a sign which advertises or provides information about a business organization or event, goods, products, services or uses, not directly concerning the use on the property upon which the sign is located, and does not include community directional signs or open house signs.

3. “Community directional sign” means a nonaccessory sign indicating the location of a community service organization, public facility, church, hospital, school or charitable institution.

4. “Construction sign” means a sign identifying an architect, engineer or contractor directly connected with a construction project and which is placed upon the premises where construction, repair or renovation is in progress.

5. “Direction sign” means a sign which directs the eye to places or services, but does not advertise or identify a product or firm.

6. “Directory sign” means a sign displaying the name of each occupant of a building who is engaged in a business, profession or occupation.

7. “Freestanding sign” means a sign which is self-supporting in a fixed location and not attached to a building or structure, and which has no exposed, connecting or supporting wires.

8. “Flashing sign” means an illuminated sign in which the artificial or reflected light is not intended to be maintained at a stationary or constant intensity.

9. “Frontage of property” means the longest single, lineal dimension of a single taxable unit of property abutting on a public or private street.

10. “Frontage of premises” means the longest horizontal straight line dimension of a frontal elevation of the premises which faces either a public street or other public open place. If a premises is so located that more than one side comes within this definition of frontage, each frontage shall be considered separately and no part of a frontage may be used to authorize sign display area on another frontage.

11. “Identification sign” or “accessory sign” means a sign which identifies the business or organization located on the premises, or advertises or informs about business, products or services sold or rendered on the premises.

12. “Mobile sign” means a sign mounted on any type of device which is movable or capable of being moved by a vehicle, but does not include lettering or illustration which is attached to or painted on, and does not extend more than one-fourth inch from the surface of such vehicle.

13. “Moving sign” means a sign which has an actual or apparent moving, revolving or rotating part actuated by electrical, mechanical or other device or by wind current. A moving sign includes, but is not limited to, a banner, pennant, flag (other than a reasonable number of United States or California flags), a balloon, a sign constructed of or faced with scotch light or similar material, a sign which changes or appears to change color, and a sign in which the intensity of light changes or appears to change. The term “moving sign” does not include a time or temperature recording device, nor a motor vehicle.

14. “Nonaccessory sign or billboard” means a sign which advertises or provides information about a business organization or event, goods, products, services or uses, not directly concerning the use on the property upon which the sign is located, and does not include community directional signs or open house signs.

15. “Political sign” means a temporary sign designed for the purpose of soliciting or advertising support of, or opposition to, a political party or candidate, or proposition at a public election.

16. “Portable sign” means a sign which is not attached to the ground or a structure.

17. “Premises” means the building or portion of a building for which a permit for a sign is being sought.

18. “Projecting sign” means a sign other than a wall sign which is suspended from or supported by a building or wall which projects out from the building or wall.

19. “Public open space” is not restricted to areas owned by or dedicated to the public but includes an unenclosed area, square or courtyard open to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or both.

20. “Reader board” means a permanent structure upon which is displayed advertising material or copy of a temporary or changeable nature.

21. “Shopping center” means an integrated shopping complex comprised of five or more retail stores occupying a developed area of at least two acres.

22. “Shopping center sign” means a freestanding sign which denotes or identifies a shopping center.

23. “Sign” means any structure, natural object or surface, or a device or arrangement attached to or painted or represented upon a structure or natural surface, which attracts or is intended to attract attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business, or which displays or includes a letter, word, bill, poster, picture, display board, lithograph, map, balloon, balance, “A” frame, “sandwich” board, barber pole, street clock, model, figure, symbol, banner, flag (other than United States or California flags), fluttering object, pennant, insignia, device, or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction, advertisement, declaration or illumination. Functional architectural features of buildings are not normally signs.

24. “Street setback line” means an official line for planned future street widening adopted by the city council pursuant to applicable state law.

25. “Subdivision” means the area covered by the tentative or final subdivision map filed by a subdivider.

26. “Taxable unit of property” means a parcel of property shown upon the county assessment roll.

27. “Under-marquee sign” means a sign suspended under a marquee, porch, canopy, walkway covering or similar covering structure.

28. “Use” means a purpose or activity for which the land or building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained to function as a separate unit.

29. “Wall sign” means a sign attached parallel to or flat against the exterior wall which faces the frontage of a premises. It includes a sign on a canopy other than an instructional sign.

30. “Window sign” means a sign maintained in or painted upon a window, which is intended to be viewed from outside the window. It does not include merchandise offered for sale on such premises. (Ord. 07-25 § 2; Ord. 77-12 N.S. Appendix I, 1977).

18.04.030 Applicability.
The sign ordinance applies to each local agency performing governmental or proprietary functions, as well as all commercial and private properties within the city. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-902).

18.04.040 Compliance.
Each sign in the city shall comply with the standards and limitations prescribed in Chapter 18.16 BMC and BMC 18.08.010 through 18.08.040, 18.08.070, 18.08.080, 18.12.020, 18.12.030, 18.12.050 through 18.12.080, 18.24.010 and 18.24.020. No existing sign may be replaced or a new sign put in place unless said standards and limitations are met. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-904).

18.04.050 Findings.
In adopting this title, the city council finds that excessive and inappropriate signage has an adverse impact on the overall visual appearance and character of the city and its highways, affects the appearance and quality of life of the community, and that it can increase the safety risks to traffic and pedestrians. By adopting this title, the city council intends to comply with the goals and policies of the General Plan to preserve the city’s vistas and scenic resources along I-780 and I-680 and to protect the city’s ability to apply for state scenic highway designation for the portions of Interstate Highways I-780 and I-680 that run through the city. This title is intended to safeguard and preserve the health, property, and public welfare of residents and businesses by prohibiting, regulating, and controlling the type, design, location and maintenance of signs. (Ord. 07-25 § 3).

Chapter 18.08
PERMITS
Sections:

18.08.010    Required.

18.08.020    Application.

18.08.030    Fees.

18.08.040    Filing – Revision.

18.08.050    Building permit – Required.

18.08.060    Building permit – Approval.

18.08.070    Appeals.

18.08.080    Variance.

18.08.010 Required.
A person may not erect or maintain a sign without a permit, except that a permit is not required for:

A. Temporary signs;

B. Exempt signs;

C. For sale, for lease or contractor identification signs;

D. Open house signs;

E. Political signs; and

F. Directional signs in manufacturing zones. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-928).

18.08.020 Application.
A. The application for a sign permit shall be on a form prepared by the planning department and, among other matters it may reasonably prescribe, shall contain or include a map or plat and drawings showing the location, size, colors, shape, type of illumination, copy, design and manner of installation of the proposed sign and the frontage of the premises, including exempt signs, giving the size and location of each.

B. The application shall specify whether a variance is requested, and if so, shall specify the manner in which the proposed sign does not comply with this chapter and the factual basis for the findings required by BMC 18.08.080.

C. A single application may cover more than one sign, but shall be limited to a single premises. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-930).

18.08.030 Fees.
A. The fee for a sign permit with or without a variance shall be established by city council resolution.

B. The fee shall be paid at the time of filing the application and is not refundable.

C. No fee is required where the application is for:

1. Service club sign, BMC 18.16.090;

2. Neighborhood association sign, BMC 18.16.060;

3. Community directional sign, BMC 18.16.030;

4. A sign in lawful use on the day the ordinance codified in this title takes effect. (Ord. 17-10 § 24; Ord. 11-06 § 1; Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-929).

18.08.040 Filing – Revision.
A. The sign application shall be filed with the planning department. The city planner, who shall be guided by the design criteria in BMC 18.12.010, may require that changes be made in the design of the sign as necessary to carry out the purposes of this title.

B. In the case where no variance is requested in the application and the city planner finds that a variance would be required for approval of the permit, or where the commission finds that the sign as proposed should be modified, the planning commission shall deny the application and advise the applicant of the reasons for denial. In this case the applicant may submit a revised application without payment of an additional fee, unless a variance fee is payable, within 90 days following denial. All actions of the city planner may be appealed to the planning commission by an aggrieved applicant within 10 days of the action. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-931).

18.08.050 Building permit – Required.
This title does not repeal or supersede any provision of law requiring a building permit for the erection of a sign. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-941).

18.08.060 Building permit – Approval.
No building permit may be issued for a sign until the city planner or the planning commission approves the application, or until its denial of an application has been reversed upon appeal. Each sign shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the terms and conditions of the approval. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-934).

18.08.070 Appeals.
A. A person aggrieved by the action of the city planner may appeal the action to the planning commission for review in accordance with Chapter 1.44 BMC.

B. There is no fee for this appeal.

C. A person appealing the decision of the city planner shall file a written notice of appeal with the secretary to the planning commission 10 days from the date of the decision being appealed.

D. The procedure for taking an appeal, giving notice, holding the hearing, and making the decision which is prescribed in the case of an appeal for a land use matter shall govern the appeal from a decision of the city planner.

E. The planning commission may reverse, modify, or affirm the action of the planner, on appeal. (Ord. 07-71 § 1; Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-933).

18.08.080 Variance.
When practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship or a result which is inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this title occurs from the strict application of this chapter, the planning commission may grant a variance from the strict application of this chapter in the manner prescribed by BMC Title 17. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-932).

Chapter 18.12
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
Sections:

18.12.010    Design criteria.

18.12.020    Computation of sign area.

18.12.030    Maximum permissible area for wall signs.

18.12.040    Maintenance.

18.12.050    Projection limits.

18.12.060    Height limitation.

18.12.070    Restriction near traffic signal or intersection.

18.12.080    Clearance from public utility facilities.

18.12.090    Obsolete signs.

18.12.010 Design criteria.
In its evaluation of quality of design, the city planner and the planning commission shall apply the following criteria among others:

A. To the extent feasible, signs shall be graphic and nonverbal, with the design emphasis on simplicity, style trademarks, business identification and symbols rather than on extensive wording and advertising messages.

B. Sign proliferation creates a busy, unpleasant atmosphere and shall be avoided. Good design calls for thoughtful coordination of all signs, in a lesser rather than greater number of locations on the premises.

C. Signs shall relate to the architectural design of the building. Signs which cover windows, or which spill over natural boundaries or architectural features and obliterate parts of upper floors of buildings are a menace to visual order and shall not be permitted.

D. The typical plastic-faced sign with white, internally illuminated background shall be discouraged; dark backgrounds with the letters or design lighter to reduce the glare and the resulting bland night-lighting effect are preferred. Sign illumination shall be designed so as to avoid glare and light intrusion onto other signs or premises.

E. Neon shall be carefully and sparingly used in signs to avoid blatancy and garishness. Neon is usually better used in symbols or design than for lettering.

F. Good signs can become bad signs by installation on thoughtlessly contrived or overpowering structures. Careful consideration shall be given to minimize and simplify every sign’s supporting structure.

G. The city planner may make design and structure exemptions if the proposed sign attempts to duplicate signs used in certain historical periods: for example, the exposed light bulbs used in the late Victorian period, and the wall-painted sign incorporated into the design facade of the art deco. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. Appendix III, 1977).

18.12.020 Computation of sign area.
A. The sign area is computed by including the maximum single display surface which is visible from a single ground position. The structure supporting a sign is not included in determining the sign area unless the structure is designed in a way as to form part of the display or is an integral background for the display.

B. The area of a sign is determined by computing the area of an encompassing circle or rectangle, whichever is smaller.

C. Where a commercial building is on a corner, the side of the building will be treated as the front in calculating the area allowed for the side sign.

D. The following illustration sets forth the manner for computing facing area:

(Ord. 77-12 § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-913).

18.12.030 Maximum permissible area for wall signs.
A. The maximum aggregate area of all wall signs permitted for a frontage of a premises is based upon the frontage of the premises and number of stories of the premises to which the sign will be affixed. This maximum area is set forth in Table I, as follows:

Table IMaximum Sign Area in Square Feet 

Frontage of Building
in Lineal Feet

1-Story or Less Than 15'

2-Story or Less Than 25'

3-Story or Less Than 40'

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

52

54

56

58

60

62

64

66

68

70

72

74

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

23

29

34

39

44

49

53

57

61

65

68

71

75

78

81

83

86

89

91

94

96

98

100

103

105

109

110

112

114

116

118

119

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

26

34

42

49

55

61

66

71

76

81

85

89

92

96

99

103

106

109

111

114

117

119

122

124

126

128

130

132

134

136

138

140

142

143

145

147

20

20

20

20

20

29

39

49

57

65

71

78

83

89

94

98

103

107

110

114

118

121

124

127

130

132

135

138

140

142

145

147

149

151

153

155

157

158

160

162

163

165

167

90

92

94

96

98

100

105

110

115

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

155

160

165

170

175

180

185

190

195

200

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

240

245

250

255

260

265

270

275

280

285

290

295

121

122

124

125

127

130

134

137

140

143

146

148

151

153

156

160

162

164

166

168

170

172

173

175

177

178

180

181

183

184

186

187

188

190

191

192

191

192

193

194

196

197

198

199

200

148

150

151

153

154

156

159

162

165

168

171

173

176

178

181

183

185

187

189

191

193

194

196

198

200

168

169

171

172

174

175

178

181

184

187

190

192

194

197

200

B. In applying Table I to a building if the frontage of the building is not listed therein, the next larger frontage figure determines the maximum wall sign area.

C. Regardless of the frontage or height of the building, the total permissible aggregate area of all wall signs for a frontage of a building is 200 square feet.

D. The maximum aggregate permissible wall sign area for buildings set forth in this section shall be reduced by the sign area of each freestanding sign and shingle sign on the property, but shall not be reduced by the amount of area used for window signs. However, if the building is set back at least 100 feet from the street line on an official street setback line, if one exists, then the permissible wall sign area is not reduced by the sign area of the freestanding sign. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-905).

18.12.040 Maintenance.
Each sign shall be maintained in a secure, safe and good condition. If the city building inspector finds that a sign is not secure, safe or in a good state of repair, he shall give written notice in a reasonable manner of this fact to the person responsible for the maintenance of the sign. If the defect in the sign is not corrected within the time permitted by the city, the city planner and/or the planning commission may revoke the permit to maintain the sign and abate it in the manner provided in BMC 18.28.010. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-936).

18.12.050 Projection limits.
No part of a sign attached to or mounted on a building may project beyond 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached, except as permitted with shingle signs. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-906).

18.12.060 Height limitation.
No part of a sign affixed to a building may extend above the roof line or ridge line of the building to which it is attached. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-907).

18.12.070 Restriction near traffic signal or intersection.
No sign may be located in a manner which may obstruct or interfere with the view of a traffic signal. No sign may be located within 100 feet of the intersection of public streets, if it obstructs the vision of a motorist within 100 feet of the intersection. No sign may be located so as to create a hazardous condition to a person using the public right-of-way. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-914).

18.12.080 Clearance from public utility facilities.
The owner of any sign shall maintain legal clearance from communications and electric facilities. A sign may not be constructed, erected, installed, maintained or repaired in any manner that conflicts with a rule, regulation, or order of the California Public Utilities Commission pertaining to the construction, operation and maintenance of public utilities facilities. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-918).

18.12.090 Obsolete signs.
An accessory sign which ceases to advertise a bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises shall be removed within 90 days after written notification from the building inspector. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-940).

Chapter 18.16
SPECIFIC SIGN REGULATIONS
Sections:

18.16.010    A-board signs.

18.16.020    Apartment houses and roominghouses.

18.16.030    Community directional signs.

18.16.040    For sale, lease and contractor identification signs.

18.16.050    Freestanding signs.

18.16.060    Neighborhood association signs.

18.16.070    Open house signs.

18.16.080    Price signs for automobile service stations.

18.16.090    Service club signs.

18.16.100    Shingle signs.

18.16.110    Signs for subdivisions and apartment buildings.

18.16.120    Temporary signs.

18.16.130    Under-marquee signs.

18.16.010 A-board signs.
The A-board sign shall be no taller than 45 inches and no wider than 30 inches. The frame shall be of dark wood. Each business at street level will be allowed only one A-board sign. The area of the sign shall not be included within the allowable sign area permitted the business on-site. The sign will only be displayed in front of the business it is advertising. After January 1, 1980, the existing A-board signs must be discontinued in use, and no new A-board signs will be permitted to be erected thereafter. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-912).

18.16.020 Apartment houses and roominghouses.
A. The allowable display area for a sign for the identification of an apartment house is computed on the basis of one-half square foot for each dwelling unit.

B. The allowable display area for a sign for the identification of a roominghouse is computed on the basis of one-half square foot for each rentable room.

C. In each case, the maximum display area is 32 square feet. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-923).

18.16.030 Community directional signs.
A community directional sign is subject to the following limitations:

A. A community facility may be approved by the city planner;

B. Each sign may not exceed three square feet in area. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-926).

18.16.040 For sale, lease and contractor identification signs.
A. A person may, without application for a sign permit, erect one sign on a taxable unit of property for the purpose of advertising construction work on the premises, or of offering the property for sale or lease. The display area of this sign may not exceed the following limitations:

1. In a land use district designated single-family, four square feet;

2. In any other land use district, 12 square feet per acre of land, not to exceed 40 square feet.

B. The sign shall be removed within 10 days after the sale, lease, or the completion of construction. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-921).

18.16.050 Freestanding signs.
A. A freestanding sign must meet the design guidelines prescribed in BMC 18.12.010. In addition, the city planner and/or the planning commission may impose reasonable conditions regulating such things as the facing area, duration of the sign, color, structure, material, location and landscaping.

B. A freestanding sign is permitted upon a premises only when the city planner finds that:

1. A freestanding sign is the most feasible means by which the business conducted on the premises can have the same degree of identification to the traveling and shopping public as that available to businesses on neighboring premises without freestanding signs; and

2. The freestanding sign will not give the business on the premises a greater identification to the public than that available to businesses on neighboring premises without freestanding signs, and will not result in an unfair advantage over competitors; and

3. A freestanding sign, if granted, would not adversely affect the preservation of property values in the vicinity;

4. No part of a freestanding sign may extend over 20 feet above the normal contour of the land or surrounding terrain of the business it serves. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code §§ 8-908, 8-909).

18.16.060 Neighborhood association signs.
A. A sign for neighborhood identification is subject to approval by the city planner as to location, size, height, lighting and design. The sign shall be for the sole purpose of identifying the area and may not advertise a dwelling for sale or lease.

B. The city planner shall see that the neighborhood identification signs harmonize with their surroundings. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-925).

18.16.070 Open house signs.
In addition to the signs authorized by BMC 18.16.040, a person may, without application for a sign permit, erect a nonaccessory or accessory sign, or both, which advertises real estate for sale and open for inspection. The sign may not exceed four square feet in area. Not more than three open house signs may be used in connection with one taxable unit of property unless approved by the planning commission. The sign may state the name of the selling agent or broker and that the property is open for inspection. The open house sign is permitted only during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-922).

18.16.080 Price signs for automobile service stations.
On premises where gasoline is dispensed to motor vehicles, a display of a price sign which may be read from a public street is encouraged. In addition to the authorizations and limitations contained elsewhere in this chapter, premises on which gasoline is sold from pumps may have a single sign displaying the prices of such gasoline. The price sign shall not be attached to or mounted on the principal building on the premises, or an under-marquee sign suspended from a canopy. No part of an under-marquee sign, not attached, used as a price sign shall be closer than 20 feet to any street line or official street setback line, if one exists. The price sign shall not exceed eight square feet in size and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-910).

18.16.090 Service club signs.
A sign for identification of a service club is subject to approval by the city planner as to location, size, height, width, lighting and general design. This section does not apply to a membership sign displayed by members of a service club. (Ord. 77-21 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-924).

18.16.100 Shingle signs.
A. Policy. In general, all forms of projecting signs are discouraged and most are prohibited. However, there is a narrow class of projecting graphic signs, called the shingle sign, which is deemed to be a desirable balance of sign function and high aesthetic standards.

B. Criteria. The use of painted wood or material closely simulating painted wood is preferred for shingle signs. Graphic representation in gold or silver shall be stressed. Letters may be used only to announce the name of the business conducted and the principal classification and brand of goods sold or service offered on the premises.

C. Limitations. A shingle sign is subject to the following limitations:

1. It may not be attached to a structure other than a building;

2. It may not project more than 30 inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached;

3. It may not contain more than a total of five square feet of display area, excluding the supporting structure;

4. It may be only as high as the eave line of the building surface to which it is attached or 11 feet above grade, whichever is lower;

5. It may not be lower than seven and one-half feet;

6. It may not be internally illuminated;

7. It may not be more than four inches or less than one-half inch thick, except as reasonably required in connection with some graphic element of the sign;

8. The total wall sign display area otherwise permitted shall be reduced by the display area, excluding the supporting structure, of the shingle sign approved;

9. Only one shingle sign may be approved for installation on a single frontage of a premises;

10. No shingle sign may be approved for a premises for which a freestanding sign permit is outstanding.

D. Required Findings. An application for a shingle sign may not be approved except upon the following written findings;

1. The sign is reasonably required for and assists in the identification of the premises by persons in motor vehicles or by pedestrians approaching along public streets or open spaces; and

2. The sign will have no garish or obtrusive qualities, and embodies strong elements of quality graphic design; and

3. Neither the supporting structure nor the proposed external lighting will materially detract from the design qualities of the sign or building; and

4. The sign will comply with the specific criteria of subsection (B) of this section and the limitations of subsection (C) of this section. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-911).

18.16.110 Signs for subdivisions and apartment buildings.
A. A person offering apartments for lease or real estate sale in a recorded subdivision may erect and maintain not more than two temporary signs identifying the subdivision or apartment building.

B. The total maximum display area for each sign is 32 square feet. The sign may not be located within 100 feet of an occupied residence, unless the planning commission finds that the maintenance of such distance is not feasible. The sign may not be illuminated.

C. In those cases where, due to location or size, there is a need of directional signs within the city leading to the subject site, the number, subject matter, design and size of the signs may be approved by the city planner.

D. In addition to all other terms and conditions which the city planner or the planning commission may impose, a person proposing to erect a subdivision sign shall enter into an agreement with the city providing for the following:

1. A deposit, to be determined by the city manager, for each sign guaranteeing maintenance and removal of the sign upon expiration of the permit;

2. Removal of the sign within one year from the date erected, except that the permit may be renewed for additional periods not exceeding one year in the discretion of the planning commission;

3. Permission to the city to remove and dispose of the sign should the sign not be removed by the subdivider; and a covenant to reimburse the city its cost of such removal and disposal if such costs exceed the amount of deposit.

E. A permanent decorative sign, giving the name of an apartment, development, subdivision or any other development, may receive approval at the same time as the planning commission grants architectural, site plan and landscaping approval of the development. If the development does not fall under the review, the community development director may grant the approval. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-920).

18.16.120 Temporary signs.
A. In addition to other signs permitted by this chapter, a business which sells goods or services to consumers may install and maintain temporary signs on a window of the premises for the purpose of advertising a bona fide special sale or promotion on the premises, subject to the following conditions:

1. No more than 50 percent of the total window space on a wall may be covered by temporary window signs; and

2. Each temporary window sign shall be removed when the sale or promotion advertised ends, or within 30 days following its installation, whichever is sooner; and

3. No sign permit is required in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section.

B. Notwithstanding BMC 18.24.020, temporary signs including those involving the use of banners, flyers, pennants, pinwheels, or utilizing two or more light bulbs in a wire string are permitted to advertise or promote a special or seasonal event. However, each such temporary sign shall be removed when the special event ends or within 45 days following installation, whichever is sooner. A sign permit is not required for such temporary signs. Temporary signs allowed in this section may only be used twice a year by any individual business. One period of use may be 30 days and the other period of use may be 45 days, but in no case shall the temporary signs be used more than 75 days in any one year. Seasonal decoration of windows is exempted. (Ord. 77-12 § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-916).

18.16.130 Under-marquee signs.
Only one under-marquee sign which is no more than three square feet in area is permitted per customer entrance for a retail store. The sign is not included in the computation of the maximum permissible display surface for the premises. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-917).

Chapter 18.20
NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Sections:

18.20.010    Existing signs.

18.20.020    Removal – Time extension – Application.

18.20.030    Time extension – Application – Review.

18.20.040    Time extension – Granting.

18.20.050    Time extension – Ineligibility.

18.20.010 Existing signs.
The owner of a sign that is in place at a permanent location on the enactment date of the ordinance codified in this title, which does not comply with this title, is however required to comply with the following procedure. Not later than 24 months following the enactment of the ordinance codified in this title, the owner of a “nonconforming sign,” which is in place at a permanent location on the enactment date, shall take one of the following actions:

A. Remove the sign;

B. Apply for an extension of time as provided in BMC 18.20.020;

C. Apply for a permanent sign permit, subject to modifications of the sign to achieve conformity with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-938).

18.20.020 Removal – Time extension – Application.
An application for an extension of the 12-month period allowed for the removal of nonconforming signs shall be filed with the planning department on a form prescribed by it. The application shall contain the name and address of the sign owner and the landowner, and identification of the property, the type of sign, the date erected, the original cost of the sign including its installation, a color photograph of the sign, a detailed statement of reasons for the extension, and the length of time for which the extension is requested. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-939(a)).

18.20.030 Time extension – Application – Review.
The application shall be referred to the planning commission for review. The planning commission shall review the application and shall hear arguments for and against the grant of an extension. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-939(b)).

18.20.040 Time extension – Granting.
The planning commission may grant an extension of time up to 72 months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, provided the sign complied with this title on the date it was installed. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-939(c)).

18.20.050 Time extension – Ineligibility.
A sign which was erected in violation of applicable sign regulations is not eligible for an extension under this chapter. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-939(d)).

Chapter 18.24
PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
Sections:

18.24.010    Prohibited signs – Generally.

18.24.020    Exempt signs – Generally.

18.24.030    Exempt signs – In commercial or industrial districts.

18.24.040    Billboards/nonaccessory signs.

18.24.010 Prohibited signs – Generally.
Unless specifically authorized under other sections of this title, the following types of signs shall not be erected or maintained: a flashing sign; a moving sign; a sign which has banners, flyers, pennants, pinwheels, or utilizes two or more light bulbs in a wire string; a portable sign; a projecting sign; a sign painted directly on the wall of a building or fence; a dilapidated or abandoned sign or a sign in disrepair or dangerous condition; a sign which is affixed to a fence, utility pole or utility structure, or a tree, shrub, rock or other natural object; a mobile sign or a sign attached to a motor vehicle which is parked with the intent to advertise to the public passing by; a sign containing obscene or profane matter; a sign illuminated by exposed light globes, i.e., clear light bulbs not turned away or properly shrouded from the viewer; and a sign created by the arrangement of vegetation, rocks, or other objects, such as hillside, visible to pedestrians and motorists, without application to and approval by the planning commission. (Ord. 07-25 § 4; Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-915).

18.24.020 Exempt signs – Generally.
Except as to the location of signs with reference to street intersections, the following signs are exempt from this chapter:

A. Memorial tablet having sign area of four square feet or less; and

B. Sign identifying a mailbox which does not exceed 60 square inches in sign area; and

C. Sign identifying a residence on nearby private roads not exceeding 120 square inches for each residence; and

D. Sign having a display area not exceeding two square feet and intended solely for the information, safety, direction or convenience of the public, rather than the advertisement of goods and services, including a sign which indicates days, hours, emergency telephone number, street address, and/or credit card honored; membership in civic, business or professional organizations; or which direct customers where to park, which identify restrooms, or which locate a public telephone or freight entrance. The aggregate display area of all such signs related to a single occupancy which can conveniently be seen from outside the premises may not exceed 10 square feet, unless the planner finds that a greater area is required for the safety or convenience of the public; and

E. Sign placed by a public utility showing the location of underground facilities; and

F. Sign advertising a community event of general public interest which does not exceed in the aggregate for all events five square feet of sign area per premises; and

G. Theatre marquee sign, which may utilize changeable lettering, which does not exceed in height the roof line or parapet of the building, or 18 feet, whichever is higher; and

H. Sign which is an integral and appropriate part of a window merchandising display; provided, that the sign:

1. Advertises or relates to goods or services offered on the premises,

2. Is not painted on or affixed to an outside window,

3. Does not contain the name of the business on the premises;

I. Temporary sign required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule or regulation, and for the safety of persons, preservation of property, or the convenience of the public and authorized in accordance with the regulations of the planning commission. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-919).

18.24.030 Exempt signs – In commercial or industrial districts.
A. Identification signs within the commercial or industrial districts shall be submitted to the community development director for approval. Directional signs are exempt in this zone. Billboard or nonaccessory signs are prohibited.

B. Any signs within the commercial or industrial zones shall be designed so that the appearance of such signs shall be in keeping with the general surrounding architecture. Special attention shall be directed to those signs visible from freeway entrances to the city. Signs that negatively impact the landscaping, open space requirements, vistas, scenic corridors or general appearance of said freeway structures may be denied. (Ord. 07-25 § 5; Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-903).

18.24.040 Billboards/nonaccessory signs.
The city completely prohibits the construction, erection or use of any billboards or nonaccessory signs other than those which legally exist in the city, or for which a valid permit has been issued and has not expired, as of the date on which this provision is first adopted. No permit shall be issued for any billboard which violates this policy, and the city will take immediate abatement action against any billboard or nonaccessory sign constructed or maintained in violation of this policy. In adopting this provision, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have adopted this billboard/nonaccessory sign policy even if it were the only provision in this chapter. The city council intends for this billboard policy to be severable and separately enforceable even if other provision(s) of this chapter or title may be declared, by a court of competent jurisdiction, to be unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable. This provision does not prohibit agreements to relocate, remodel or enhance presently existing, legal billboards or nonaccessory signs. (Ord. 07-25 § 6).

Chapter 18.28
ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL
Sections:

18.28.010    Abatement.

18.28.020    Removal generally.

18.28.030    Violation – Notice.

18.28.040    Notice – Hearing.

18.28.050    Removal by city.

18.28.060    Removal cost.

18.28.010 Abatement.
A sign erected or maintained in violation of this title is a public nuisance. The city may take proceedings for the abatement of the nuisance and make the cost of the abatement a special assessment against the premises in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Sections 38773, 38773.5, and those specified in Chapter 8.04 BMC. In addition to all other remedies, the city has a lien upon the sign which it removes and may keep possession of the sign until the owner pays the cost of removal. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-935).

18.28.020 Removal generally.
A. Unsafe Signs. A sign which imperils the safety of a person or property may be summarily removed.

B. Removal After Notice and Hearing. A sign which is not removed within the time prescribed in this title, or a sign which is erected in violation of this title is subject to removal in the manner set forth in BMC 18.28.030 through 18.28.060. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-937(a, b)).

18.28.030 Violation – Notice.
The building inspector shall give written notice to the owner of the premises as shown in the last equalized assessment roll or as known to him, and to each person other than the owner who is in possession or control of the premises. The notice of violation shall be by certified mail addressed to the premises where the violation exists. The notice shall contain the following:

A. A general description of the sign which is allegedly in violation;

B. A copy of the section of this title which is being violated;

C. An estimate of cost of the sign together with any substantiating information such as a cost estimate in support of the figure stated;

D. A notice of time and place at which time the owner or the person responsible may appeal and present evidence as to the absence of a violation or the value of the sign or both. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-937(b)(1)).

18.28.040 Notice – Hearing.
The building inspector or his designated representative shall hold a hearing at the time and place set forth in this notice. The purpose of the hearing is to establish whether or not a violation of this title has occurred and is continuing to occur and to fix the value of the sign. At the hearing, either the owner or the occupant of the premises, or both, may appear and be heard upon these questions. A person has the right to appear with an attorney. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-937(b)(2)).

18.28.050 Removal by city.
If at the conclusion of the hearing the city building inspector or his designated representative finds that a violation of this title is continuing to exist and, that upon previous notice to comply, the owner or occupant of the premises failed to correct the violation and that the fair market value of the sign does not exceed $500.00, then the building inspector may order the sign to be summarily removed. The building inspector shall give the owner and occupant of the premises notice of the time and place of his intention to remove the sign. The owner or occupant may remove the sign at any time prior thereto. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-937(b)(3)).

18.28.060 Removal cost.
Each person who erects a sign which is subject to removal under this chapter is jointly and severally liable for the cost of removal. The city has a lien upon the sign for the cost of removal and may keep possession of the sign until the owner redeems it by paying to the city the cost of removal. The city may dispose of the sign 60 days after removal by giving the owner notice that the owner may redeem the sign by paying the cost of removal or if he fails to do so, the city will dispose of the sign as it sees fit without further liability to the owner for this action. (Ord. 77-12 N.S. § 1, 1977; prior code § 8-937(c)).

Chapter 18.32
FREEWAY ADVERTISING DISPLAYS
(Repealed by Ord. 07-25)

Chapter 18.36
OVERHANGING SIGNS
Sections:

18.36.010  Generally.

18.36.020  Repealed.

18.36.010 Generally.
It is unlawful for any firm, corporation, or person to extend any signs of any nature or kind out over any sidewalk in the city unless the same shall be at least eight feet above the walk. The sign or signs must be wholly supported from the building, and no post or support will be permitted from the street or sidewalk. (Ord. 204 M.C. § 1, 1912).

18.36.020 Violation – Penalty.
Repealed by Ord. 03-9. (Ord. 204 M.C. § 2, 1912).