10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 1/797
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Beverly Hills, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 19-O-2787, effective October 18, 2019.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers began supplementation of this Code in 2004. Prior to 2004, supplementation of the Code was done by the City.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1
TITLE, CONSTRUCTION, AND EFFECT OF CODE
1-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This code shall be known as the BEVERLY HILLS MUNICIPAL CODE. (1962 Code § 1-1.01)
1-1-2: AUTHORITY FOR CODE:
This code is a compilation and codification of the criminal and regulatory ordinances of the city of Beverly Hills which ordinances have been enacted and
published in accordance with the provisions of the general law of the state of California, and which have not been repealed, and is done by virtue of the
authority granted in section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the state of California. (1962 Code § 1-1.02)
1-1-3: EXISTING LAWS CONTINUED:
The provisions of this code insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions and ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be
construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (1962 Code § 1-1.03)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION:
The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice. Where several code
provisions regulate the same subject matter, the code shall be construed and compliance required with the most restrictive of the various provisions. (1962
Code § 1-1.04)
1-1-5: EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS:
The adoption of this code shall not in any manner:
A. Affect prosecutions for violations of ordinances which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code;
B. Be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty due and unpaid under any ordinance;
C. Be construed as affecting any of the provisions of any ordinance relating to the collection of any license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to
any violation thereof;
D. Affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance; and
E. Be construed as impairing existing rights and obligations, which shall continue and remain in full force and effect. (1962 Code § 1-1.05)
1-1-6: REFERENCE TO ORDINANCES OR THE 1962 CODE SECTIONS:
References appearing in parentheses at the end of each section of this code refer to the section of the municipal code of the city of Beverly Hills, 1962
edition, and will refer to subsequent amendments to this code which is the source of each such section. (1962 Code § 1-1.06)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 2/797
1-1-7: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER AND SECTION NUMBERS:
In reading a section number from left to right, the first set of digits shall designate the title number of this code. The second set of digits, those between the
dashes, shall indicate the chapter number and the final, rightmost digits shall indicate the section number. (1962 Code § 1-1.07)
1-1-8: EFFECT OF HEADINGS:
Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning
or intent of the provisions of any chapter, article, or section of this code. (1962 Code § 1-1.08)
1-1-9: GRAMMATICAL INTERPRETATION:
A. Any gender includes the other genders.
B. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa unless manifestly inapplicable.
D. Words and phrases used in this code not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (1962
Code § 1-1.09)
1-1-10: REFERENCES TO ACTIONS OR OMISSIONS:
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within territorial limits of the city of Beverly Hills and to that territory outside the city over
which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any law by reason of ownership or control of property. (1962 Code § 1-1.10)
1-1-11: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this code as herein enacted or hereafter amended, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this code, or any section or portion of section hereof, which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this code are, and are intended to be, severable. (1962 Code § 1-1.11)
1-1-12: EXERCISE OF POWER OR DUTY BY DEPUTIES:
Whenever a power is granted or a duty is imposed upon an appointing authority by the provisions of this code, the power may be exercised or the duty
performed by a deputy of the appointing power or by a person authorized unless it is expressly otherwise provided. (1962 Code § 1-1.12)
1-1-13: APPLICATION OF MUNICIPAL CODE TO CITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no provision of this code shall apply to, direct, or restrict the city unless the provision specifically indicates
that it is intended to apply to, direct, or restrict the city. (Ord. 01-O-2365, eff. 3-8-2001)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
1-2-1: APPLICATION OF DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Code, the words and phrases set forth in this chapter shall be construed as defined herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases.
CALENDAR YEAR: From January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
CITY: The City of Beverly Hills, a municipal corporation of the State of California, or, when referring to territory or territorial limits, it shall mean the area
within the territorial City limits of the City of Beverly Hills and such territory outside the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
law.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Beverly Hills.
COUNCIL MEMBER: A member of the City Council.
COUNTY: The County of Los Angeles.
FISCAL YEAR: From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 3/797
MAY: Permissive.
MONTH: A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
OATH: Affirmation.
OFFICE: The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the City unless
otherwise specified.
OFFICIAL DATUM PLANE: The bench mark located at the south side of the entrance door of the City Hall, which bench mark has an elevation 267.906
feet above the United States Geological Survey datum plane, and upon which all maps and references in the official records of the City are based and
referenced.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization,
cooperative, and collective, and any manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.
PROPERTY: Both real and personal property.
QUARTERLY: When used to designate a period of time, means the first three (3) calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three (3)
calendar months.
REAL PROPERTY: Land and improvement therein.
SHALL: Mandatory.
STATE: The State of California.
STREET: Except as otherwise designated in this Code, shall include all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, and
other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use or such other public property so designated in any law
of the State.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others. (1962 Code §§ 1-2.01, 1-2.10 - 1-2.87; amd. Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017)
Chapter 3
CODE VIOLATIONS
Article 1. Offense And Punishment
1-3-101: MISDEMEANORS, INFRACTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES:
A. No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provisionor requirement of this code. Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision
or requirement of this code, or a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless: 1) such a violation or
failure is designated as an infraction or is subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such person is guilty of an infraction; or 2) such a
violation or failure is prosecuted as a civil administrative action pursuant to article 3 of this chapter. Any person who fails to pay an administrative fine or
to comply with an administrative order is guilty of a misdemeanor as provided for in article 3 of this chapter.
B. Any violation of any provision of this code may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, as an infraction, or as a civil administrative action in the discretion of
the city attorney or city prosecutor. (1962 Code § 1-4.01; amd. Ord. 00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
1-3-102: CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or
requirement of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by any person and shall be punished accordingly. (1962 Code § 1-4.02)
1-3-103: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the city, and each day such condition continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. (1962
Code § 1-4.03)
1-3-104: AIDING AND ABETTING:
Whenever any act or omission is prohibited by any provision of this code, such prohibition shall be deemed also to prohibit the causing, permitting, aiding,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 4/797
abetting, suffering, or concealing of such act or omission, and any person who shall cause, permit, aid, abet, suffer or conceal such act or omission shall
be guilty of a violation of this code and shall be punishable in accordance with the punishment prescribed for such act or omission. (1962 Code § 1-4.04)
1-3-105: RESPONSIBILITY:
The occupant of any premises upon which a violation of any provision of this code is apparent, the owner of any object or material placed or remaining
anywhere in violation of any provision of this code, or the occupant of any premises served by any excavation or structure made or erected in violation of
any provision of this code shall be deemed prima facie responsiblefor the violation and subject to the penalties provided therefor. (1962 Code § 1-4.05)
1-3-106: PUNISHMENT:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person guilty of a misdemeanor under a provision of this code shall be punished by a fine of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
As prescribed in section 36900 of the Government Code of the state and section 42001 of the Vehicle Code of the state, any person who has committed
an infraction shall be punished for a first violation by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for committing the same offense a second
time within one year by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for committing the same offense a third or any subsequent time within one
year, by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (1962 Code § 1-4.06)
1-3-107: VIOLATIONS OF CONDITIONS:
Any violation of a condition of any permit or approval issued pursuant to this code shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
Article 2. Citation Procedure
1-3-201: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS BY DESIGNATED EMPLOYEES:
A. Those officers and employees of the building and safety department, city manager's office, fire department, public works department, and recreation
and parks department, as determined and designated from time to time by the city manager or directors of those departments, shall have the power,
authority, and immunity, as set forth in section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state, to issue citations and make arrests without a warrant whenever
such officers or employees have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed an infraction or misdemeanor violation of
an ordinance of the city or state statute which such officers or employees have the duty to enforce, and the violation has been committed in the
presence of such officers or employees.
B. In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this authority and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the
officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on the promise to appear, as prescribed by
chapter 5(c), commencing with section 853.5, of the Penal Code of the state.
C. The officers and employees identified in subsection A of this section shall have the concurrent authority to issue administrative citations, as well as any
other persons designated to do so by the city manager.
D. Nothing in this section shall affect any proceedings described in article 3 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 1-5.01; amd. Ord. 95-O-2244, eff. 9-1-1995; Ord.
00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000; Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 3. Administrative Penalties
1-3-301: SCOPE:
This article provides for an administrative remedy for any violation of this code, including continuing violations related to building, plumbing, electrical, or
other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety. This remedy may be exercised in place of, or in
addition to, any administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable remedy allowed by law. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall have sole discretion to
determine whether a violation will be prosecuted criminally. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-302: DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION OR CITATION: A written notice to a responsible person issued by the citing official that a violation of this code has occurred.
ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE ORDER OR COMPLIANCE ORDER: A written notice to a responsible person issued by the citing official that there
exists a continuing violation of this code related to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues.
CITING DEPARTMENT: The city department that issued the citation pursuant to section 1-3-201 of this chapter.
CITING OFFICIAL: Any officer or employee authorized to issue citations pursuant to section 1-3-201 of this chapter.
LEGAL INTEREST: Any ownership interest of any person as hereafter defined in real or personal property as evidenced by title or ownership documents
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 5/797
or instruments recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder's office or on file with, or in possession of, any other governmental entity. "Legal interest"
shall also include the property interest of lessees or tenants of real property, as well as all sublessors thereof.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person whom a citing official determines is responsible for causing, maintaining, permitting, or allowing a violation of this
code. The term "responsible person" includes, but is not limited to: any person who has an ownership or possessory interest in real or personal property;
any agent thereof with actual or apparent authority, possession, or control of real or personal property; or any other person, who creates, maintains,
permits, or allows a violation of this code. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007; amd. Ord. 13-O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
1-3-303: PROCEDURE FOR SERVICE:
Except as provided below, the citing official may issue an administrative compliance order, citation, or other notice to a responsible person on a form
approved by the city manager using either of the following methods:
A. Personal Service: The citing official may issue the administrative compliance order, citation, or other notice by personal delivery to a responsible
person. The citing official shall attempt to obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative compliance order or citation. If the
responsible person or person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative compliance order or citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not
affect the validity of the compliance order or citation or of any subsequent proceedings.
B. Mail: The citing official may mail the administrative compliance order, citation, or other notice to the responsible person by first class mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of the premises described
at such person's last known address. If no address is known or made known to the citing official, then the citing official may mail the administrative
compliance order, citation, or other notice to the owner's last known address as the name appears on the latest equalized assessment roll.
Service is effective when personally served or when deposited into the United States mail. The citing official must complete a declaration of service.
Failure to receive any notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this article. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-304: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITED PARTY:
Upon service of an administrative compliance order or citation, the responsible person shall do the following:
A. Pay the administrative fine no later than twenty (20) days from the date of service of the administrative citation. Payment of the fine shall not excuse or
discharge the failure to correct the violation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
B. Comply with the compliance order to remedy the violation within the time specified on the compliance order. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-305: COMPLIANCE ORDER:
Whenever the citing official determines that there exists a continuing violation of any provision of this code related to building, plumbing, electrical, or other
similar structural or zoning issues that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the citing official shall issue or cause to be issued a written
compliance order to any responsible person. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-306: CONTENT OF COMPLIANCE ORDER:
A compliance order shall contain all of the following information:
A. The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation occurred.
B. The city code section violated and a description of the violation.
C. The action required to correct the violation and the date by which such action must be completed. Except for orders to comply with title 9, chapter 4,
article 3, "Emergency Water Conservation Plan", of this code, the date for compliance shall not be less than twenty (20) days from the date the
compliance order is served.
D. The consequences of failing to correct the violation, including a description of the administrative hearing procedure and appeal process.
E. The time period after which administrative fines will begin to accrue if there is no compliance with the order.
F. The amount of the fine that will be imposed if there is no compliance with the order.
G. The name and signature of the citing official. (Ord. 15-O-2677, eff. 6-18-2015)
1-3-307: COMPLIANCE ORDER SATISFIED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 6/797
If the citing official determines that all violations specified in the compliance order have been corrected within the time set forth in the order, no further
action shall be taken against the responsible person regarding the violations. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-308: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH COMPLIANCE ORDER:
If the responsible person fails to fully comply with the compliance order within the time specified in the compliance order, the citing official may issue an
administrative citation as provided in this article. The issuance of the administrative citation does not obviate the responsible person's obligation to fully
comply with the compliance order. The administrative citation shall be served by the applicable method set forth in section 1-3-303 of this chapter. (Ord.
07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-309: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
Any person violating any section of this code that is subject to this article may be issued an administrative citation by a citing official as provided in this
article. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-310: CONTENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
An administrative citation shall contain all of the following information:
A. The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation occurred or was detected.
B. The code section violated and a description of the violation.
C. The amount of the fine imposed for the violation, and the time within which and the place at which the fine shall be paid.
D. An order prohibiting another occurrence of the code violation.
E. A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which to contest the administrative citation and the place from which
to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation.
F. The name and signature of the citing official. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-311: ADMINISTRATIVE FINE; CITATIONS AND COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
A. For any violation of this code for which the violation would otherwise be an infraction, the administrative fine shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
first violation; two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision of this code within a twelve (12) month period; and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision of this code within a twelve (12) month period. For any violation of this
code for which there is no specific administrative fine established in this code, the fine imposed shall be that set forth in a resolution adopted by the city
council.
B. Because a new and separate offense occurs under section 1-3-102 of this chapter each day during which a violation of any provision or requirement of
this code is committed, continued, or permitted, the citing official may further assess a fine according to the schedule set forth in subsection A of this
section for each day from the date for compliance specified in the compliance order until the date the violation is fully corrected as determined by the
citing official. The administrative citation shall specify the date by which the fine must be paid.
C. Administrative fines assessed for failing to fully comply with a compliance order or administrative citation is a debt owed to the city.
D. If the responsible person provides written notice to the citing official that the violation has been corrected, and if the citing official finds compliance, the
citing official shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the citing official to be the date the violation was
corrected. If, however, a final inspection confirmed compliance before mailing or personal delivery of a written notice, or if no written notice is provided,
the date of final inspection shall be deemed to be the date the violation was corrected. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-312: PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINE:
The administrative fine shall be paid to the citing department within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the administrative citation. If, after a
hearing requested pursuant to section 1-3-313 of this chapter, the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled, the
administrative fine shall be refunded in accordance with section 1-3-320 of this chapter. (Ord. 13-O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
1-3-313: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. Any responsible person to whom an administrative citation is issued may contest the citation by: 1) completing a request for hearing form and returning
it to the citing department; and 2) either depositing the administrative fine with the citing department or providing notice that a request for an advance
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 7/797
deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to section 1-3-314 of this chapter. A request for hearing form may be obtained from the citing
department.
B. The citing department must receive a completed request for hearing form and the administrative fine or completed hardship waiver form pursuant to
section 1-3-314 of this chapter within twenty (20) days from the date of service of the administrative citation. If not, the responsible person waives the
right to a hearing.
C. The citing official shall notify the person requesting the hearing by regular mail in accordance with section 1-3-303 of this chapter of the time and place
of the hearing at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing. The citing official shall serve any documentation, other than the administrative
citation, that the citing official has submitted or will submit to the hearing officer on the person requesting the hearing by regular mail in accordance with
section 1-3-303 of this chapter at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 13-O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
1-3-314: ADVANCE HARDSHIP WAIVER DEPOSIT:
A. Any responsible person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative citation and who is financially unable to deposit the administrative fine
required in section 1-3-312 of this chapter may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The request shall be filed with the citing
department on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the citing department, no later than twenty (20) days after service
of the administrative citation. The citing department's failure to receive a completed form with all supporting documents within twenty (20) days after
service of the administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of the right to receive a hardship waiver.
B. The director of the citing department or designee may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver only if the person requesting the waiver submits a
sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the director or designee the person's financial inability to
deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. The director or designee shall issue a written decision specifying the reasons
for issuing or not issuing the waiver. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the waiver as specified in section 1-3-303 of this chapter.
If the director or designee determines that the waiver is not warranted the person shall remit the full amount of the fine to the citing department within
ten (10) days of receipt of the director's written decision. The director or designee's decision whether to issue a hardship waiver shall be final. (Ord. 13-
O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
1-3-315: TIME FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Only after a request for hearing form is received by the citing department within the required period, and the responsible person requesting the hearing has
either deposited the administrative fine in full or obtained an advance deposit hardship waiver (hereinafter a "perfected appeal"), shall the city set the date
and time for the administrative hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than sixty (60) days after a perfected
appeal. (Ord. 13-O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
1-3-316: REQUEST FOR CONTINUANCE OF HEARING:
The responsible person requesting a hearing may request one continuance, and the city may continue the hearing on its own initiative, but in no event may
the hearing begin later than ninety (90) days after the request for hearing form is filed, and the administrative fine is deposited with the city or an advance
deposit hardship waiver is issued. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-317: APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
The city manager or his designee shall establish procedures for the selection of an administrative hearing officer. Administrative hearing officers shall be
selected in a manner that avoids the potential for pecuniary or other bias. In no event shall the administrative hearing officer be the citing official. The
compensation, if any, of the administrative hearing officer shall be paid by the city. Compensation shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon
whether or not administrative citations are upheld by the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-318: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in
support of that party's case and to cross examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish a violation of this
code. The administrative citation and any additional reports submitted by the citing official shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in
those documents. The administrative hearing officer must use preponderance of evidence as the standard of review in deciding the issues. (Ord. 07-O-
2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-319: FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
If the responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will proceed without the responsible person, and the responsible person will be
deemed to have waived the right to an administrative hearing and any further appeals as set forth in this article. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-320: DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Issuance Of Decision: No later than thirty (30) days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes, the administrative hearing officer shall
issue a written decision. The decision shall set forth the reasons for the decision along with notice of the right to appeal pursuant to section 1-3-324 of
this chapter. The administrative hearing officer's decision shall be final. The decision shall be served by first class mail in accordance with section 1-3-
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 8/797
303 of this chapter and shall be deemed to be served on the date the decision is deposited with the United States postal service. The failure of the
responsible person to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate the administrative citation, compliance order or the administrative
hearing officer's decision.
B. Administrative Citation: The administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation. If the
administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative citation, the city shall retain the fine deposited by the responsible person. If the administrative
hearing officer upholds the administrative citation and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the
administrative hearing officer shall specify in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. If the administrative hearing officer cancels the
administrative citation, any fine deposited with the City shall be promptly refunded. The Administrative Hearing Officer's decision is final.
C. Compliance Order: With regard to a compliance order, the Administrative Hearing Officer's written decision shall be entitled "administrative order". The
Administrative Hearing Officer shall make findings within the administrative order regarding the existence of the violation(s) specified in the compliance
order, and regarding whether the responsible person took the required corrective action within the time period set forth in the compliance order. If the
Administrative Hearing Officer concludes that the violation continues to exist, the administrative order shall set forth a schedule for correction. In
addition, the administrative order shall impose administrative fines as provided in section 1-3-311 of this article, and administrative costs as provided in
section 1-3-321 of this article. The administrative order shall set a deadline for compliance with its terms in the event that the responsible person fails to
file an appeal. If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that the violation(s) set forth in the compliance order did not exist, or that the violation(s)
was (were) timely corrected, all proceedings regarding the violation(s) shall immediately cease and the administrative citations shall be canceled. If the
Administrative Hearing Officer cancels the administrative citation, any fine deposited with the City shall be promptly refunded. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-
29-2007)
1-3-321: ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The Administrative Hearing Officer shall assess against the responsible person administrative costs for any violation found to exist, or for any violation
which was not timely corrected. The administrative costs include any and all costs incurred by the City in connection with prosecuting the violation,
including, but not limited to, investigation costs, staffing costs for preparing and conducting the administrative hearing, and costs for all inspections
necessary to enforce the compliance order and the administrative order. The administrative order shall specify the date by which the costs must be paid to
the City. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-322: LATE PAYMENT CHARGES:
Any person who fails to pay to the City on or before the due date any administrative fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for
the payment of late payment charges as follows:
A. For payments received within thirty (30) days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the administrative fine due.
B. For payments received more than thirty (30) days after the due date, a late fee in the amount of fifty percent (50%) of the administrative fine due, plus
an additional ten percent (10%) of the overdue administrative fine for each month the payment is overdue. The maximum late fee shall be one hundred
percent (100%) of the overdue administrative fine. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
1-3-323: COLLECTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND COSTS; LIEN PROCEDURE:
A. If the responsible person fails to satisfy in full the assessed administrative fines and costs by the time specified in the Administrative Hearing Officer's
decision or the administrative order, and no timely appeal of the Administrative Officer's decision has been filed with the Los Angeles Superior Court,
the City may recover the outstanding fines and costs by imposing a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.
B. Prior to the recording of the lien with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office, the City Council shall conduct a hearing to hear any protest or objection
to the lien. The citing official shall serve notice of the hearing upon the owner of record of the real property, based on the last equalized assessment roll
or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice of hearing shall include the time, date, and place of the hearing, and shall be served
upon the owner of record by regular mail in accordance with section 1-3-303 of this article at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing.
C. If the City Council determines that the lien should be imposed, the responsible person will have forty five (45) days to satisfy the assessed
administrative fines and costs in full. If after that time the assessed administrative fines and costs are not paid in full, the citing official shall then
prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the amount due and owing.
D. After the report is filed with the City Clerk, the citing official may cause the lien to be recorded with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the lien shall
have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure, or its successor,
and may be extended as provided in sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure, or their successors.
E. The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive and may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this Code or by law. The City may
collect any past due fines and costs by use of any available legal means. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007; amd. Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
1-3-324: APPEAL OF DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER:
Within twenty (20) days after service of the Administrative Hearing Officer's decision upon the responsible person, the responsible person may seek review
of the Administrative Hearing Officer's decision by filing a notice of appeal with the Los Angeles Superior Court, Stanley Mosk Courthouse, Clerk of the
Court/Room 102 (Civil Filing), 111 North Hill Street, Los Angeles, CA 90012. The responsible person shall serve a copy of the notice of appeal either in
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 9/797
person or by first class mail upon the citing department. If the responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the administrative order shall be
deemed confirmed. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
1-3-325: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER:
Failure to comply with an administrative order after it becomes final is a misdemeanor. Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the City
from using any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with the administrative order. (Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007)
Chapter 4
APPEAL AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
Article 1. Appeal Of Administrative Decisions To Council
1-4-101: RIGHT TO APPEAL:
A. Where a right of appeal to council exists under this code, and a procedure is not otherwise specifically set forth in this code, an appeal may be taken to
the council, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article, from any act, ruling, or determination of any commission, board, or official or from
the denial, suspension, or revocation of any permit or license.
B. No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this code shall exist
when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of
the provisions of this code.
C. No appeal pursuant to the provisions of this article may be taken from any administrative decision made by an official of the city, unless the decision to
appeal has been first taken up with the official rendering the decision. (1962 Code § 1-6.101)
1-4-102: TIME WITHIN WHICH APPEAL PETITIONS MUST BE FILED; WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL PETITIONS:
A. Any appeal petition shall be filed with the city clerk within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date of the decision. Inthe event the last day of the filing
period falls on a nonbusiness day, the appeal period shall be extended to include the next business day. The timely filing of the appeal petition is
jurisdictional. The fee schedule for appeal petitions shall be approved by the council and maintained on file by the director of finance administration.
B. If an appeal petition, filed pursuant to subsection A of this section, is withdrawn at any time prior to the council decision on the appeal petition, then
subsequent to such withdrawal, the council may review the decision which was the subject of the withdrawn petition. Such review may be ordered by
motion of the council duly adopted within fifteen (15) calendar days after the appeal petition is withdrawn. If the council orders a review of such a
decision, the effectiveness of such decision shall be stayed until council review is final. (1962 Code § 1-6.102; amd. Ord. 94-O-2211, eff. 9-2-1994)
1-4-103: CONTENTS OF APPEAL PETITIONS:
Every appeal petition shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the appeal is based in sufficient detail to enable the council to understand the
nature of the controversy, the basis of the appeal, and the relief requested. (1962 Code § 1-6.103)
1-4-104: STAYS PENDING APPEALS:
Upon the filing of an appeal petition, the effectiveness of any permit, entitlement to use, or other right granted by the decision appealed from shall be
stayed pending a final decision by the Council. (1962 Code § 1-6.104)
1-4-105: CONSIDERATION OF APPEAL PETITIONS:
After an appeal petition is filed in accordance with this article, the City Clerk shall place the matter on the Council agenda for Council action. Based on the
appeal petition and the written material presented, the Council shall determine whether to refer the matter back to the commission, board, or official
rendering the decision pursuant to subsection A of this section or whether to grant a hearing on the appeal pursuant to subsection B of this section. The
Council shall not permit oral testimony in its determination under this section.
A. If the Council finds the facts in the appeal petition contain new and material evidence not previously presented to the board, commission, or official, the
Council may order that the board, commission, or official rehear the matter. Written notice of the rehearing shall be mailed to the appellant and to such
other persons who have appeared and addressed the board, commission, or official at the prior hearing in connection with such matter, and mailing
shall be at least twenty (20) days before such rehearing, and such other notice as required by law for the previous hearing shall also be given.
B. Except as provided for in subsection A of this section, the Council shall set the matter for a hearing. At least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing,
written notice shall be mailed to the appellant and to other persons who appeared and addressed the board, commission, or official at the prior hearing
on the matter, and such other notice as required by law for the previous hearing shall also be given. (Ord. 18-O-2752, eff. 5-11-2018)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 10/797
1-4-106: HEARINGS BY THE COUNCIL:
Unless otherwise ordered and noticed, hearings shall be held as a part of the regular meetings of the Council. The hearing shall be de novo in that an
independent reexamination of the matter shall be made. The appellant shall have the burden of proof in all cases, and where it appears that an appellant
was served with a notice of hearing but fails to appear either in person or by counsel, or fails to present or offer evidence, the Council may adopt the
determination or approve the act of the board, commission, or official, or it may itself decide the matter upon the record with or without taking any
additional evidence. Any oral or documentary evidence may be received, but the Mayor shall exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
Unless a demand is made, witnesses will not be sworn. It shall not be a ground for objection that the evidence is hearsay or secondary, however, the
Council's decision shall be made upon substantial evidence. (1962 Code § 1-6.106)
1-4-107: DECISIONS BY THE COUNCIL FINAL:
Upon the hearing of the appeal, the Council may refer the matter back to the board, commission, or official, with directions for further consideration, or the
Council may reverse, affirm, or modify the decision or may make such decision or determination as may appear just and reasonable in the light of the
evidence presented. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on the first day after
issuance. (1962 Code § 1-6.107)
1-4-108: FINDINGS BY THE COUNCIL:
The Council shall prepare written findings if, prior to closing the public hearing, the appellant, the applicant, or an aggrieved party requests the Council to
make written findings. In such event, the Council shall direct the City Attorney to draft a resolution containing the facts found to be true, which findings shall
be considered and adopted by resolution at a subsequent regular meeting of the Council. The findings shall include the reasons for the Council's ruling,
including, but not limited to, findings of facts, if any, required by the Code sections or ordinance upon which the appeal is based. (1962 Code § 1-6.108)
Article 2. Council Ordered Review Of Administrative Decisions
1-4-201: RIGHT TO REVIEW:
The Council may order a review of any decision made by any commission, board, or official of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Code. Such
review may be ordered by motion of the Council duly adopted within thirty (30) calendar days after the issuance of the decision. If the Council orders a
review of a decision, the effectiveness of such decision shall be stayed until Council review is final. (1962 Code § 1-6.201; amd. Ord. 94-O-2211, eff. 9-2-
1994)
1-4-202: SETTING HEARINGS:
Upon the adoption of an order for a review of a decision, the Mayor shall fix a time and place for the hearing. At least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing,
written notice shall be mailed to the applicant and such other persons who appeared and addressed the board, commission, or official at the previous
hearing on the matter, and such other notice as required by law for the previous hearing shall also be given. (Ord. 18-O-2752, eff. 5-11-2018)
1-4-203: HEARINGS BY THE COUNCIL:
Unless otherwise ordered and noticed, hearings shall be held as a part of the regular meetings of the Council. The hearings shall be de novo in that an
independent reexamination of the matter shall be made. The Council may decide the matter upon the record or may take additional evidence. Any oral or
documentary evidence may be received, but the Mayor shall exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence. It shall not be a ground for
objection that the evidence is hearsay or secondary, but the Council's decision shall be made upon substantial evidence. (1962 Code § 1-6.203)
1-4-204: DECISIONS AND FINDINGS:
The provisions of sections 1-4-107 and 1-4-108 of this chapter shall be applicable to the decisions of the Council. (1962 Code § 1-6.204)
Chapter 5
NOTICES, SERVICE OF PROCESS, STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS, AND CONTRACTS
Article 1. Notices
1-5-101: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
Whenever a notice is given pursuant to the provisions of this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically designated, such notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage paid, addressed
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 11/797
to such person at their last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to which such
notice is directed. (1962 Code § 1-3.01)
1-5-102: PROOF OF SERVICE OF NOTICES:
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the declaration or affidavit of any officer or employee of the city or by any person over the age of eighteen (18)
years, which shows service in conformity with this code or such other provisions of law as applicable to the subject matter concerned. (1962 Code § 1-
3.02)
Article 2. Service Of Process
1-5-201: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
Service of civil process upon the city as a public entity shall be made upon the city clerk. (1988 Code)
1-5-202: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL MEETINGS PROHIBITED:
The council finds that the actual or attempted service of civil, criminal, or administrative processes upon a city officer or employee participating in an official
meeting constitutes a disturbance, disruption, and an undue interference with such official meetings and the efficient and proper conduct of public
business.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to serve a civil, criminal, or administrative process upon a council member, commission member, board member, or
other officer or employee of the city who is at the time participating in any official meeting of the council, or a commission, board, or other official
meeting relating to business of the city.
B. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
OFFICIAL MEETING: Any regularly called meeting; including, but not limited to, all regular, adjourned, or special meetings as defined in chapter 9 of
part 1 of division 2 of title 5 of the Government Code of the state.
PARTICIPATING: Relates to any individual attending any official meeting in his or her capacity as an officer or as an employee and shall include any
time during the period commencing one-half (1/2) hour before the scheduled time the official meeting is to commence, and extending to one-half (1/2)
hour after its adjournment.
PROCESS: Any document relating to a civil, criminal, or administrative proceeding, including, but not limited to, subpoenas, summons, complaints,
petitions, writs, injunctions, and court orders.
SERVE: Any act which relates to the service of a process or an effort to serve a process. (1962 Code § 2-15.01)
1-5-203: PAYMENT OF WITNESS FEES REQUESTED:
Any person serving a subpoena in a civil case on any employee of the city, when the appearance required by the subpoena is to obtain testimony or
records relative to the employee's employment with the city shall first pay to the city the witness fees required by law. Where service of the subpoena is on
an employee who is not a peace officer, payment shall be made to the cashier in the office of the director of finance administration. (1962 Code § 2-15.02)
Article 3. Administrative Mandamus And Statute Of Limitations
1-5-301: TIME LIMITS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW OF CERTAIN ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
The provisions of section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state are hereby adopted by the council, and the statute of limitations provided
therein shall apply. (1962 Code § 1-7.01)
1-5-302: PROMPT JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any interested party may seek judicial review of a final city decision regarding the issuance, revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit or license for an
activity protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution in accordance with the terms and procedures provided by California Code of
Civil Procedure section 1094.8. (Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-19-1999)
Article 4. Contracts
1-5-401: AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT:
Any contract made or purportedly made by any person shall not be an obligation of the city unless made in accordance with the provisions of this section,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 12/797
except as otherwise provided in this code.
A. All contracts shall be in writing and shall be signed by a person authorized by this code, an ordinance, resolution, or motion of the council or by a
contract approved by the council to sign any such contract. No oral contract shall become an obligation of the city.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "contract" shall refer to any agreement, contract, lease, promise, or other obligation to which the city is, or is
alleged to be, a party and shall include, but not be limited to, any contract for equipment, supplies, services, or public projects. (Ord. 87-O-2012, eff. 12-
31-1987; amd. 1988 Code)
Chapter 6
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY AND FEES
Article 1. Claims Against The City
1-6-101: CLAIMS PROCEDURE:
The provisions of this chapter implement procedures for processing claims against the city in accordance with the state Government Code section 935.
Procedures under title 1, division 3.6, part 3 commencing with section 900 of the state Government Code shall be applicable except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. (1962 Code § 2-2)
1-6-102: FILING WITH CITY CLERK:
All claims and demands against the city shall be filed with the city clerk. (1962 Code § 2-2)
1-6-103: ADDITIONAL MATTERS REQUIRING FILING OF CLAIMS:
In addition to the requirement of state Government Code section 905, and notwithstanding the exemptions thereto, a claim filed with the city shall be a
prerequisite to suit in the following matters:
A. Any claim by public officers or employees for fees, salaries, wages, overtime pay, holiday pay, compensating time off, or vacation pay, sick leave pay, or
any other expenses or allowances claimed due from the city, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local
laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by sections 910 through 915.2 of the state Government Code; and
such claim shall be subject to the provisions of section 945.4 of the state Government Code prohibiting suits in the absence of the presentation of such
claim and action thereon by council.
B. Any claim against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claim is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, shall be
presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by sections 910 through 915.2 of the state Government Code; and such claim shall
be subject to the provisions of section 945.4 of the state Government Code prohibiting suits in the absence of the presentation of such claim and action
thereon by council. (1962 Code § 2-2)
1-6-104: PROCESSING OF CLAIMS:
The director of human services, with the approval of the city manager, shall adopt and implement procedures for the processing of claims consistent with
the provisions of the state Government Code, provisions of this article, and any regulations adopted by council. (1962 Code § 2-2)
Article 2. Fees
1-6-201: ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE SCHEDULE:
Fees for records, documents, permits, and all types of city services for which a fee is required for the service rendered shall be established by resolution
adopted by council. (1962 Code § 2-11)
Chapter 7
CITY ELECTIONS
1-7-1: PROCEDURE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 13/797
All elections held in the city shall be held in accordance with the general election laws of the state so far as the same may be made applicable. (1962 Code
§ 2-5.01)
1-7-2: FILING FEE FOR CANDIDATES:
A filing fee as established by council resolution shall be payable for candidates' nomination papers for elective officers at municipal elections held in the
city. The filing fee shall be paid to the city clerk by each candidate for elective office at the time the candidate's nomination paper is filed with the city clerk.
(1962 Code § 2-5.02)
1-7-3: POLLING PLACES; COMPENSATION:
Each person furnishing a polling place for use in a municipal election in the city shall be paid a sum equal to that paid for the furnishing of an election
polling place in the county. (1962 Code § 2-5.03)
Chapter 8
CITY ELECTION CAMPAIGNS; CONTRIBUTION LIMITS, VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE
LIMIT AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
1-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are:
A. To eliminate the possibility of corruption or the appearance of corruption in local elections, arising as a result of disproportionately large political
contributions, by adopting the least restrictive limits possible on the amounts of money any person may contribute or otherwise cause to be available to
candidates for the city council and city treasurer and those who support or oppose such candidates;
B. To eliminate the need for candidates and their supporters and opponents to seek large campaign contributions by establishing a realistic voluntary
expenditure ceiling for campaigns;
C. To promote informed actions by the electors of the city by requiring the full and truthful disclosure of contributions and expenditures in election
campaigns and city ballot measure campaigns;
D. To inhibit improper or illegal campaign activity, and to ensure vigorous enforcement of this chapter; and
E. Pursuant to California Government Code section 81013 and Elections Code section 10202, to impose contribution limitations and other regulations in
addition to those imposed by state law, but that do not prevent any person from complying with state law. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 10-O-2594, eff. 11-4-
2010)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions set forth in the California political reform act, as amended (Government Code section 81000 et seq.), and the regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, shall govern the interpretation of this chapter except as to those terms defined below:
ADVERTISEMENT: Any general or public communication, including printed, mailed, telephonic, automated, and electronic communications, which is
authorized and paid for by a ballot measure committee for the purpose of supporting or opposing a city ballot measure. The term "advertisement" does not
include personal communications between individuals, such as personal telephone calls made by an individual to another individual, one to one
conversations, debates or other informational presentations by an individual, but shall include, without limitation, automated telephone calls to voters.
BALLOT MEASURE COMMITTEE: Any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly does any of the following in connection with supporting
or opposing a city ballot measure:
A. Receives contributions totaling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year;
B. Makes independent expenditures totaling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year; or
C. Qualifies, or has previously qualified, as a committee under applicable state law.
A person or combination of persons that becomes a ballot measure committee shall retain its status as a ballot measure committee until such time as that
status is terminated pursuant to Government Code section 84214 or any successor statute.
CANDIDATE: An individual who is listed on the ballot or who has qualified to have write in votes on his or her behalf counted by election officials for
nomination or election to the city council or the office of city treasurer, or who receives a contribution or makes an expenditure or gives his or her consent
for any other person to receive a contribution or make an expenditure with a view to bringing about his or her nomination or election to the city council or to
the office of city treasurer, whether or not the specific city office for which he or she will seek nomination or election is known at the time the contribution is
received or the expenditure is made and whether or not he or she has announced his or her candidacy or filed a declaration of candidacy at such time.
Notwithstanding the above, "candidate" does not include a replacement candidate or a target officer. An individual who becomes a candidate shall retain
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 14/797
his or her status as a candidate until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to section 84214 of the California Government Code. "Candidate"
does not include any person within the meaning of section 301(b) of the federal election campaign act of 1971.
CITY BALLOT MEASURE: Any initiative, referendum or city council sponsored measure that is submitted solely to the voters of the city of Beverly Hills.
COMMITTEE: Any person or combination of persons who directly or indirectly do any of the following in connection with supporting or opposing a
candidate or candidates for city council or city treasurer:
A. Receive contributions totaling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year.
B. Make independent expenditures totaling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in a calendar year.
C. Make contributions totaling ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more in a calendar year.
A person or combination of persons that becomes a committee shall retain its status as a committee until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to
California Government Code section 84214.
CONTRIBUTION: A. A payment, a forgiveness of a loan or debt, a payment of a loan or debt by a third party, or an enforceable promise to make a
payment except to the extent that full and adequate consideration is received, unless it is clear from the surrounding circumstances that it is not made for
political purposes. Any expenditure made at the behest of a candidate, committee or elected officer is a contribution to the candidate, committee or elected
officer unless full and adequate consideration is received for making the expenditure. The term "contribution" includes: 1) the purchase of tickets for events
such as dinners, luncheons, rallies and similar fundraising events; 2) the candidate's own money or property used on behalf of his or her candidacy; 3) the
granting of discounts or rebates not extended to the public generally or the granting of discounts or rebates by television and radio stations and
newspapers not extended on an equal basis to all candidates for the same office; 4) the payment of compensation by any person for the personal services
or expenses of any other person if such services are rendered or expenses incurred on behalf of a candidate or committee without payment of full and
adequate consideration; 5) any transfer of anything of value received by a committee from another person, unless full and adequate consideration is
received; 6) any loan or any extension of credit in excess of thirty (30) days, except as provided below, from the maker and/or guarantor of the loan or
extension of credit.
B. The term "contribution" does not include: 1) amounts received pursuant to an enforceable promise to the extent such amounts have been previously
reported as a contribution and otherwise comply with the limits of this chapter. However, the fact that such amounts have been received shall be
indicated in the appropriate campaign statement; 2) a payment made by an occupant of a home or office for costs related to any meeting or
fundraising event held in the occupant's home or office if the costs for the meeting or fundraising event are five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less; 3)
volunteer personal services or payments made by any individual for his or her own travel expenses if such payments are made voluntarily without
any understanding or agreement that they shall be, directly or indirectly, repaid to him or her; 4) the proceeds of a loan made to a candidate by a
commercial lending institution in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public, which is not guaranteed by
any other party, and for which a written agreement has been executed and filed with the candidate's first campaign statement due after the date the
loan is made; 5) an independent expenditure as defined by Government Code section 82031 or any successor statute.
C. A contribution shall not be considered to have been received or accepted if it is not negotiated, deposited, or utilized, and in addition it is returned to
the donor within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the closing date for the next campaign report, whichever is earlier.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, committee, company, corporation, limited liability
corporation, association, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert.
POLITICAL REFORM ACT: Title 9 of the Government Code, section 81000 et seq., as it now exists or may be amended.
QUALIFYING PAYMENT: Any payment, binding promise to pay, contribution, expenditure or independent expenditure of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
or more made by a ballot measure committee for an advertisement to support or oppose a city ballot measure. All payments to the same payee in a
calendar year shall be aggregated for the purpose of determining the two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) threshold.
RECALL ELECTION: An election conducted pursuant to division 11 of the Elections Code. For purposes of this chapter, a recall election begins when a
member of the city council or the city treasurer is served with a notice of intention to circulate a recall petition pursuant to section 11021 of the Elections
Code and a recall election ends when any of the following occurs: a) the city clerk finds that the notice of intention to circulate a recall petition for the target
officer fails to meet the requirements of sections 11020-24 of the Elections Code; b) the proponents of the recall of the target officer fail to file a valid recall
petition within the deadlines required by section 11042 of the Elections Code; c) the city clerk refuses to accept for filing the recall petition for the target
officer pursuant to section 11222 of the Elections Code; d) the city clerk certifies the recall petition for the target officer to be insufficient pursuant to section
11224 or 11225 of the Elections Code; or e) the recall election is held.
REPLACEMENT CANDIDATE: A candidate in a recall election.
TARGET OFFICER: An elected officer who is the subject of a recall election. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 08-O-2558, eff. 12-19-2008; Ord. 10-O-2594, eff. 11-
4-2010)
1-8-3: CONTRIBUTION LIMITATIONS:
A. Limits On Contributions By Persons And Committees:
1. Except as provided in this section and section 1-8-4 of this chapter, no person or committee shall make to any candidate, including the controlled
committee of such candidate, a contribution in excess of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for any single election at which the candidate is
attempting to be, or is, on the ballot. Additionally, no candidate or candidate's controlled committee shall solicit or accept any contribution that will
cause the amount contributed by the contributor to the candidate or the candidate's controlled committee to exceed one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00) for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot.
2. Notwithstanding subsection A1 of this section, if a candidate accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling established by section 1-8-4 of this chapter,
no person or committee shall make to any such candidate, including the controlled committee of such candidate, a contribution in excess of four
hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be, or is, on the ballot. Additionally, no candidate or
candidate's controlled committee shall solicit or accept any contribution that will cause the amount contributed by the contributor to the candidate or
the candidate's controlled committee to exceed four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for any single election at which the candidate is attempting to be,
or is, on the ballot.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 15/797
3. The city council may, by resolution, adjust the contribution limit established in this subsection A in October of every even numbered year to reflect
any increase or decrease in the California consumer price index since the last such adjustment of the contribution limit. Such adjustments shall be
rounded to the nearest ten dollar ($10.00) amount.
4. The limitations of this subsection A shall not apply to contributions of a candidate's personal funds to his or her controlled campaign committee on
behalf of his or her own candidacy, and shall apply to contributions from the candidate's spouse.
B. Limitations On Loans: Any loan or extension of credit for a period of more than thirty (30) days, other than loans to the candidate from commercial
lending institutions without a guarantor made in the regular course of business on the same terms available to members of the public, shall be
considered a contribution from the maker and/or guarantor of the loan or the creditor, and shall be subject to all applicable contribution limits.
C. Assumed Name Contributions: No contribution shall be made, directly or indirectly, by any person or combination of persons acting jointly in a name
other than the name by which they are identified for legal purposes, nor in the name of another person or combination of persons. No person shall
make a contribution in his or her name of anything belonging to another person or received from another person on the condition that it be used as a
contribution. No person shall fully or partially reimburse or advance any contribution made by another person. Upon discovery by a candidate for city
council or city treasurer, or by any campaign treasurer or committee, that a contribution has been received in violation of this subsection, the amount
received in violation of this subsection shall be promptly paid from available campaign funds to the treasurer of the city for deposit in the general fund of
the city, and shall be earmarked to be used for the purpose of defraying any costs incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter, and shall not be used to
benefit any candidate or committee.
D. Family Contributions: Contributions by a husband and wife shall be treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated. Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent a husband and wife from making such separate contributions through the use of one check if: 1) the check is from a joint
checking account with the names of both spouses printed on the check, or 2) the check is accompanied by a letter from either spouse indicating that
the check is from both spouses. Contributions by children under eighteen (18) years of age shall be treated as contributions by their parents and
attributed one-half (1/2) to each parent or the total amount to a single custodial parent.
E. Aggregation Of Contributions: Contributions shall be aggregated and, hence, treated as though made by the same person, when made by:
1. Entities which share a majority of members on their boards of directors, unless the decision makers responsible for making a contribution in fact act
independently in their decisions to make contributions;
2. Entities which share two (2) or more officers, unless the decision makers responsible for making a contribution in fact act independently in their
decisions to make contributions;
3. Entities which are in a parent-subsidiary relationship, or where one entity is a branch, division, affiliate, department or local unit of the other;
4. An individual or group of individuals and any legal entity or entities in which the individual or group of individuals own greater than fifty percent (50%)
of the voting or other class of stock of the entity, or who receive or are entitled to receive greater than fifty percent (50%) of the profits of the entity.
5. An individual and any other legal entity or entities for which the individual is in fact solely responsible for decisions regarding the making of
contributions. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 06-O-2508, eff. 12-8-2006; Ord. 08-O-2557, eff. 11-5-2008; Ord. 08-O-2558, eff. 12-19-2008; Ord. 10-O-2593,
eff. 11-4-2010; Ord. 10-O-2596, eff. 12-17-2010; Ord. 11-O-2604, eff. 2-15-2011; Ord. 14-O-2668, eff. 12-5-2014)
1-8-4: ELECTION CAMPAIGNS; VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE CEILING:
A. A voluntary expenditure ceiling is hereby established for each election for city elective office in the amount of eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). As
used in this section, the term "city elective office" shall mean the offices of members of the city council and city treasurer. This section shall not apply in
recall elections.
B. Prior to accepting any contributions, each candidate for city elective office shall file with the city clerk a statement of acceptance or rejection of the
voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein.
C. No candidate for city elective office who accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein and no controlled campaign committee of such a
candidate shall make campaign expenditures cumulatively in excess of the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein.
D. Each candidate who rejects the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein shall be subject to the contribution limit set forth in subsection 1-8-3A1
of this chapter, as the same may be amended from time to time.
E. Each candidate who accepts the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein shall be subject to the contribution limit set forth in subsection 1-8-3A2
of this chapter, and not the contribution limit set forth in subsection 1-8-3A1 of this chapter, as either subsection may be amended from time to time. In
addition, as to each such candidate, the city clerk shall:
1. Cause to be printed in the city sample ballot materials, at the option of the candidate, a candidate's statement at no charge to the candidate.
Additionally, if federal law requires the city sample ballot materials to be translated into another language, the candidate shall be entitled to free
printing of the candidate's statement in that additional language;
2. Provide notification to voters that the candidate has accepted the voluntary expenditure ceiling established herein. Such notification shall be provided
on the ballot and on the sample ballot.
F. Except as provided herein, the provisions of the California political reform acts of 1974 and 1996, California Government Code section 81000 et seq.
(collectively, "the acts"), and applicable regulations adopted pursuant thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time, shall govern the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 16/797
interpretation and application of this section. (Ord. 00-O-2360, eff. 12-22-2000; amd. Ord. 02-O-2413, eff. 12-6-2002; Ord. 06-O-2508, eff. 12-8-2006;
Ord. 08-O-2557, eff. 11-5-2008; Ord. 08-O-2558, eff. 12-19-2008; Ord. 12-O-2632, eff. 10-21-2012)
1-8-5: DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR BALLOT MEASURE COMMITTEES:
A. In addition to the requirements of this chapter, every ballot measure committee shall comply with the registration and reporting requirements set forth in
the political reform act applicable to committees. In addition to other reports required by law, any ballot measure committee that makes a qualifying
payment shall, within seventy two (72) hours of making the first such qualifying payment, file in the office of the city clerk a letter containing the name
and address of the committee, the full street address of the committee, the FPPC/secretary of state identification number of the committee, the name of
the treasurer of the committee, and the identifying letter or number of the city ballot measure(s) supported or opposed by such qualifying payment. It
shall be unlawful for any person or committee to knowingly file or publish any name or street address for a committee that is not the complete and
accurate name and/or street address of the committee.
B. In addition to any preelection statement required by the political reform act, every ballot measure committee shall file a preelection statement for the
following periods at the following times:
1. For the period ending thirty (30) days before the election, the statement shall be filed not later than twenty five (25) days before the election.
2. For the period ending ten (10) days before the election, the statement shall be filed no later than five (5) days before the election.
Any contribution from any person of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), individually or in the aggregate, that is made less than ten (10)
days before the election shall be reported to the city clerk on the next business day following receipt of the contribution.
C. Every advertisement in support of or opposition to a city ballot measure placed by a ballot measure committee shall include the name of the committee
and shall include a clearly visible or audible disclosure statement containing the actual legal name of any person(s) whose cumulative contributions,
whether cash or in kind, to the ballot measure committee total ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more in the twelve (12) calendar months
immediately preceding the first qualifying payment for that advertisement. If there is more than one donor that has contributed ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) or more in the twelve (12) calendar months immediately preceding the first qualifying payment for that advertisement, the ballot measure
committee shall identify in any advertisements the highest donor first followed by other donors in descending order of contribution amount. The order
shall be determined on the last practicable date before the advertisement is generally or publicly communicated.
D. Every advertisement in support of or opposition to a city ballot measure shall include a statement indicating that additional information about
contributions to the ballot measure committee paying for the advertisement is available at www.beverlyhills.org. The city clerk shall maintain an online,
publicly available database of all reports submitted by ballot measure committees to the city clerk.
E. The disclosure statement required to be included in an advertisement pursuant to this section shall be shown legibly and in a conspicuous manner, in
no less than 14-point type in printed, video, or e-mail format, and for at least one-half (1/2) of the time duration of the advertisement if the advertisement
consists of video material. If the advertisement is audio, telephonic or transmitted in some other audible form only, the information shall be spoken so
as to be clearly audible and understood by the intended public and otherwise appropriately conveyed for the hearing impaired. Such disclosure
statement required to be included in an advertisement by this section shall convey the following information in substantially the following form:
This communication is presented by [name of committee] with major funding provided by [legal name of donors in descending order of amount of
contribution]. These donors are listed in descending order of contribution amount. More current information regarding the sources of funding for
this election campaign is available at www.beverlyhills.org.
This disclosure statement shall not list any donor except donors required to be disclosed by subsection C of this section.
F. In addition to the other requirements of this section, every advertisement in support of, or opposition to, one or more city ballot measures shall contain
the official title of the city ballot measure, as provided by the city attorney, in a clearly audible or legible form. (Ord. 10-O-2594, eff. 11-4-2010)
1-8-6: RECORDKEEPING AND AUDITS:
A. Recordkeeping: It shall be the duty of each candidate, treasurer, and principal officer of any committee or ballot measure committee to maintain such
detailed accounts, records, bills, copies of checks, and receipts that are necessary to prepare the campaign statements required by this chapter and
the political reform act. Such records shall be maintained and retained by the filer pursuant to the provisions of the political reform act and regulations
promulgated by the fair political practices commission. Persons maintaining such records shall, upon not less than seven (7) days' written notice, make
such records available for review and/or audit by a designated representative of the city of Beverly Hills.
B. Audits: For the specific purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter only, the city clerk or the city attorney, or their designated representatives,
may investigate and audit the records and reports of any candidate, candidate's controlled committee, and any other committee or ballot measure
committee. (Ord. 10-O-2594, eff. 11-4-2010)
1-8-7: REMEDIES:
A. Liability For Violations: In the case of any violations of this chapter by a committee, the treasurer and any principal officers or, in the case of a controlled
committee, the candidate, may be liable for violations as provided herein. In the case of any violations of this chapter by a ballot measure committee,
the treasurer, any principal officers, and any person primarily responsible for the preparation of any advertisement may be liable for violations as
provided herein. If two (2) or more persons are liable for any violation, they shall be jointly and severally liable.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 17/797
B. Misdemeanor Violations And Fines: Any person or candidate for elective office who knowingly or wilfully violates any provision of section 1-8-3, 1-8-5 or
1-8-6 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Allegations that such violations have
occurred may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be referred to the Los Angeles County district attorney for investigation and prosecution.
C. Civil Injunctive Relief And Civil Penalties: Any person residing in the city may sue in Los Angeles County superior court to enjoin violations of, or to
compel compliance with, the provisions of this chapter. Any person who is found by a court of competent jurisdiction in such an action to have
intentionally or negligently violated any provision of this chapter may be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed three (3) times the amount in controversy.
In determining the amount of a civil penalty, if any, the court shall take into consideration the seriousness of the violation, and the degree of culpability
of the defendant. The prevailing party in any such action shall be entitled to seek and be awarded its attorney fees and court costs. Any action for civil
injunctive relief and/or civil penalty must be filed within one year of the date of the alleged violation.
D. Remedies For Violation Of Local Voluntary Expenditure Ceiling: The penalties and remedies for violations of section 1-8-4 of this chapter shall also
include those set forth in the political reform act. (Ord. 98-O-2317, eff. 1-1-1999; amd. Ord. 10-O-2594, eff. 11-4-2010)
Chapter 9
LEGISLATIVE ADVOCATES
Article 1. Compensated Legislative Advocates
1-9-101: TITLE AND FINDINGS:
This article shall be referred to as the BEVERLY HILLS MUNICIPAL LEGISLATIVE ADVOCACY ORDINANCE. In adopting this ordinance, the City Council
makes the following findings:
A. City government functions to serve the interests of all citizens.
B. The citizens of Beverly Hills have a right to know the identity of interests which attempt to influence the decisions of City government through
compensated representatives.
C. Complete disclosure of the efforts and financing of legislative advocates is essential to maintaining public confidence in the integrity of City government.
D. It is in the public interest to ensure that legislative advocates do not misrepresent facts, the positions of their clients or others, or otherwise attempt to
mislead or deceive City decision makers. (Ord. 00-O-2347, eff. 9-1-2000; amd. Ord. 06-O-2507, eff. 11-17-2006)
1-9-102: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings set forth below. For any term not specifically defined herein, the definitions shall be as set
forth in the California Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, and in the regulations of the California Fair Political Practices Commission, if defined
therein.
ATTEMPTING TO INFLUENCE: Promoting, supporting, opposing, seeking to modify, or seeking to delay Municipal legislation by any means, including,
without limitation, providing or generating political contacts, presenting information, statistical analyses or studies.
CITY OFFICIAL: The Mayor, any member of the City Council, any member of a City of Beverly Hills commission, and any City employee who participates
in the consideration of any Municipal legislation other than in a purely clerical or secretarial capacity.
CLIENT: Any person who provides compensation to a legislative advocate for legislative advocacy, whether the compensation is provided directly,
indirectly or through an intermediary.
COMPENSATION: Monetary or in-kind payment or remuneration in an amount in excess of fifty dollars ($50.00), or the expectation of such remuneration,
for engaging in the legislative advocacy. Compensation does not include the salary of an employee who devotes less than twenty percent (20%) of that
employee's work time to legislative advocacy during any one year and who engages in legislative advocacy only on behalf of a single employer.
Compensation also does not include reimbursement of or payments for reasonable travel or business expenses, such as copying, telephone charges and
meals.
CONTRACTOR: A person that agrees to construct, or constructs, a building or other structure, or who provides or installs specialized portions of the
construction. A contractor shall not include any person who prepares the plans or designs of a building or other structure.
DIRECT COMMUNICATION: Appearing as a witness before, talking to (either in person or by telephone), corresponding with, or answering questions or
inquiries from, any City official either personally or through an agent who acts under one's direct supervision or control.
ENGAGEMENT LETTER: An Engagement Letter is the written agreement between the client and legislative advocate that includes one or more of the
following: a) scope of work, b) the responsibilities and obligations of each of the respective parties, or c) fee estimates or quotes.
EXPENDITURE LOBBYIST: Any person, other than any government entity, or officer or employee of a government entity acting in an official capacity, who
advises regarding, or makes, payments or incurs expenditures of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more during any calendar year for directing or
guiding public relations, media relations, advertising, public outreach, research, investigation, reports, analyses, or studies with the intent of soliciting,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 18/797
requesting or urging, directly or indirectly, other persons to communicate directly with a City official in order to influence Municipal legislation. Expenditure
lobbyist shall not include: a) a person who pays compensation to a legislative advocate or who pays compensation to another representative who appears
at a hearing on Municipal legislation, b) a person who pays dues to a membership organization that is ongoing in nature and whose membership services
do not consist exclusively of legislative advocacy, c) an organization who makes payments to distribute communications to its members, and d) a person
engaged in publication or broadcasting of news items, editorials, or commentary, provided that the person is not compensated to take a specific position.
FINANCIER: Actual legal name of any person(s) whose cumulative contributions, whether cash or in kind, to a Ballot Measure Committee as defined in
section 1-8-2 of this title, or otherwise, to support or oppose an initiative or referendum, total ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more. There may be
more than one financier.
INDIRECT COMMUNICATION: Directing, advising or counseling another regarding direct communication. Indirect communication includes, without
limitation, communication through an agent who acts under one's supervision or control or communication through a client.
LEGISLATIVE ADVOCACY: Includes the following and similar conduct for compensation when the conduct is related to attempting to influence Municipal
legislation:
A. Engaging in, either personally or through an agent, written, electronic, or oral direct communication with a City official;
B. Drafting ordinances, resolutions, or regulations;
C. Attempting to influence the position of any third party on Municipal legislation or an issue relating to Municipal legislation by any means, including,
but not limited to, engaging in community or media relations activities;
D. Advising clients regarding strategy for legislative advocacy.
LEGISLATIVE ADVOCATE: Any individual who is compensated or who is hired, directed, retained or otherwise becomes entitled to be compensated for
engaging in legislative advocacy and makes a direct or indirect communication with a City official or who is an expenditure lobbyist or financier. For
example, a legislative advocate may include attorneys, permit expediters, and architects or designers. However, notwithstanding the definition, a legislative
advocate shall not include contractors.
MUNICIPAL LEGISLATION: Any legislative, quasi-judicial, or administrative matter proposed by or pending before the City Council or any City
commission, or any discretionary matter proposed or pending before the City Manager or any department head, or any action that involves a development
project. "Municipal legislation" includes, without limitation, those matters involving the granting, denial, amendment, revocation, or restriction of any
license, permit or entitlement for use (including all land use permits); the consideration, adoption, amendment or repeal of all Municipal ordinances; and
the consideration and award of bids and proposals for City contracts. "Municipal legislation" does not include purely ministerial actions. A development
application shall be considered to be pending before the City Council or City commission or City staff once any preliminary material, including an
application for concept review, has been filed with the City. (Ord. 14-O-2656, eff. 4-4-2014; amd. Ord. 18-O-2749, eff. 2-9-2018; Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-
18-2019)
1-9-103: EXEMPTIONS:
The following persons are exempt from the requirements of this article:
A. Any public official or employee of a public entity acting in his or her official capacity and within the scope of his or her employment by the public entity.
B. Any person who is engaging in legislative advocacy without compensation other than a financier.
C. Any person whose only activity is submitting a bid on a competitively bid contract, who submits a written or oral response to a request for more
information, or who participates in an oral interview process. This exemption shall not apply to any person who attempts to influence the actions of any
City official with regard to any such contract outside an interview or public meeting.
D. Any person making a request of the City staff for advice or for an interpretation of laws, regulations, or City approvals or policies; or who responds to a
request from a City official. However, this exemption shall not include any substantive discussion of that advice or interpretation.
E. Persons seeking any ministerial action that does not involve a development project. An action is ministerial if it does not require the City official involved
to exercise discretion concerning any outcome or course of action. (Ord. 00-O-2347, eff. 9-1-2000; amd. Ord. 06-O-2507, eff. 11-17-2006; Ord. 18-O-
2749, eff. 2-9-2018; Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-18-2019)
1-9-104: PROHIBITIONS:
No legislative advocate shall knowingly and wilfully:
A. Deceive or attempt to deceive any City official with regard to any material fact pertinent to any proposed or pending Municipal legislation;
B. Cause any communication to be sent to any City official in the name of a nonexistent person, or in the name of a person without the consent of such
person.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 19/797
C. If such legislative advocate is a financier, deceive or attempt to deceive directly or indirectly, any resident of the City with regard to any material fact
pertinent to any proposed, pending or existing Municipal legislation.
D. If such legislative advocate is a financier, employ any individual or group of individuals, directly or indirectly through any other person or entity, as
circulators without having first caused each individual circulator to have received a written factual description of the true purpose and effect of the
referendum, and required that each individual circulator attend a training session of at least two (2) hours concerning the requirements of this Code and
the Elections Code relating to the circulation of referendum petitions, the signature gatherer's duty not to deceive the voters, and the actual purpose
and effect of the referendum. Financiers shall maintain written records of the financier's contract with signature gathering firm or firms with these
requirements incorporated into said contracts, as well as written records showing that each circulator employed has received the written description
and attended the training required herein. Financiers shall maintain such records for not less than two (2) calendar years following the later of the date
of the election on the referendum, the date the City Council repeals the ordinance subject to referendum, or the date the referendum fails to qualify for
the ballot. Financiers shall make such records available to the City Attorney or his designee during normal business hours following not less than
twenty four (24) hours' written notice to the financier. (Ord. 00-O-2347, eff. 9-1-2000; amd. Ord. 06-O-2507, eff. 11-17-2006; Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-
18-2019)
1-9-105: REGISTRATION:
A. Within ten (10) days after a legislative advocate begins to engage in legislative advocacy or receives an executed Engagement Letter, whichever is
sooner, the legislative advocate shall register as a legislative advocate with the City Clerk on a form provided by the City for that purpose; provided
however, financiers shall register within seventy two (72) hours of: 1) collecting signatures for a referendum or initiative petition or 2) engaging a
signature gathering company to acquire such signatures or 3) qualifying as a financier. The legislative advocate shall specify:
1. The name, telephone number, business address, e-mail address and fax number of the legislative advocate and the legislative advocate's employer,
2. The identity of the client and the contact information for the client; provided however that this requirement shall not apply to financiers,
3. A description of the specific business in which the client or financier is involved as it relates to the legislative advocacy,
4. A description with specificity of the matter of Municipal legislation the legislative advocate is attempting to influence, and the outcome desired by the
client or financier,
5. An estimate of fees to be generated, or if the legislative advocate is a financier, the estimate of fees to be paid by such financier. The estimate of
fees shall be a check-box on the form that will provide a range of fees as follows:
Up to $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $75,000.00, and
$75,001.00 and above,
6. Whether the legislative advocate has ever been sanctioned for a violation of this article or a violation of any law, regulation or ordinance of another
jurisdiction governing legislative advocacy or lobbying. The legislative advocate shall include a description of any such violation,
7. Whether a firm at which the legislative advocate works, has worked, or for which he owns or has owned an equity interest, has been sanctioned for a
violation of this article or a violation of any law, regulation or ordinance of another jurisdiction governing legislative advocacy or lobbying. Provided
however, the legislative advocate need only report those violations that occurred while he worked for or held in equity interest in the firm. The
legislative advocate shall include a description of any such violation,
8. A description of legislative advocacy conducted during the previous twelve (12) months that was not previously reported to the City by the legislative
advocate.
B. In addition, expenditure lobbyists shall indicate they are filing as expenditure lobbyists. If the expenditure lobbyist is a corporation, the form shall include
the names of the corporation's chief executive officer, chief financial officer, and secretary, any officer who authorized payments to influence local
legislative and administrative action, and any person who owns more than twenty percent (20%) of the corporation. If the expenditure lobbyist is a
partnership, the form shall include the name of each partner if the entity has fewer than five (5), or the name of the partner with the greatest ownership
interest if the entity has five (5) or more partners. If the expenditure lobbyist is any other type of business entity, the form shall include the name of each
person with an ownership interest if the entity has fewer than five (5) owners, or the name of the person with the greatest ownership interest in the
entity, if the entity has five (5) or more owners.
C. Any form submitted by a legislative advocate shall be signed under penalty of perjury, shall be available for public view in the City Clerk's Office as well
as posted on the City's website in a searchable database and shall be forwarded by the City Clerk to each City official, the City Manager and the City
Attorney.
D. Within ten (10) days after any information on the form becomes incorrect, the legislative advocate shall update the form with the corrected information.
E. All legislative advocates who filed a legislative advocate registration form with the City between February 9, 2017 through and including February 8,
2018 shall file a new registration form with the City that meets the requirements of this article, or shall file a form disclosing the termination of the
legislative advocate relationship pursuant to section 1-9-107 of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2749, eff. 2-9-2018; amd. Ord. 18-O-2752, eff. 5-11-2018; Ord.
19-O-2787, eff. 10-18-2019)
1-9-106: DISCLOSURE AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 20/797
At any time that a legislative advocate engages in legislative advocacy at a City Council or City commission meeting, the legislative advocate shall
announce the specific matter being addressed and shall identify the client who is being represented by the legislative advocate. (Ord. 14-O-2656, eff. 4-4-
2014)
1-9-107: NOTICE OF TERMINATION:
Upon termination of a legislative advocate's role concerning a project, the legislative advocate shall file a notice of termination with the City. The notice
shall be filed on the form provided by the City. (Ord. 18-O-2749, eff. 2-9-2018)
1-9-108: REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Pursuant to the administrative remedies and procedures set forth in chapter 3 of this title, any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of
this article, may be assessed an administrative penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation.
Additionally, the City Prosecutor is delegated the authority to investigate any charge that a person has knowingly and willfully violated this article. If the City
Prosecutor determines that there is probable cause to believe that a legislative advocate has knowingly, willfully and materially violated the provisions of
this article, the City Prosecutor may request that the City conduct an administrative hearing to determine whether such a violation has occurred and, if so,
whether the legislative advocate should be prohibited from engaging in legislative advocacy for a period of time.
Upon the request of the City Prosecutor, a Hearing Officer shall be retained and an administrative hearing shall be conducted substantially in accordance
with the procedures set forth in chapter 3 of this title for conducting hearings on administrative citations.
If, after conducting a hearing pursuant to this section, a Hearing Officer determines that the legislative advocate has knowingly, willfully and materially
violated the provisions of this article, then for the first violation of this article, the Hearing Officer shall prohibit the legislative advocate from engaging in
legislative advocacy for a minimum period of six (6) months, for a second violation, the Hearing Officer shall prohibit the legislative advocate from
engaging in legislative advocacy for a minimum period of one year, and for a third or subsequent violation, the Hearing Officer shall prohibit the legislative
advocate from engaging in legislative advocacy for a minimum period of four (4) years. The Hearing Officer may issue an order prohibiting the legislative
advocate from engaging in legislative advocacy for a period of less than the maximum period set forth in this paragraph if the Hearing Officer determines
that mitigating circumstances justify a lesser period of prohibition.
If the Hearing Officer determines that the legislative advocate has knowingly, willfully and materially violated the provisions of this article, or if the
legislative advocate accepts the allegation of knowing, willful and material violation and waives the opportunity for a hearing, then the City's website shall
identify the legislative advocate and indicate that the legislative advocate has violated the City's regulations governing legislative advocacy. The website
identification shall remain posted on the website for one year.
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 3 of this title, any decision by a Hearing Officer pursuant to this section shall be a final decision and not subject
to appeal or review by the City Council. (Ord. 18-O-2749, eff. 2-9-2018)
Article 2. Restrictions Pertaining To Former Elected Officials, Former Planning
Commissioners And Former City Officials
1-9-201: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
In order to make the City of Beverly Hills a better community, built on mutual respect and trust, and in order to promote and maintain the highest standards
of personal and professional conduct among all involved in City government, and in order to avoid any appearance of undue influence on City officials and
elected officials in making governmental actions and decisions, the City Council finds it desirable to impose reasonable restrictions on the ability of former
city officials, elected officials and planning commissioners to influence the city, or its officers and employees. (Ord. 06-O-2507, eff. 11-17-2006)
1-9-202: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings for purposes of this article, unless otherwise indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OR LEGISLATIVE ACTION: The proposal, drafting, introduction, development, consideration, amendment, enactment, or defeat by the
city, the city council, or any commission, committee, or subcommittee of the city of any ordinance, amendment, resolution, report, initiative or other matter,
including any rule, regulation, or other action in any regulatory proceeding, whether legislative, administrative, quasi-legislative or quasi-judicial.
Administrative action does not include any action that is solely ministerial.
CITY OFFICIAL: Every officer or employee of the city who is required to file a statement of economic interests pursuant to the city's conflict of interest
code, except that "city official" shall not include any member of the city council or a member of a city commission, committee or subcommittee.
COMMISSION AND COMMITTEE: Any body created by the city council as set forth in title 2, chapter 2 and title 10, chapter 1 of this code.
COMMUNICATION TO THE CITY: For purposes of section 1-9-203 of this chapter shall mean any formal or informal appearance before, or the making of
any oral or written communication to, the city, the city council or any member thereof, or any commission, committee, subcommittee of the city or member
thereof, or any other officer or employee of the city, if the appearance or communication is made for the purpose of influencing a land use matter.
ELECTED OFFICIAL: Any person elected or appointed to hold an elected office of the city.
LAND USE MATTER: For purposes of section 1-9-203 of this chapter shall mean those matters for which an application has been submitted to the city for
administrative or legislative action pursuant to the provisions set forth in title 10 of this code such as, but not limited to, a general plan amendment, specific
plan, conditional use permit, variance or a planned development.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 21/797
PLANNING COMMISSIONER: Each member of the Beverly Hills planning commission.
VOTED UPON BY THE ELECTED OFFICIAL: For purposes of section 1-9-203 of this chapter shall refer to a land use matter on which the city council has
taken action at a formal meeting during the elected official's term of office, unless the elected official was absent from all meetings at which the land use
matter was considered. (Ord. 07-O-2535, eff. 12-14-2007)
1-9-203: PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES:
A. Revolving Door Prohibition:
1. No former city official, elected official or planning commissioner shall represent, for compensation, any other person, by making any formal or
informal appearance before, or by making any oral or written communication to, the city, the city council or any member thereof, or any commission,
committee, subcommittee of the city or member thereof, or any other officer or employee of the city, if the appearance or communication is made for
the purpose of influencing administrative or legislative action, or influencing any action or proceeding involving the issuance, amendment, awarding,
or revocation of a permit, license, grant, or contract, or the sale or purchase of goods or property; provided, however, that such prohibition shall only
be applicable for the following time periods after leaving city office or employment:
a. For city officials who leave office or employment prior to October 1, 2016, for a period of two (2) years after leaving city office or employment;
b. For elected officials who leave office prior to October 1, 2016, for a period of thirty (30) months after leaving city office;
c. For city officials and elected officials who leave office or employment on or after October 1, 2016, for a period of four (4) years after leaving city
office or employment;
d. For planning commissioners who are appointed prior to October 1, 2016, for a period of thirty (30) months after leaving city office.
e. For planning commissioners who are appointed or reappointed on or after October 1, 2016, for a period of four (4) years after leaving city office.
B. Representation By Former Elected Official: No former elected official shall represent, for compensation, any person or entity, by making any
communication to the city, if the communication is related to a land use matter which was voted upon by the elected official during his or her term of
office.
C. Acceptance Of Gifts From Applicant: Elected officials and city officials who participate in a decision to approve a land use matter, shall be prohibited for
a period of thirty (30) months from the date of any decision to approve a land use matter made prior to October 1, 2016, or for a period of four (4) years
from the date of any decision to approve a land use matter made after October 1, 2016, from receiving from the applicant anything of value that
exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), including, without limitation, any gift, payment of money, or other compensation that exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Planning commissioners appointed prior to October 1, 2016, who participate in a decision to approve a land use matter, shall be
prohibited for a period of thirty (30) months from the date of any decision to approve a land use matter, or for a period of four (4) years from the date of
any decision to approve a land use matter for planning commissioners appointed or reappointed on or after October 1, 2016, from receiving from the
applicant anything of value that exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), including, without limitation, any gift, payment of money, or other compensation
that exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00). This prohibition shall continue in effect after the elected official, city official or planning commissioner
leaves office for the applicable period. For the purposes of this prohibition, the "applicant" shall include partners, majority shareholders, and officers of
the applicant, as well as any other person who provides anything of value to the elected official, city official or planning commissioner on behalf of the
applicant. If the applicant is making an application as an agent of a principal, then for the purposes of this subsection the applicant shall be considered
the principal, not the agent. (Ord. 16-O-2707, eff. 9-30-2016)
1-9-204: RESTRICTIONS ON EMPLOYMENT OF FORMER ELECTED OFFICIALS:
No former elected official shall accept any position of employment or management for compensation, or act as a director or officer for compensation of any
organization or entity which: a) receives more than fifty percent (50%) of its funding from the city, as determined by the city; or b) has fifty percent (50%) or
more of its board members, officers or directors appointed by the city council; provided, however, that such prohibition shall only be applicable for the
following time periods after leaving city office:
A. For elected officials who leave office prior to October 1, 2016, for a period of two (2) years after leaving city office; or
B. For elected officials who leave office on or after October 1, 2016, for a period of four (4) years after leaving city office. (Ord. 16-O-2707, eff. 9-30-2016)
1-9-205: EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibitions in this article shall not apply to the following:
A. Appearances or communications by former city officials, elected officials or planning commissioners representing their personal interests, such as, but
not limited to, an appearance before a city commission or committee concerning development of their home.
B. Appearances or communications by former city officials, elected officials or planning commissioners at the request of, or on behalf of any government
entity or public agency, including the city of Beverly Hills.
C. Appearances or communications by former city officials, elected officials or planning commissioners who are engaged in such activity without
compensation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 22/797
D. Any former city official, elected official or planning commissioners whose only activity is submitting a bid on a competitively bid contract, who submits a
written or oral response to a request for more information, or who participates in an oral interview process. This exemption shall not apply to any
person who attempts to influence the actions of any city official or elected official with regard to any such contract outside an interview or public
meeting. (Ord. 07-O-2535, eff. 12-14-2007)
1-9-206: DISAPPROVAL OF TRANSACTIONS:
A. If a former city official, elected official or planning commissioner violates any provision of this article, such violation or violations shall be grounds for the
city to disapprove any contract, approval, permit, or transaction that was related to any such violation.
B. A violation of this article shall not be a basis for invalidating any city decision. (Ord. 16-O-2707, eff. 9-30-2016)
Chapter 10
REFERENDUM
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
CIRCULATOR: A person who presents to other persons for possible signature a referendum petition relating to a City ordinance.
REFERENDUM FINANCIER: Actual legal name of any person(s) whose cumulative contributions, whether cash or in kind, to a Ballot Measure Committee
as defined in section 1-8-2 of this title, or otherwise, to support or oppose a referendum, total ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more. There may be
more than one referendum financier. (Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-18-2019)
1-10-2: CIRCULATOR BADGE:
A. A circulator who has not been paid, or promised to be paid, for circulating a referendum petition relating to a City ordinance shall, at all times while
circulating wear on his or her person in a visible location an identification badge with a blue-colored outer border that includes the words "VOLUNTEER
CIRCULATOR" in bold-faced type that is clearly legible and has a font size of at least 16 points.
B. A circulator who has been paid, or is promised to be paid, for circulating a referendum petition relating to a City ordinance shall, at all times while
circulating wear on his or her person in a visible location an identification badge with a yellow-colored outer border that includes the words "PAID
CIRCULATOR" in bold-faced type that is clearly legible and has a font size of at least 16 points. The identification badge shall also include in boldfaced
type that is clearly legible and has a font size of at least 12 points the name and telephone number of the individual or entity employing the circulator as
well as any referendum financier; provided, however, if an entity employing such circulator is a signature gathering service, then the name of the
individual or entity employing such signature gathering service shall be disclosed. If there is more than one referendum financier, then the identification
badge shall list the top three (3) referendum financiers by contribution amount.
C. The City Clerk shall maintain and make available on request an example of each of the identification badges required by this section. (Ord. 19-O-2787,
eff. 10-18-2019)
1-10-3: IMPARTIAL ANALYSIS:
The City Attorney shall prepare a 500-word or less impartial analysis of the ordinance subject to referendum showing the effect of the ordinance on the
existing law upon the earlier of the following: a) within five (5) business days of direction by the City Manager; or b) within five (5) business days of filing by
a referendum financier a legislative advocate registration form pursuant to section 1-9-105 of this title. The impartial analysis shall be posted on the City's
website. (Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-18-2019)
1-10-4: COMPLAINTS AND RESPONSE:
Any person may make a complaint alleging a violation of this chapter, or of the provisions of chapter 9 of this title relating to referendum petitions, by
submitting the complaint in writing to the City Clerk's Office. The City Clerk shall transmit such complaints to the City Attorney, who shall determine which
office of the City shall investigate the complaint. The City Attorney or his designee shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint in writing to the complainant
within two (2) business days of receiving the complaint from the City Clerk. (Ord. 19-O-2787, eff. 10-18-2019)
Title 2
ADMINISTRATION, PERSONNEL, AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 1
COUNCIL
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 23/797
2-1-1: MEETINGS:
A. Formal Meetings: The council shall hold formal meetings in the council chamber of the city hall on the first and third Tuesday of each month at seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. and on such other days, at such other times, and at such other places as may be designated in an order for a special meeting.
When the day for any formal meeting of the council falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall not be held on such holiday but shall be held at the same
hour on the next succeeding Tuesday thereafter.
B. Study Sessions: The council shall hold study sessions in the council chamber of the city hall, 455 North Rexford Drive, Beverly Hills, California, on the
first and third Tuesday of each month at two thirty o'clock (2:30) P.M. and on such other days, at such other times, and at such other places as may be
designated in an order for a special meeting. When the day for any study session of the council falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall not be held on
such holiday but shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding Tuesday thereafter. The study session shall be a regular meeting of the city
council for all purposes. (Ord. 08-O-2544, eff. 3-7-2008)
2-1-2: AGENDA:
All reports, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, and other matters to be submitted to the council at a scheduled formal meeting shall be delivered
to the city clerk not later than ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on the Friday preceding the day of the council meeting. The city clerk shall prepare the agenda of all
such matters according to the order of business and cause a complete copy of such agenda, with related material, to be delivered to each council member,
the city manager and the city attorney on the Friday preceding the day of the meeting. The agenda shall be available for public inspection in the city library
and in the city clerk's office at least seventy two (72) hours prior to the meeting. (1962 Code § 2-3.02)
2-1-3: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
All formal meetings of the council shall be open to the public; provided, however, when a closed session is held in accordance with law, the public may be
excluded from such closed session held during a council meeting. At the hour set by law on the day of the scheduled formal meeting, the council
members, the city manager, the city attorney, the city clerk, and such other personnel as have been requested to be present by the city manager shall take
their regular stations in the council chamber. The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in substantially the following
order, except as may be otherwise ordered by the mayor or the council:
A. Roll call;
B. Presentations;
C. Oral communication from the audience;
D. Consent calendar;
E. Public hearings;
F. Continued and new business;
G. Items pulled from consent calendar for discussion;
H. Commission synopses and minutes;
I. Other business; and
J. Adjournment. (Ord. 13-O-2646, eff. 10-11-2013)
2-1-4: DUTIES OF THE MAYOR; VICE MAYOR:
The mayor, or in the mayor's absence the vice mayor, shall be the presiding officer and shall assume the office and duties immediately following election.
The mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all formal meetings of the council, state questions coming before the council, announce its decision
on all subjects, and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council as a whole, in which event a majority vote shall govern and
conclusively determine such question of order.
All ordinances and resolutions adopted and contracts approved by the council at formal meetings shall be signed by the mayor if the mayor is present. In
the event of the absence of the mayor, the vice mayor shall sign such documents. In the absence of the mayor and vice mayor, the acting mayor shall sign
such documents. (1962 Code § 2-3.05)
2-1-5: CALL TO ORDER; PRESIDING OFFICER:
The mayor, or in the mayor's absence the vice mayor, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the formal meeting and shall call the council to order. In
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 24/797
the absence of the mayor and the vice mayor, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon an acting mayor shall be elected by the council
members present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or vice mayor, the acting mayor shall relinquish the chair at the conclusion of the business then before the
council. (1962 Code § 2-3.06)
2-1-6: ROLL CALL:
Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk shall call the roll of the council members and the names of those present shall be entered
in the minutes. (1962 Code § 2-3.07)
2-1-7: QUORUM:
A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time. When there is no
quorum for a meeting, the mayor, vice mayor, or any council member shall adjourn such meeting, or, if no council member is present, the city clerk shall
adjourn the meeting. (1962 Code § 2-3.08)
2-1-8: RIGHT TO ADDRESS THE COUNCIL:
Any person desiring to address the council during a formal meeting shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do; provided, however,
under the following headings of business, unless the presiding officer rules otherwise, any qualified and interested person shall have the right to address
the council upon obtaining recognition by the presiding officer:
A. Interested parties or their authorized representatives may address the council with regard to written communications referred to in any staff report, or
agenda item.
B. Interested persons or their authorized representatives may address the council in regard to matters under consideration in a public hearing.
C. Taxpayers or residents of the city, or their authorized legal representatives, may address the council by oral communication on any matter concerning
the city's business or on any matter over which the council has control during oral communications part of the agenda. (1962 Code § 2-3.12)
2-1-9: PROCEDURES IN ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL:
A. Each person desiring to address the council shall furnish their name and address to the city clerk. When called upon by the presiding officer, the person
shall come to the microphone, state their name in an audible tone of voice for the record, and shall limit their remarks as directed by the presiding
officer with the consent of the council. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than a
council member and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion without the permission of the presiding officer.
B. Whenever any group of persons wishes to address the council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a
spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the council and, in the event additional matters are to be presented at the time by any other member
of such group, to limit the number of persons so addressing the council in order to avoid unnecessary repetition before the council. (1962 Code § 2-
3.13)
2-1-10: RULES OF COUNCIL DEBATE:
A. The presiding officer may move, second, and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all
council members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a council member by reason of acting as the presiding officer.
B. Every council member desiring to speak shall address the chair and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine comments to the question
under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.
C. A council member once recognized shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it shall be to call such council member to order or as otherwise
provided by this section. If a council member while speaking, shall be called to order, the council member shall cease speaking until the question of
order has been determined and, if in order, shall be permitted to proceed.
D. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council at a formal meeting may be made only on the day such action was taken or at the next
succeeding adjourned or regular meeting. Such a motion may only be made by a council member of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any
council member. The motion may be made at any time during such meeting, and shall be debatable. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent any council member from making or remaking the original motion or a similar motion at a subsequent meeting of the council.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, "Robert's Rules Of Order, Newly Revised Edition", 1981 edition, shall govern the conduct of the formal
meetings of the council. (1962 Code § 2-3.11)
2-1-11: ROLL CALL VOTE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 25/797
A roll call vote shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances, resolutions, and orders for the payment of money and shall be entered in the minutes of
the council showing those council members voting aye, those voting no, and those not voting or absent. Upon the request of any council member, a roll
call vote shall be taken and recorded on any vote. Whenever a recorded or roll call of the council is in order, the city clerk shall call the names of the
council members in order of seniority, except that the name of the presiding officer shall be called last. (1962 Code § 2-3.19)
2-1-12: SILENCE CONSTITUTES AFFIRMATIVE VOTE:
A council member's silence on a roll call vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote, unless such council member states otherwise. (1962 Code § 2-3.14)
2-1-13: RECORDATION OF ENTRY OF PROTEST:
Any council member, upon request, shall have the right to have the reasons for such council member's dissent or protest against any action of the council
entered in the minutes. (1962 Code § 2-3.18)
2-1-14: INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARINGS:
The council shall have the discretionary right to make investigations and hold hearings with respect to all matters within its legislative power and all matters
pertaining to the administration of the business of the city, and shall have the power of subpoena as provided in sections 37104 et seq., of the state
Government Code. (1962 Code § 2-3.20)
2-1-15: RECORDATION OF COUNCIL PROCEEDINGS; NOTICE REQUIRED:
No person shall use a tape recorder, stenotype, or other mechanical device to record all or any part of the proceedings of the council, whether sitting in
formal or informal session, without first notifying the city clerk in writing at least four (4) hours prior to the time fixed for the convening of such meeting. In
the event a person intending to record a council proceeding fails to give such notice, the council may prohibit such person's use of a tape recorder,
stenotype, or other mechanical device to record such council proceedings. (1962 Code § 2-3.21)
2-1-16: DECORUM DURING COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A. While the council is in formal meeting, the council members shall preserve order and decorum, and no council member by conversation or otherwise,
shall delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council, disturb any council member while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the
council or the presiding officer, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. During a council meeting, any persons making impertinent or slanderous remarks, or using loud, boisterous or profane language, or who persistently
interrupt the proceedings of the council, shall be forthwith barred from further audience and attendance at such meeting by the presiding officer, unless
the order of the presiding officer is overruled by a majority of council.
C. Signs, placards, banners, or similar items shall not be permitted at any time in the council chamber. (1962 Code § 2-3.15)
2-1-17: ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM:
The police chief or other official designated by council shall be ex officio sergeant at arms of the council, and shall carry out all orders and instructions
given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum in the council chamber. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be
the duty of the sergeant at arms or any police officer present to eject any such person from the council chamber or place such person under arrest, or
both. (1962 Code § 2-3.16)
2-1-18: PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BE WITHIN THE RAIL:
No person, except city officials and their representatives shall be permitted within the rail in front of the council chamber without the consent of the council.
(1962 Code § 2-3.17)
2-1-19: COUNCIL SALARIES:
Each member of the council shall receive as monthly salary the sum of seven hundred eighty five dollars eighty one cents ($785.81) which shall be
payable at the same time and in the same manner as salaries paid to other officers and employees of the city. This compensation shall not take effect until
that date in April 2007, on which new terms of office will begin. (1962 Code § 2-3.22; amd. Ord. 02-O-2416, eff. 12-19-2002; Ord. 06-O-2505, eff. 11-3-
2006)
2-1-20: COUNCIL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENTS:
The salaries prescribed in section 2-1-19 of this chapter are and shall be exclusive of any amount payable to each member of the council as
reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by such council member in the performance of official duties for the city. (1962 Code § 2-3.24)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 26/797
Chapter 2
COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Article 1. General Provisions
2-2-101: GENERAL:
Council shall create such commissions and committees as required by State law or as deemed appropriate for the performance of specific City functions.
Commissions shall be created by ordinance and committees shall be created by ordinance, resolution, or motion of the Council. (1962 Code § 2-13; amd.
Ord. 92-O-2156, eff. 12-11-1992)
2-2-102: DEFINITIONS:
COMMISSION: An agency charged with the consideration of an indefinitely recurrent sequence of transactions and whose members serve for a specified
term and hold meetings on a regular publicized schedule.
COMMITTEE: An agency charged with the consideration of a single nonrecurring subject or matter, or a matter which recurs sporadically, and which holds
meetings only as appropriate. (1962 Code § 2-13)
2-2-103: DURATION OF COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES:
A. Every commission shall continue indefinitely until abolished by Council.
B. Every committee shall automatically terminate on the first anniversary of its creation, unless otherwise provided by Council. (1962 Code § 2-13)
2-2-104: APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Appointments to any commission or committee shall be made by the City Council.
B. Any person appointed to a commission or committee shall be a resident of the City, unless otherwise designated in the instrument creating such
commission or committee, and shall meet such other requirements as designated by Council.
C. Any person appointed to a commission or committee shall serve without compensation for service on such commission or committee.
D. Any person appointed to a commission or committee (other than the Sunshine Task Force Committee) shall not have been a legislative advocate as
defined in section 1-9-102 of this Code for at least two (2) years prior to the start of the term and once appointed, shall not function as a legislative
advocate while serving on a commission or committee; provided, however, the foregoing provisions shall not apply to the Architectural Commission or
Design Review Commission if necessary to meet the membership requirements specified in section 10-3-3002 or 10-3-4402 of this Code, as
applicable, and the legislative advocate limits his or her legislative advocacy to the area of expertise for which he or she was appointed. (Ord. 17-O-
2742, eff. 12-22-2017)
2-2-105: TERM OF OFFICE:
A. Appointments to a commission shall be for an initial term of two (2) years. At the discretion of the City Council, Commissioners may be reappointed to a
second term. Appointments to a second term may be for up to four (4) years. The City Council may appoint any commission member or members to
terms shorter or longer than those set forth in this subsection if the City Council determines that a shorter or longer term or terms is in the best interest
of the commission or is appropriate to stagger the terms of appointees so that the terms of all or a majority of members do not expire concurrently or
inappropriately close in time.
B. Appointees who have served two (2) successive terms shall not be eligible for reappointment to the same commission.
C. A member may serve beyond expiration of that member's term until such time as a successor is appointed.
D. A Commissioner must wait one year after the end of the Commissioner's term before applying to another commission other than the Planning
Commission.
E. Committee members shall be appointed at the time of creation of the committee. Where the committee continues in existence for three (3) years or
more, original appointments shall expire on the third anniversary of the committee where the committee consists of three (3) members, and shall expire
on the fourth anniversary of the committee where the committee consists of four (4) or more members. Any committee which continues in existence
beyond a period of three (3) years shall be governed by the appointment provisions of subsections A, B and C of this section. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-
2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 27/797
2-2-106: TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP:
Membership on a commission or committee shall terminate under the following conditions, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code:
A. Membership shall terminate automatically upon resignation or death of a member.
B. If a commission or committee regularly meets once per month, and a member is absent from three (3) regular meetings within a twelve (12) month
period, such Commissioner shall meet with an ad hoc committee appointed by the Mayor to discuss the reasons for such absence. If the ad hoc
committee believes that the absences are likely to continue, the ad hoc committee will request that the matter be placed on a City Council agenda. The
City Council, in its sole discretion, may consider the following actions: 1) if the Council finds that the absences were due to health reasons or for other
unusual hardship that justifies the absence, the Council may excuse the absences and if necessary, appoint a temporary Commissioner to fill the role
until such time as the Commissioner is able to serve; or 2) remove such Commissioner and if necessary, appoint a temporary Commissioner until such
time as a new Commissioner is appointed.
C. If a commission or committee regularly meets at least twice per month, and a member is absent from four (4) regular meetings within a twelve (12)
month period, such Commissioner shall meet with an ad hoc committee appointed by the Mayor to discuss the reasons for such absence. If the ad hoc
committee believes that the absences are likely to continue, the ad hoc committee will request that the matter be placed on a City Council agenda. The
City Council, in its sole discretion, may consider the following actions: 1) if the Council finds that the absences will not likely continue, the Council may
allow the Commissioner to continue serving; or 2) remove such Commissioner and if necessary, appoint a temporary Commissioner until such time as
a new Commissioner is appointed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Commissioner's term shall automatically terminate in the event a Commissioner is
absent from six (6) regular meetings in a twelve (12) month period, or nine (9) regular meetings within a twenty four (24) month period.
D. Membership shall terminate automatically if a member ceases to reside in the City, unless residence is not required for membership or unless a
member has temporarily ceased to reside in the City because of unusual circumstance or hardship, has not purchased a home outside the City in
which the member is residing, intends to move back into the City, and has not previously ceased to reside in the City at any time while serving on the
commission. For the purposes of this subsection "temporarily" means a period not exceeding six (6) months starting from the date a member ceased
residence in the City.
E. Membership shall terminate automatically if a member's office would be vacated under the provisions for disqualification from office set forth in section
1770 of the California Government Code. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section governing absences shall supersede the provisions of
section 1770 regarding absences.
F. The City Council may remove any member from a commission or committee for any reason. Such removal may be accomplished by resolution or
minute order of the City Council.
G. In the event of a Commissioner vacancy due to resignation or termination, the City Council liaisons to the affected commission shall recommend a
former Commissioner until such time as a new Commissioner is appointed to fill such vacancy, subject to City Council approval. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff.
3-6-2015)
2-2-107: OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES:
Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance or resolution creating a commission or committee the following provisions shall apply in the conduct of
business of such commission or committee:
A. Each commission or committee shall adopt rules of conduct and procedure which shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Each commission shall have regularly scheduled meetings at least once each month, and may call special meetings as provided in section 54956 of the
State Government Code.
C. Committees are not required to have regularly scheduled meetings, and meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by a majority of the
membership.
D. A majority of the designated membership shall constitute a quorum, and any action shall require a majority of the quorum for either affirmative or
negative action.
E. A Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson shall serve for one year. A rotation progression of the Chair and the Vice Chair position among Commissioners
shall be established by the City Clerk based upon seniority of appointment to the commission. If a Commissioner declines to serve as Chairperson,
such Commissioner shall wait until the other Commissioners currently serving at such time are eligible for Chairperson before assuming the Chair,
regardless of seniority of appointment. A Commissioner shall not serve as Chairperson or Vice Chairperson during his or her first year as a
Commissioner. A Commissioner shall not serve as Chairperson if such Commissioner's term will end before such Commissioner is able to serve one
complete year as Chairperson.
F. An official record of all considerations and decisions shall be made and filed with the City Clerk; and a report shall be made to Council.
G. The City Manager shall designate such staff as necessary to provide administrative support, unless otherwise designated by Council. (Ord. 15-O-2673,
eff. 3-6-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 28/797
Article 2. Reserved
Article 3. Reserved (Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
Article 4. Reserved
Article 5. Rent Stabilization Commission
2-2-501: ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION:
There is hereby established the Rent Stabilization Commission.
A. Appointment And Qualifications: The commission shall be composed of six (6) members and three (3) alternates appointed by the City Council, all of
whom shall be residents of the City. Applicants for membership on the commission shall submit an application to the City. The application shall include
a statement under penalty of perjury of the applicant's interests and dealings in multi-family residential real property including, but not limited to,
ownership, trusteeship, sale, or management, including investment in or in association with partnerships, corporations, companies, joint ventures, and
syndicates engaged in the ownership, rental, sale, or management of multi-family residential real property during the three (3) years immediately prior
to the date of submission of the applicant's application to the City. This documentation shall be made available to the public.
B. Composition: The commission shall be comprised of two (2) landlords who own one or more residential rental properties within the City, two (2) tenants,
and two (2) members who are not landlords, tenants or managers of an apartment building ("at large member"). One of the three (3) alternates shall be
a landlord who owns one or more residential rental properties in the City; one alternate shall be a tenant, and one alternate shall not be a landlord,
tenant or manager of an apartment building. The landlord alternate shall serve in place of the landlord members of the commission; the tenant alternate
shall serve in place of the tenant members, and the at large alternate shall serve in place of the at large members. Members of the commission shall
have the duties and functions set forth in this article and in title 4, chapters 5 and 6 of this Code with respect to rent stabilization.
C. Term Of Office: Commission members shall serve terms of four (4) years. Commission member terms shall be staggered. Therefore, one landlord
member, one tenant member, and one at large member of the initially appointed Commissioners and the landlord alternate, the tenant alternate and the
at large alternate shall be appointed for an initial term of four (4) years. The other three (3) Commissioners shall be appointed for an initial term of two
(2) years. Each Commissioner and alternate shall thereafter have the opportunity for reappointment to an additional four-year term. An appointment to
fill a vacancy on the commission shall be for the period of the unexpired term.
D. Secretary Of The Commission: The Deputy Director of Rent Stabilization shall act as the Secretary of the commission. The Secretary shall attend
commission meetings and keep a record of the proceedings and transactions of the commission, specifying the names of the Commissioners in
attendance at each meeting and the ayes and noes upon all roll calls. The Secretary shall, among other duties, post and publish all orders, resolutions,
and notices which the commission shall order to be posted and published.
E. Quorum And Actions Of The Commission: Notwithstanding section 2-2-107 of this chapter, to constitute a quorum of the commission, the following six
(6) Commissioners must be present: two (2) Commissioners who are the landlord members or the landlord alternate; two (2) who are tenant members
or the tenant alternate, and two (2) who are the at large members or the at large alternate. The powers conferred upon the commission shall be
exercised by resolution or motion adopted by a majority vote of the members of the commission and recorded in the minutes with the ayes and noes. If
one or more alternates are present at a meeting but are not serving in the place of an absent Commissioner, the alternate(s) may participate in the
commission's discussions about policy issues but shall not be entitled to cast a vote. (Ord. 19-O-2776, eff. 5-3-2019)
2-2-502: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the duties of the Rent Stabilization Commission shall be as follows:
A. Make recommendations to the City Council concerning amendments to title 4, chapters 5 and 6 of this Code that have not been resolved by the City
Council; and
B. Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the City Council. (Ord. 19-O-2776, eff. 5-3-2019)
Article 6. Charitable Solicitations Commission
2-2-601: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a Charitable Solicitations Commission consisting of five (5) members. (1962 Code § 4-10.200 et seq.; amd. Ord. 09-O-2575, eff. 1-15-
2010)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 29/797
2-2-602: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Charitable Solicitations Commission shall perform the following functions:
A. Review applications for solicitation permits for charitable or religious solicitation purposes, and make recommendations thereon as provided in title 4,
chapter 3, article 8 of this Code.
B. Evaluate the fiscal health of nonprofit organizations and recommend eligible organizations for community assistance grant funds, as well as funding
allocations to organizations based on service needs in the City.
C. Perform such other functions and duties as designated by City Council. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
2-2-603: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The Police Department shall be responsible for furnishing administrative staff support to the Charitable Solicitations Commission. (1962 Code § 4-10.200
et seq.; amd. Ord. 09-O-2575, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 7. Traffic And Parking Commission
2-2-701: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a Traffic and Parking Commission consisting of five (5) members. (Ord. 12-O-2618, eff. 2-24-2012)
2-2-702: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Traffic and Parking Commission shall perform the following functions:
A. Act as an advisory agency to the Council in all matters which relate to parking and traffic;
B. Advise and counsel with the transportation/engineering official and the Police Chief as to ways and means to improve general traffic conditions in the
City;
C. Prepare and coordinate with the Planning Commission, and recommend to the Council for adoption, a comprehensive long range plan relating to
transportation, traffic, and off street and on street parking in the City;
D. Perform such other duties relating to traffic and parking matters as may be referred to it by the Council, other commissions, and the
transportation/engineering official;
E. Perform the functions and duties relative to traffic, parking, and public transportation vehicles as designated under title 7 of this Code;
F. Perform such other duties and functions as may be designated by Council. (1962 Code § 3-6.1900 et seq.)
2-2-703: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The Transportation Division of the Department of Environmental Services shall provide administrative support to the Traffic and Parking Commission.
(1962 Code § 3-6.1900 et seq.)
Article 8. Arts and Culture Commission
2-2-801: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established an Arts and Culture Commission consisting of five (5) members. (Ord. 19-O-2781, eff. 6-7-2019)
2-2-802: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The mission of the Arts and Culture Commission is to promote and nurture the arts and cultural life of the City of Beverly Hills.
The Arts and Culture Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 30/797
A. Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council on matters pertaining to the enrichment of the community through fine arts, visual arts, performing arts,
digital and media arts, arts education, and community cultural activities, education and events;
B. Serve as an advocate for cultural activities, community cultural programs and events within the City;
C. Promote arts and culture activities of and in the City to broaden the opportunities for residents and visitors' participation in the arts;
D. Implement the City's Fine Art Program, as specified in sections 3-1-801 through 3-1-814 of this Code, including, but not limited to, the purchase of fine
art for the public, consideration of donations and loans of public art, hosting art exhibits or art events, and performance of such other duties relating to
procurement, display and maintenance of fine art as designated by the City Council;
E. Foster public and private partnerships for providing arts and cultural programming, including enhancing and expanding community cultural events by
involving artists, art galleries, fine and visual arts, performing arts, digital and media arts, literary arts and creative arts organizations, the creative
community, residents and the business community;
F. Promote access to the highest quality arts and cultural opportunities possible;
G. Encourage the integration of cultural programs and community cultural events into fabric of the City to improve the quality of life for City residents and
welcome visitors to the world-class Beverly Hills experience;
H. Encourage and support arts education programs in the community and schools including docent programs or similar;
I. Perform such other duties, not inconsistent with this Code, as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, City Council policy or other City Council
action. (Ord. 19-O-2781, eff. 6-7-2019)
2-2-803: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The Community Services Department shall be responsible for furnishing administrative staff support to the Arts and Culture Commission. (Ord. 19-O-2781,
eff. 6-7-2019)
Article 9. R-1 Commission (Rep. by Ord. 92-O-2159, eff. 12-8-1992)
Article 10. Recreation And Parks Commission
2-2-1001: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a Recreation and Parks Commission consisting of five (5) members. (Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990)
2-2-1002: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Recreation and Parks Commission shall perform the following functions:
A. Act as an advisory body to the City Council on matters which relate to recreation and parks programs and facilities, including, without limitation, the
Greystone estate grounds and mansion.
B. Advise and make recommendations to the Director of Recreation and Parks, or his designee, on the planning, evaluation and delivery of recreation and
parks programs and facilities including:
1. Formulating general policies on use and delivery of recreation and park services;
2. Evaluating the effectiveness of programs in relation to City Council policy objectives;
3. Assisting in communications with the community concerning recreation and parks programs.
C. Advise the City Council and staff regarding capital improvements and program projects for recreation and parks improvements.
D. Provide recommendations on proposed user fees for use of recreation and parks facilities and programs.
E. Perform such other duties relating to recreation and parks matters as may be referred to it by the City Council, or the Director of Recreation and Parks,
or his representative. (Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990; amd. Ord. 99-O-2332, eff. 9-3-1999; Ord. 03-O-2430, eff. 10-17-2003)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 31/797
2-2-1003: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The recreation and parks department, or such other staff designated by the city manager, shall provide administrative support to the recreation and parks
commission. (Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990; amd. Ord. 03-O-2430, eff. 10-17-2003)
Article 11. Public Works Commission
2-2-1101: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a public works commission consisting of five (5) members. (Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990)
2-2-1102: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
The public works commission shall perform the following functions:
A. Act as an advisory body to the city council on matters which relate to public works facilities, infrastructure and programs.
B. Advise and make recommendations to the director of public services or other staff on the planning, evaluation and delivery of public works systems and
programs. Such public works systems may include the city's water, wastewater, storm drain, street lighting, refuse management and other
infrastructure systems. Traffic engineering associated with street and signalization systems shall be within the jurisdiction of the traffic and parking
commission. The public works commission also shall act in an advisory capacity concerning public outreach programs relating to the above systems,
including, but not limited to, water conservation, refuse recycling, graffiti removal, and other such programs.
C. Provide recommendations on proposed utility rate structure changes.
D. Advise the city council and staff regarding capital improvement program budgetary items relating to public works improvements.
E. Assist in communicating with the community concerning public works programs.
F. Perform such other duties relating to public works matters as may be referred to it by the city council, the director of public services, or their
representatives. (Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-2-1103: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The public services department, or such other staff designated by the city manager, shall provide administrative support to the public works commission.
(Ord. 90-O-2099, eff. 9-13-1990)
Article 12. Health Commission (Rep. by Ord. 98-O-2299, eff. 10-16-1998)
Article 13. Seismic Safety Appeals Board
2-2-1301: ESTABLISHMENT:
There shall be and is hereby created a seismic safety appeals board. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all general provisions of this code
generally applicable to committees and contained in article 1 of this chapter shall also be applicable to this board. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
2-2-1302: JURISDICTION AND FUNCTIONS:
A. The seismic safety appeals board shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide appeals of decisions or determinations made by the director of building and
safety relative to the application and reasonable interpretation of the seismic safety program pursuant to title 9, chapter 5 of this code including the
determination of the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction.
B. The decision of the seismic safety appeals board shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal to the city council. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
2-2-1303: ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS FOR APPOINTMENTS:
Appointees to the seismic safety appeals board shall meet the requirements of section 2-2-104 of this chapter except that appointees other than the public
member need not be residents of the city of Beverly Hills and shall not be employees of the city of Beverly Hills. Appointees, with the exception of the
public member, shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. The board shall be composed of five
(5) members and shall include one member from the general public and four (4) members who shall be chosen from among the following categories,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 32/797
provided that no more than two (2) members of the board shall qualify from any one category: a state licensed structural engineer, a state licensed building
contractor, a state licensed civil engineer and a state licensed architect. The director of building and safety shall be an ex officio member and shall act as
secretary to the board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
2-2-1304: DURATION OF THE SEISMIC SAFETY APPEALS BOARD:
The seismic safety appeals board shall continue indefinitely until abolished by council. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
Article 14. Human Relations Commission
2-2-1401: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a human relations commission. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all provisions of this code and any other rules and
regulations generally applicable to commissions shall apply to the human relations commission. The human relations commission shall be advisory to the
city council and other officials and staff of the city and the commission shall have the authority to make recommendations to the city manager or city
council regarding matters within its purview. (Ord. 00-O-2358, eff. 12-2-2000)
2-2-1402: MISSION STATEMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The human relations commission shall advise, recommend, assist and encourage activities and programs to be undertaken to promote positive human
relations in all aspects of community life in Beverly Hills. The commission shall actively promote a just and equitable multicultural society; and will
endeavor to reduce conflict and tension, as well as discrimination, prejudice and stereotyping based on race, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national
origin, age, disability, or any other arbitrary factor.
The purposes and responsibilities of the commission shall include:
A. Promoting the concepts of diversity, tolerance, and acceptance in the community;
B. Conducting such studies and to hear such issues in any field of human relations in the community as will aid in effectuating the commission's general
purpose;
C. Inquiring into incidents of tension or conflict among or between various racial, religious or nationality groups, and encouraging action by means of
conciliation, conference, and/or persuasion to alleviate such tensions and conflict;
D. Conducting and/or recommending such educational programs as will increase good will throughout the community;
E. Defining, identifying and tracking existing and emerging issues that may benefit from intervention or conflict resolution;
F. Facilitating better communication and interpersonal relations within the city and between the city and members of the community and hearing and
receiving oral and written communications, in an appropriate time and manner, from members of the public concerning any topic that relates to the
relationships between members of the community or between the city or its staff and members of the community;
G. Receiving citizen complaints, in an appropriate time and manner, concerning the interactions of city employees with the public. The commission shall
serve as one alternative to directing complaints to the city department involved in the complaint.
1. The commission or its staff may communicate with complainants and city departments with regard to complaints received by the commission and
may also arrange and facilitate communications directly between city departments and complainants;
2. The commission or its staff may inquire about the status of a complaint received by the commission and the progress of the review of a complaint;
H. Landlord-Tenant Issues:
1. The commission shall hear landlord-tenant disputes in order to provide a public forum where tenants and landlords can address issues and resolve
differences prior to pursuing mediation, requesting a formal hearing with the city, if applicable, or filing a civil suit.
2. The commission shall educate tenants in the City regarding tenant rights. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
2-2-1403: MEMBERSHIP:
The Human Relations Commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City, except that one member may be a nonresident who
is active in religious, educational, or social service agencies serving the Beverly Hills community.
The commission shall request that the Beverly Hills Unified School District and the Police Chief appoint a representative to attend meetings when the
commission deems it appropriate. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 33/797
2-2-1404: RESERVED:
(Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
2-2-1405: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The City Manager shall appoint a Director of Human Relations who shall be a paid member of the City staff and shall provide administrative support to the
Human Relations Commission. The commission may request, through the City Manager or the City Council, access to City personnel in addition to the
Director of Human Relations. The commission, to the extent provided by law, shall have access to all of the public records of the City. The Human
Relations Director shall provide the commission with the records requested by the commission. (Ord. 00-O-2358, eff. 12-2-2000)
Article 15. Representation On Board Of Directors Of The Metropolitan Water District
Of Southern California
2-2-1501: APPOINTMENT:
The City representative to the Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, as authorized by the Metropolitan Water District
Act, shall be designated and appointed by the City Council. Any person appointed shall be a resident of the City and shall meet such other requirements
as designated by Council. (Ord. 06-O-2503, eff. 10-20-2006)
2-2-1502: TERM OF APPOINTMENT:
The term of office of the representative shall be for five (5) years. At the discretion of the City Council, the representative may be reappointed to a second
term. Appointments to a second term shall be for five (5) years; provided, however, that the Council can extend a representative's second term up to an
additional five (5) years for purposes of allowing such representative to complete a full term as an officer of the Board of Directors. (Ord. 17-O-2735, eff.
10-6-2017)
2-2-1503: TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT:
The appointment shall terminate under the following conditions, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code:
A. The appointment shall terminate automatically upon resignation or death of a member.
B. The appointment shall terminate automatically if the appointee is absent from four (4) meetings within a twelve (12) month period. Additionally, the
City Council may consider removing the appointee who is absent from three (3) meetings within a twelve (12) month period.
C. Membership shall terminate automatically if the appointee ceases to reside in the City.
D. Membership shall terminate automatically if a member's office would be vacated under the provisions for disqualification from office set forth in
section 1770 of the California Government Code. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section governing absences shall supersede the
provisions of section 1770 regarding absences.
In addition, the City Council may remove the City representative for any reason at any time. Such removal may be accomplished by resolution or minute
order of the City Council. (Ord. 06-O-2503, eff. 10-20-2006)
Article 16. Health And Safety Commission
2-2-1601: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a Health and Safety Commission. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all provisions of this Code and any other rules
and regulations generally applicable to commissions shall apply to the Health and Safety Commission. The Health and Safety Commission shall be
advisory to the City Council and other officials and staff of the City and the commission shall have the authority to make recommendations to the City
Manager or City Council regarding matters within its purview. (Ord. 07-O-2523, eff. 9-7-2007)
2-2-1602: MISSION STATEMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The health and safety commission shall strive to maintain and improve the overall health and safety of the community in accordance with its purposes
and responsibilities. The commission shall have the following purposes and responsibilities:
1. Increase Public Awareness: Promote and broaden community awareness of health and safety issues, including issues of public health and welfare,
healthy lifestyles, mitigation of safety risks and hazards, the importance of disaster preparedness (hereafter "health and safety issues") and
encourage citizen participation in efforts aimed at promoting health and safety issues.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 34/797
2. Inform The Public: Educate and inform members of the community regarding health and safety issues and risk avoidance through various means,
including, but not limiting to, public discussion, website publications and postings, community outreach, sharing of information and by assisting at and
supporting city sponsored activities and programs which promote health and safety issues.
3. Provide A Public Forum: Provide the community with a public forum within which members of the general public can discuss and/or comment on
health and safety issues.
4. Provide Recommendations: Recommend strategies aimed at improving the health and safety of the city, including as directed by the city council, or
as requested by members of the general public, and/or which relate to health and safety issues.
5. Support Efforts Aimed At Disaster Preparedness, Prevention, Mitigation, Response And Recovery: Support the work of all city departments before,
during and after a medical, natural or manmade disaster, and strengthen ties with the community's disaster related stakeholders.
6. Recognize Achievement: Honor individuals, businesses or groups that have demonstrated leadership in the field of health and safety, have promoted
health and safety issues and/or have otherwise made a contribution to the missions of the health and safety commission.
B. For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
DISASTER: The kind of event, such as fire, flood, storm, earthquake, riot, or any other occurrence, for which a "local emergency" or a "state of
emergency" may be proclaimed, or which constitutes the existence of a "state of war emergency", as each of those official emergencies are defined in
section 2-4-102 of this title.
DISASTER RELATED STAKEHOLDERS: Local residents, businesses, schools, faith based organizations, community based groups, and local, state
and federal agencies that are involved in disaster preparedness and response.
C. Notwithstanding any provision of subsections A and B of this section, the commission shall not be a department oversight commission, a police
oversight commission, or a fire oversight commission. The commission shall not become involved with:
1. Police or fire response issues;
2. Issues that involve special technical expertise;
3. School safety issues;
4. Monitoring or overseeing any enforcement activities of any city department, including, but not limited to, enforcement of this code, enforcement of
traffic laws, or enforcement of state criminal or civil laws. (Ord. 16-O-2701, eff. 5-6-2016)
2-2-1603: MEMBERSHIP:
The health and safety commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
2-2-1604: RESERVED:
(Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
2-2-1605: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The director of the office of emergency management, or such other city staff designated by the city manager, shall provide administrative support to the
health and safety commission. (Ord. 07-O-2523, eff. 9-7-2007)
Article 17. Library Board Of Trustees
2-2-1701: CITY COUNCIL TO COMPRISE BOARD:
The Beverly Hills Public Library shall be managed by the Beverly Hills library board of trustees. The members of the Beverly Hills city council shall serve
as the Beverly Hills library board of trustees ("board") and shall comprise the entire board. (Ord. 07-O-2537, eff. 12-21-2007)
2-2-1702: PRESIDENT:
The mayor shall serve as board president, and the vice mayor shall serve as the board vice president. (Ord. 07-O-2537, eff. 12-21-2007)
2-2-1703: MEETINGS:
A. Meetings shall be held at least annually, with a time, date and place noticed in accordance with subsection B of this section.
B. Special meetings may be called at any time by the board president or by three (3) trustees when notice is provided as required by the Ralph M. Brown
act.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 35/797
C. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for conducting business.
D. The city clerk shall keep a proper record of board proceedings. (Ord. 07-O-2537, eff. 12-21-2007)
2-2-1704: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The board shall have all of the powers and be subject to all of the duties set forth and contained in the California Education Code 18900 et seq., as may
be amended from time to time.
B. The powers of the board shall be delegated to the city manager except that, the following actions shall not be final until approved by the board: 1)
approval of the annual operating and capital budgets for the library; 2) acquisition of real property; and 3) issuance of debt.
C. The board, on or before August 31 in each year, shall report to the state librarian on the condition of the library, for the year ending the preceding June
30. The reports shall contain the information prescribed in section 18927 of the California Education Code, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord.
07-O-2537, eff. 12-21-2007)
Footnote 1: The powers and authority of the R-1 commission were transferred to the planning commission pursuant to Ord. 92-0-2159, adopted
December 8, 1992.
Chapter 3
DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES
Article 0. Name Modifications
2-3-001: DEPARTMENT AND POSITION NAME MODIFICATIONS:
Wherever in this Code the following department and position names appear, it shall be understood to mean the new names listed below:
A. All references to the "Building and Safety Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
B. All references to the "Building and Safety Division" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
C. All references to the "Building Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
D. All references to the "Building Director" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
E. All references to the "Building Division" shall now mean "Building and Safety Division of the Department of Community Development".
F. All references to the "California Department of Health Services" shall now mean "California Department of Public Health".
G. All references to the "Building Inspector" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
H. All references to "Chief Financial Officer" shall now mean "Director of Finance".
I. All references to the "City Controller" shall now mean "Director of Finance".
J. All references to the "Department of Building and Safety" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
K. All references to the "Department of Finance Administration" shall now mean "Department of Finance".
L. All references to the "Department of Library and Community Services" shall now mean "Department of Community Services".
M. All references to the "Department of Planning and Community Development" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 36/797
N. All references to the "Department of Transportation" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
O. All references to the "Director of Building and Planning" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
P. All references to the "Director of Building and Safety" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
Q. All references to the "Director of Finance Administration" shall now mean "Director of Finance".
R. All references to the "Director of Human Relations" shall now mean "Human Services Administrator".
S. All references to the "Director of Human Services" shall now mean "Director of Human Resources".
T. All references to the "Director of Planning" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
U. All references to the "Director of Planning and Community Development" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
V. All references to the "Director of Public Services" shall now mean "Director of Public Works".
W. All references to the "Director of Recreation and Parks" shall now mean "Director of Community Services".
X. All references to the "Director of Traffic and Parking" shall now mean "Director of Public Works".
Y. All references to the "Director of Transportation" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
Z. All references to the "Director of Transportation and Engineering" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
AA. All references to the "Human Services Department" shall now mean "Human Resources Department".
BB. All references to the "Library and Community Services Department" shall now mean "Community Services Department".
CC. All references to the "Planning Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
DD. All references to the "Planning Director" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
EE. All references to the "Public Services Department" shall now mean "Department of Public Works".
FF. All references to the "Public Works Administrator" shall now mean "Director of Public Works".
GG. All references to the "Recreation and Parks Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Services".
HH. All references to the "Recreation Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Services".
II. All references to the "Superintendent of the Building Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
JJ. All references to the "Transportation Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
KK. All references to the "Transportation and Engineering Department" shall now mean "Department of Community Development".
LL. All references to the "Transportation Official" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
MM. All references to the "Transportation/Engineering Official" shall now mean "Director of Community Development".
NN. All references to the "Water Department" shall now mean "Department of Public Works".
OO. All references to the "Water Manager" shall now mean "Director of Public Works". (Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 37/797
Article 1. Office Of The City Manager
2-3-101: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Office of the City Manager is hereby established. The City Manager shall be head of the administrative branch of the City government, and shall have
the following powers and duties:
A. Direct and supervise the administration of all departments and offices of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Code;
B. Attend all Council meetings, and shall have the right to take part in discussions, but may not vote;
C. Enforce all City laws, and implement all acts of the Council which are required to be executed under his direction and supervision;
D. Cause to be prepared and submit the annual budget and Capital Improvement Program to the Council, and supervise its administration after adoption;
E. Submit to the Council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each
fiscal year;
F. Make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of the City departments, offices, and agencies subject to the City
Manager's direction and supervision;
G. Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial conditions and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council concerning
the affairs of the City as he deems desirable;
H. Make such rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this Code as deemed necessary for the conduct of the various departments under his
supervision and direction;
I. Give immediate attention to mail addressed to the Council to ensure that all administrative business referred to in such communications, and not
necessarily requiring Council action, may be disposed of between Council meetings; provided, however, all actions taken pursuant to such
communications shall be reported to the Council at its next regular meeting thereafter;
J. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Code or as may be required by the Council. (1962 Code § 2-4.101)
2-3-102: COMMUNICATIONS WITH ADMINISTRATION:
A. Except for the purposes of inquiry, the council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and
supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or
employee, either publicly or privately. The provisions of this subsection shall apply with respect to any intended action of the council relating to the
imposition of any disciplinary action concerning a department head not included within the classified service. However, the provisions of this subsection
shall not apply with respect to any action of the city council under subsection 2-5-208B of this title to dismiss or release a department head, deputy city
manager, or assistant city manager.
B. All officers and employees subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager shall deal with the council solely through the city manager.
Except for purposes of inquiry, they shall not initiate communications to the council except through the city manager. (Ord. 16-O-2710, eff. 9-30-2016)
2-3-103: AUDITS:
The city manager, or deputies, or authorized representatives of the city manager are hereby authorized during normal working hours to examine, audit,
and inspect the books and records of any person subject to the provisions of this code, as may be necessary to ascertain or verify compliance with the
provisions of this code by such person. No person subject to any of the provisions of this code shall fail to permit such examination, audit, or inspection in
accordance with the provisions of this section. (1962 Code § 2-4.104)
2-3-104: AUDITS; INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL:
The information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of section 2-3-103 of this chapter shall be confidential and used only in the administration
of the provisions of this code. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of any such information by any officer or employee of the city shall be a violation of this
code and shall be punishable as provided in this code. (1962 Code § 2-4.105)
Article 2. Police Department
2-3-201: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 38/797
The police department is hereby established, and the office of police chief created. The police department shall be under the supervision and control of the
police chief, who shall be accountable to the city manager. The police chief shall be responsible for the preservation of public peace, shall preserve and
protect the property of the city, shall perform such duties as imposed by local, state, and federal law, and such other duties as designated by the city
manager or council. (1962 Code § 2-4.203)
2-3-202: POLICE RESERVES:
There is hereby established a police reserve force in the police department. The police chief shall have the authority to appoint police reserves. Any
person appointed a member of the police reserve force, and who is issued a state of California commission on peace officer standards and training
(POST) level I reserve officer certificate shall have the full powers and duties of a peace officer as provided in the Penal Code of the state upon
determination by the police chief that such member is qualified to perform general law enforcement duties by reason of the member's training and
experience. The police chief shall have authority to issue rules and regulations governing the police reserve force. (1962 Code § 2-4.202.5)
2-3-203: IMPOUNDED VEHICLES; HEARING PROCEDURES:
The police chief shall establish and implement an administrative hearing procedures for impounded vehicles in accordance with Vehicle Code sections
22851.3 and 22852. The procedures shall be subject to approval by city council. (1962 Code § 2-4.204)
Article 3. Fire Department
2-3-301: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The fire department is hereby established, and the office of fire chief created. The fire department shall be under the supervision and control of the fire
chief, who shall be accountable to the city manager. The fire chief shall be responsible for providing fire protection to the city, for enforcement of the fire
code, and shall perform such other duties and functions as imposed by local, state, and federal law, and such other duties as designated by the city
manager or council. (1962 Code § 2-4.301)
2-3-302: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
There is hereby established within the fire department a bureau of fire prevention as designated in section 2.103 of the uniform fire code. The fire chief
shall appoint from among the officers of the fire department a "fire marshal" who shall administer the bureau of fire prevention under the direction and
supervision of the fire chief. (1962 Code § 3-3.101)
Article 4. Capital Assets Department
2-3-401: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The capital assets department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the deputy city manager of capital assets who shall be accountable
to the city manager. The duties of the deputy city manager of capital assets shall be as follows:
A. Formulate and recommend to the city manager policies and procedures relating to capital asset construction, reconstruction and rehabilitation of city
owned buildings and right of way improvements;
B. Plan, design, and construct the city's public works facilities including storm drains, streets, alleys and sewers, and other facilities as may be required,
and is designated street superintendent for purpose of the state Streets And Highways Code;
C. Perform or direct all phases of engineering work required in connection with the functions of the city, not otherwise assigned to another department, and
prepare and maintain the engineering records of the city;
D. Issue permits and control the use of public rights of way and easements, except as otherwise specifically assigned to another department by the
provisions of this code;
E. Inventory and maintain in current condition mapped and descriptive information on all interests owned or possessed by the city in real property located
in the city, including easements in public streets;
F. Issue permits and control the use of public rights of way and easements, except as otherwise specifically assigned to another department by provisions
of this code;
G. Coordinate with the director of public works and director of community development in matters relating to land use, development, construction,
transportation, traffic and parking;
H. Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 39/797
Article 5. Community Development Department
2-3-501: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The community development department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the director of community development who shall be
accountable to the city manager. The duties of the director of community development shall be as follows:
A. Supervise, administer, and enforce all technical codes including building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, and property maintenance codes; all rules
and regulations of the city, including zoning and sign laws; all state regulations governing construction including handicapped access, energy
conservation, essential service buildings, historic buildings, sound insulation, and seismic safety regulations; and such other matters as may be
designated;
B. Advise and assist in formulating proposals, policies, and procedures pertaining to regulatory codes including building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical,
sign, and zoning codes relative to the development, use, and occupancy of property;
C. Recommend proposals and procedures pertaining to land use and development, to the use and development of public properties, and to special zoning
matters; cooperate with the fire chief in coordinating fire protection, land use, and regulatory codes;
D. Conduct studies, investigations, and environmental assessments and prepare documentation as required by the California environmental quality act;
prepare development plans or zoning regulations for specified areas within the city at the request of or as required by the planning commission or city
council; prepare site development plans for municipally owned property;
E. Issue permits in conformity with the regulatory codes and laws for buildings and structures, and in conformity with all state and local land use
entitlements and zoning laws;
F. Oversee the maintenance of the city's general plan, zoning, and other planning and land use laws and policies in compliance with state requirements;
G. Advise the public on matters relating to planning and development procedures and receive and transmit to the proper authority requests of the public
that are within the jurisdiction of the community development department;
H. Coordinate the work of the community development department with and provide technical assistance to the design review commission, the
architectural commission, and the planning commission;
I. Maintain such maps, plans, and records as may be necessary for the fulfillment of the functions of the community development department;
J. Formulate and recommend to the city manager for approval policies and procedures for the management of the community development department;
K. Organize and maintain, subject to the approval of the city manager, such operating divisions in the community development department as the
operations may require;
L. Coordinate with the director of public works services and the deputy city manager of capital assets in matters relating to land use, development,
construction, transportation, traffic, and parking;
M. Be responsible for all functions assigned by law to the director of community development;
N. Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager;
O. Provide traffic engineering services, including, but not limited to, planning, scheduling, design, data and statistical compilation, retrieval, use,
construction, supervision, operations and surveillance. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010; amd. Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
2-3-502: BUILDING AND SAFETY DIVISION:
The building and safety division is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the building official who shall be accountable to the director of
environmental services. The duties of the building official shall be as follows:
A. Supervise, administer, and enforce all technical codes, including building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, property maintenance, zoning, sign laws,
and rules and regulations of the city; and state regulations governing construction including, but not limited to, handicapped access, energy
conservation, essential service buildings, historical buildings, sound insulation, seismic safety, and such other matters as may be designated;
B. Formulate and recommend to the environmental services director and the city manager for approval policies and procedures for the management of the
building and safety division;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 40/797
C. Advise and assist in formulating proposals, policies, and procedures pertaining to regulatory codes including the building, plumbing, mechanical,
electrical, and relative to property maintenance, signs, and that part of the zoning laws relative to the use and occupancy of property;
D. Issue permits in conformity with the regulatory codes and laws for buildings and structures;
E. Be responsible for all functions assigned by law to the building official;
F. Organize and maintain, subject to the approval of the environmental services director and the city manager, such sections in the building and safety
division as the operations may require;
G. Perform such other duties as may be required by the director of environmental services or the city manager. (1962 Code § 2-4.601)
2-3-503: PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIVISION:
The planning and community development division is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the planning and community development
official who shall be accountable to the director of environmental services. The duties of the planning and community development official shall be as
follows:
A. Formulate and recommend to the environmental services director and the city manager for approval policies and procedures for the management of the
planning and community development division;
B. Conduct studies and investigations and prepare plans, as may be required or requested by the planning commission or the council, in connection with
the development or zoning regulations of specified areas within the city, site development plans for municipally owned property, and other planning
matters;
C. Recommend proposals and procedures pertaining to land use and development and the use and development of public properties and special zoning
matters, and to cooperate with the building and safety official and the fire chief in coordinating fire protection and land use;
D. Coordinate with the transportation/engineering official in matters relating to transportation, planning, traffic, and parking;
E. Advise the public on matters relating to planning procedures and to receive and transmit to the proper authority requests of the public which are within
the jurisdiction of the planning and community development division;
F. Coordinate the work of the planning and community development division with, and provide technical assistance to, the architectural commission and
the planning commission;
G. Maintain such maps and records as may be necessary for the fulfillment of the functions of the planning and community development division;
H. Organize and maintain, subject to the approval of the director of environmental services and the city manager, such sections in the planning and
community development division as the operations may require;
I. Act as the zoning administrator of the city and perform such duties as may be imposed by law upon that position; and
J. Perform such other duties as may be required by the director of environmental services and the city manager. (1962 Code § 2-4.1201)
2-3-504: TRANSPORTATION DIVISION:
The transportation division is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the deputy director of transportation, who shall be accountable to the
director of community development. The duties of the deputy director of transportation shall be as follows:
A. Formulate and recommend to the director of community development and the city manager, for approval, policies and procedures for the management
of the traffic and parking functions;
B. Provide technical assistance to the traffic and parking commission;
C. Provide traffic engineering services, including, but not limited to, planning, scheduling, design, data and statistical compilation, retrieval, use,
construction, supervision, operations and surveillance;
D. Provide for the installation and maintenance of traffic control and safety devices;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 41/797
E. Provide for the planning and maintenance of on street and off street parking facilities;
F. Provide public education and information regarding traffic and parking safety;
G. Perform or direct all phases of engineering work required in connection with the functions of the city, not otherwise assigned to another department, and
prepare and maintain the engineering records of the city, and is designated city engineer for purposes of state law;
H. Issue permits and control the use of public rights of way and easements, except as otherwise specifically assigned to another department by the
provisions of this code;
I. To perform such other duties as may be required by the director of community development or the city manager. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
2-3-505: PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION:
The public works division is hereby established which shall be under the direction of the public works administrator who shall be accountable to the
director of environmental services. The duties of the public works administrator shall be as follows:
A. Inspect, operate, and maintain the city's public works facilities, including storm drains, streets and sewers, and maintain all city installations where
maintenance is not assigned to another department;
B. Maintain all city owned or operated mechanical equipment;
C. Maintain and have custody of all city owned or operated structures;
D. Administer the city water operations as provided in this code;
E. Administer the city refuse collection operations as provided in this code;
F. Perform such other duties as may be required by the director of environmental services or city manager. (1962 Code § 2-4.401)
Article 6. Finance Department
2-3-601: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Finance Department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the Director of Finance who shall be accountable to the City Manager.
The duties of the Director of Finance shall be as follows:
A. Under provisions of the State Government Code and pursuant to section 40805.5 thereof perform the financial and accounting duties imposed on the
City Clerk commencing with section 40802, and pursuant to section 37209 perform the duties imposed on the City Clerk relative to issuance of
warrants commencing with section 37203;
B. Act as the Accounting Officer of the City, maintain records reflecting the current financial condition of the City, and furnish advice and reports on City
financial matters as may be requested by the City Manager;
C. Institute and administer a system of accounts and financial reports, and approve the payment of vouchers and the payroll;
D. Act as the purchasing agent of the City and perform such duties as may be imposed by law upon that position;
E. Administer the annual budget, interpret the purpose and intent of appropriations, and account for appropriations and expenditures;
F. Direct and supervise the administration of general accounting, payroll, accounts payable, purchasing, management and budget, revenue administration,
and cashiering and utility billing, and establish procedures and policies for their effective administration;
G. Administer and enforce the Business Tax, Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax, and other taxes administered by the City; and
H. Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Manager. (Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
Article 7. Community Services Department
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 42/797
2-3-701: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Community Services Department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the Director of Community Services who shall be
accountable to the City Manager. The duties of the Director of Community Services shall be as follows:
A. Supervise and administer library programs, facilities, and services;
B. Organize and catalog all library collections of print and nonprint material to facilitate access by patrons;
C. Implement and maintain a circulation system that encourages patron use of library collections while also protecting and preserving the integrity of the
collections;
D. Implement the rules and regulations governing the use of the library, including, but not limited to, the schedule of fees for the use of library services and
the schedule of fines for violation of such rules and regulations;
E. Formulate and recommend for approval policies and procedures in connection with the management, programming, operation, and control of Municipal
and community recreation facilities and programs, such as parks, athletics, aquatics, and community centers, and the activities connected therewith,
and to conduct such activities for the city;
F. Formulate and recommend for approval policies and procedures in connection with the management, programming, operation, and control of cultural,
leisure, and park maintenance programs, and the activities connected therewith, and to conduct such activities for the city;
G. Plan, install, construct, plant, and maintain all cultivated and landscaped public grounds, and trees thereon;
H. Recommend a schedule of fees and charges for the special services of the community services department;
I. Prepare, promulgate, and enforce, with the approval of the city manager, such administrative regulations as deemed necessary to accomplish the
assigned responsibilities;
J. Formulate and recommend to the city manager for approval policies and procedures for the management of the community services department; and
K. Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-3-702: CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES DIVISION:
The cable television services division is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the chief technology officer, or the chief's designee. The
duties of the chief or the chief's designee shall be as follows:
A. Develop, implement, monitor, and evaluate all cable television activities and services;
B. Produce, or otherwise acquire and schedule for broadcast, all programming to be aired on the city's municipal cable television channel;
C. Administer and supervise regulation of the city's cable television franchise and the enforcement of the city's cable television franchise agreements;
D. Administer and supervise the development and coordination of municipal uses of cable television for public information dissemination and other
applications involving the use of cable technology; and
E. Perform such other duties as may be required by the chief technology officer or the city manager. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 8. Public Works Services Department
2-3-801: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The public works services department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the director of public works services who shall be
accountable to the city manager. The duties of the director of public works services shall be as follows:
A. Formulate and recommend to the city manager policies and procedures for the management of the traffic and parking functions;
B. Provide technical assistance to the traffic and parking commission;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 43/797
C. Provide for the installation and maintenance of traffic control and safety devices;
D. Provide for the maintenance of on street and off street parking facilities;
E. Provide public education and information regarding traffic and parking safety;
F. Inspect, operate, and maintain the city's public works facilities, including storm drains, streets and sewers, and maintain all city installations where
maintenance is not assigned to another department;
G. Maintain all city owned or operated mechanical equipment;
H. Maintain and have custody of all city owned or operated structures;
I. Administer the city water operations as provided in this code;
J. Administer the city refuse collection operations as provided in this code;
K. Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
Article 9. Office Of The City Clerk
2-3-901: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The office of the city clerk is established as provided by section 36501 of the Government Code of the state. The city clerk shall have all of the powers,
duties, and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the city clerk by the provisions of chapter 2, part 3, division 3, title 4 of the
Government Code of the state, other general laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the council. The city clerk
shall administer the office of city clerk and shall be responsible for the performance of its functions.
The primary function and duties of the city clerk shall include:
A. Attend all meetings of the council and be responsible for recording and maintaining a record of all actions of council;
B. Promptly after each formal council meeting, the city clerk shall cause a copy of the minutes thereof to be forwarded to each council member, the city
manager, and department heads. The city clerk shall maintain a book of council minutes, with a record of each particular type of business transacted;
provided however, the city clerk shall only be required to record such business as was acted upon by vote of council, and shall not be required to
record the remarks of any council member, or any other person, except at the special request of a council member. The city clerk's record of the
meeting shall also include the names and addresses of persons addressing the council, the title of the subject matter to which their remarks related,
and whether they spoke in support of or in opposition to such matter;
C. Keep all ordinances and resolutions and other official records of the council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily
accessible and open to the public. The city clerk shall attach to the original copy of each ordinance a certificate which shall state the date the ordinance
was adopted, and that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law;
D. Keep all records of the council and of the office of the city clerk in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and
open to the public until such time as any of the records may be destroyed, or reproduced and the original thereof destroyed, in accordance with state
laws;
E. Be the custodian of the seal of the city;
F. Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the city, and certify copies of the official records;
G. Have charge of all city elections;
H. Be responsible for the publication of all the official advertising of the city;
I. Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the municipal code;
J. Appoint, direct and supervise the deputy city clerk;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 44/797
K. Perform such other duties consistent with this code as may be required by the council. (1962 Code § 2-4.701; amd. Ord. 90-O-2093, eff. 7-19-1990;
Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-3-902: DELEGATION OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS TO DIRECTOR OF FINANCE ADMINISTRATION:
The city clerk shall not be required to perform the following functions which are delegated to the director of finance administration.
A. The financial and accounting duties of state Government Code section 40802 et seq., which are transferred to the director of finance administration
pursuant to state Government Code section 40805.5.
B. Functions and duties relative to warrants under state Government Code section 37203 et seq., which are transferred to the director of finance
administration pursuant to state Government Code 37209. (1962 Code § 2-4.701; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 10. Office Of The City Attorney
2-3-1001: CREATION:
The office of the city attorney is hereby established. It shall consist of the city attorney and other positions authorized by the council. The city attorney shall
administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. The city attorney shall serve under the direct supervision and
control of the council as its legal advisor. The council may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants, or special counsel as may be needed to take
charge of any litigation or legal matters or to assist the city attorney therein. (1962 Code § 2-4.1401; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-3-1002: FUNCTIONS:
The functions of the office of the city attorney shall include:
A. Represent and appear for the city, its council, and commissions in all actions or proceedings in which they are concerned or are a party; and represent
and appear for a city officer or employee, or a former city officer or employee, in all actions or proceedings in which such officer or employee is a party
defendant due to the performance of his official duties, provided such representation and appearance, in the opinion of the city attorney, will not conflict
with the city Attorney's duties to the City, will not adversely affect the interests of the City, and is approved by the Council;
B. Advise the Council and all City officers in all matters of law pertaining to their offices;
C. Furnish service at all meetings of the Council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under
consideration by the Council or by any of the boards, commissions or officers of the City;
D. Prepare ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and other legal instruments as shall be required, or as may be deemed necessary, by the City Attorney for
the proper conduct of the business of the City; and approve the form of contracts and bonds relating to City business;
E. Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal cases for violations of City ordinances; and
F. Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the Council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions.
(1962 Code § 2-4.1402; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 11. Office Of The City Treasurer
2-3-1101: OFFICE ESTABLISHED:
The elective Office of City Treasurer is hereby established. (1962 Code § 2-4.501; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-3-1102: DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF CITY TREASURER:
The City Treasurer shall perform such duties and functions as prescribed by the State Government Code commencing with section 41000 thereof. (1962
Code § 2-4.501; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
2-3-1103: COMPENSATION:
The City Treasurer shall receive a monthly salary of two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 09-O-2564, eff. 5-8-2009; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 12. Health Officer
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 45/797
2-3-1201: COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER DESIGNATED TO PERFORM FUNCTIONS:
The County Health Officer is designated to perform the functions, duties and responsibilities of Health Officer pursuant to contract under provisions of
sections 476 et seq., of the State Health and Safety Code, and in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 3 of this Code. (1962 Code § 2-4.901;
amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 13. Office Of The City Auditor
2-3-1301: CREATION:
The Office of the City auditor is hereby established. The City Council shall appoint the City auditor who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. The
City auditor shall have such staff and budget as the City Council may prescribe. The City auditor shall serve under the direct supervision and control of,
and shall report to, the City Council. (Ord. 17-O-2736, eff. 10-6-2017)
2-3-1302: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City auditor shall be a certified public accountant (CPA), a certified internal auditor (CIA), certified government auditing professional (CGAP) or have
such other or additional qualifications as the City Council may establish. The City auditor shall set the qualifications for subordinate staff. (Ord. 17-O-2736,
eff. 10-6-2017)
2-3-1303: DUTIES:
A. The City auditor shall have authority to conduct financial and performance audits of all departments, offices, boards, commissions, activities, and
programs of the City in order to determine both independently and objectively whether:
1. Programs and activities have been appropriately authorized and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws;
2. The department and/or staff are acquiring, managing, protecting and using resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment, and
space economically, efficiently, equitably, and effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by this Code, State law or
applicable Federal law or regulation;
3. The City, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical
practices;
4. The desired result or benefits are being achieved;
5. Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately, and fully all information required by law, to ascertain the nature and
scope of programs and activities, and to establish a proper basis for evaluating the programs and activities including the collection of, accounting for,
and depositing of, revenues and other resources;
6. Management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, systems or accounting internal control systems and
internal management controls; and
7. There exist indications of fraud, abuse or illegal acts which require further investigation. (Ord. 17-O-2736, eff. 10-6-2017)
2-3-1304: REPORTS:
The City auditor shall prepare a written report of the results of each audit conducted and will be responsible for retaining a copy. The Council may
prescribe the manner of report preparation and presentation. The City auditor shall not publicly disclose any information received during an audit or any
completed audit that is deemed confidential in nature by any local, State or Federal law or regulation. (Ord. 17-O-2736, eff. 10-6-2017)
2-3-1305: ACCESS TO INFORMATION:
City employees, agents and officers shall provide the City auditor access to all information, property, and personnel relevant to the performance of an
audit, unless restricted or prohibited by law. City employees, officers and agents shall fully cooperate with, and make full disclosure of all pertinent
information to, the City auditor. The City auditor and the auditor's staff will work cooperatively with other City departments to ensure that both the needs of
the department and the City's audit function are both met in a timely manner. (Ord. 17-O-2736, eff. 10-6-2017)
Article 14. Human Resources Department
2-3-1401: CREATION AND FUNCTIONS:
The Human Resources Department is hereby established and shall be under the direction of the Director of Human Resources who shall be accountable
to the City Manager. The duties of the Director of Human Resources shall be as follows:
A. Administer the personnel system rules and regulations;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 46/797
B. Formulate and recommend for approval the policies and procedures regarding the personnel management of the City;
C. Provide personnel services for City employees;
D. Administer the City's insurance programs;
E. Administer the Risk Management Program;
F. Administer the Employee Benefits Program;
G. Prepare, promulgate, and enforce, with the approval of the City Manager, such administrative regulations as are deemed necessary to accomplish
assigned responsibilities; and
H. Perform such other duties as may be required by the City Manager. (Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
Chapter 4
DISASTERS AND EMERGENCIES
Article 1. Disaster Council And Emergency Services Organization
2-4-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the preparation and execution of plans for the protection of persons, property, and the environment within the
city in the event of an emergency and to provide for the coordination of the emergency services disaster functions of this city with all other public agencies
and affected private persons, corporations, and organizations. Expenditures made in connection with emergency services and disaster activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants of this city. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-102: DEFINITIONS:
In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
EMERGENCY: The actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused
by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, or earthquake, or other conditions,
including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are
likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions
to combat.
LOCAL EMERGENCY: Shall have the meaning given it in section 8558 of the California Government Code, or its successor provision.
STATE OF EMERGENCY: Shall have the meaning given it in section 8558 of the California Government Code, or its successor provision.
STATE OF WAR EMERGENCY: Shall have the meaning given it in section 8558 of the California Government Code, or its successor provision.
SUCCESSOR PROVISION: The specified section of state law as amended from time to time and any replacement for that section if that section is
recodified or renumbered. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-103: DISASTER COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP:
A. The city of Beverly Hills disaster council shall consist of the members of the city council. The mayor shall serve as chairperson, and the vice mayor shall
serve as vice chairperson. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-104: DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and it is hereby empowered:
1. To develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions
and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.
2. To forward a copy of any emergency plan developed and adopted by the city to the state of California office of emergency services, including,
without limitation, the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan provided for in section 2-4-109 of this article.
B. The disaster council is hereby empowered:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 47/797
1. To register disaster service workers; provided, however, that the disaster council may delegate the act of registering disaster service workers to
others through the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan.
2. To designate the individual responsible for keeping the registration of disaster service workers current, and for the accuracy and safekeeping of the
official registration records, provided, however, that the documented proof that the disaster service worker has taken the oath of office shall be filed in
the office of the city clerk.
3. To direct the activities of disaster service workers within the city through its role in the adoption of the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan. The
emergency plan shall delegate to city staff the authority to direct the activities of disaster service workers during a local emergency, state of
emergency, or state of war emergency.
C. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in such person's absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the
vice chairperson.
D. The disaster council shall have such other powers, duties, and responsibilities of a local disaster council pursuant to the provisions of article 10 of the
California emergency services act1, as amended from time to time and any replacement for that article if that article is recodified or renumbered. (Ord.
07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-105: DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. There is hereby established the office of emergency services and the office of director of emergency services is hereby created. The director of
emergency services is the director of the city's emergency organization. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.
B. There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services. The assistant city manager shall be the assistant director of emergency
services. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-106: SUCCESSION:
A. Director Of Emergency Services:
1. Should the city manager as director of emergency services be absent or unable to perform his or her duties, the individuals who hold permanent
appointments to the positions named for this purpose in a letter signed by the city manager and delivered to the city clerk, shall automatically serve
as acting director of emergency services, in the order specified in the letter, and shall serve until the city manager, or an individual holding the
permanent appointment to a position above the acting director of emergency services, in the order specified in the letter, is present and able to serve.
The letter may, without limitation, include lists of successors for emergency and nonemergency situations, delineate the circumstances that trigger
when a particular list controls the designation of the acting director of emergency services, and provide the parameters for determining when the city
manager or other successors are absent or unable to perform the duties of the director of emergency services. Such persons who serve as acting
director of emergency services must be employees or officers of the city.
2. An individual serving as acting director of emergency services shall have the authority and powers of the director of emergency services.
3. The city's emergency plan may provide additional guidelines to assist city personnel in determining when the city manager, or his or her successor,
is absent or unable to perform his or her duties, and when such individuals are available to serve, but in the event of a conflict between the letter
provided to the city clerk pursuant to subsection A1 of this section, and the provisions in the city's emergency plan, the letter shall prevail.
B. City Council: In the event of a state of war emergency, or declaration of a state of emergency or local emergency, the city council may be reconstituted
and vacancies filled.
C. City Treasurer: In the event of a state of war emergency, or declaration of a state of emergency or local emergency, if the city treasurer is unavailable,
the deputy city treasurer who also serves as the chief financial officer shall exercise the powers of city treasurer. The term "unavailable" as used in this
subsection shall have the same meaning as that contained in section 8636 of the California Government Code, or its successor provision. (Ord. 07-O-
2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-107: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
A. The director of emergency services is hereby empowered to:
1. Monitor and evaluate potentially dangerous emergency situations, and when appropriate, request the city council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever
a local emergency is proclaimed by the director of emergency services, the city council shall take action to ratify or otherwise act upon such
proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter. The local emergency shall not remain in effect for a period in excess of seven (7) days unless it has
been ratified by the city council. If the city council does not ratify the local emergency, such inaction shall not affect the validity of the local emergency
during the period of time that it was in effect.
2. Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director of emergency services, the locally available resources
are inadequate to cope with the emergency and the city council is not in session.
3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this article.
4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise between them.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 48/797
5. Coordinate and carry out the policies and direction of the city council and the disaster council, and perform such other duties and responsibilities as
delegated by the disaster council or by the city council.
6. Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein.
7. Adopt rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this article for operation of the office of emergency services.
8. In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of
the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director of emergency services, is hereby empowered:
a. To implement and carry out the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan adopted pursuant to section 2-4-109 of this chapter;
b. To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency,
including, but not limited to, orders or regulations imposing a curfew within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve the public order
and safety; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;
c. To obtain from other sources such vital supplies, equipment, and other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property,
and to bind the city for the fair value thereof as provided in the emergency provisions of the city's purchasing regulations and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
d. To authorize the use of any gifts of services, equipment, temporary loan of equipment, supplies, goods or other in-kind donations, as necessary to
provide for the protection of life and property, regardless of whether the donation comes from public or private sources. The order authorizing the
use of any gifts shall be in writing. Any such donations used by the city shall be deemed duly accepted by the city council in accordance with
section 37354 of the California Government Code, or its successor provision. A report of all such gifts used shall be made to the city council at its
next regular meeting for review;
e. To require emergency services of any city officer or employee, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems
necessary in the execution of his or her duties, and to grant to public officers, employees, and registered volunteers the authority to command the
aid of citizens of this community as they deem necessary in the execution of their duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits,
and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;
f. To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;
g. To request state aid, including, without limitation, financial aid, equipment, personnel, supplies or anything else that the state or federal
government can provide to assist the city in coping with, responding to, or recovering from the emergency situation;
h. To perform such other functions as necessary or appropriate to cope with the emergency situation; and
i. To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this article or by resolution or
emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved
by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.
9. In the event of a situation in which a significant number of persons are without the ability to obtain shelter, resulting in a threat to their health and
safety, the director of emergency services may issue a declaration of a shelter crisis pursuant to section 8698.2 of the California Government Code,
or its successor provision.
B. The director of emergency services, or his or her designee, shall, with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, manage the emergency programs of
the city.
C. The assistant director of emergency services, under the supervision of the director of emergency services, shall have such powers and duties as may
be assigned by the director of emergency services. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-108: EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION:
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and
persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection 2-4-107A8e of this article
shall be charged with duties incident to the protection of life, property, and the environment in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the
emergency organization of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-109: EMERGENCY PLAN:
The city of Beverly Hills disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan, which plan shall provide for
the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of
emergency, or state of war emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such
plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-110: EXPENDITURES:
A. Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of Beverly Hills.
B. Section 3-2-101 of this code requires a second signature on any check, draft, or warrant which exceeds an amount established by resolution of the
council. The city council may adopt by resolution an alternate threshold amount, and in the event a local emergency or a state of emergency is duly
proclaimed, or a state of war emergency exists, a second signature shall only be required on any check, draft, or warrant if it exceeds that alternate
threshold amount. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 49/797
2-4-111: PUNISHMENT OF VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to title 1, chapter 3 of this code, for any person, during an emergency, to:
A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this
article, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this article.
B. Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article.
C. Wilfully fail to obey a curfew regulation after being given due notice, either oral or written, of the curfew regulation.
D. Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the director of emergency services. (Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
Article 2. Price Gouging
2-4-201: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
The city council hereby finds that during emergencies and major disasters elsewhere, including, but not limited to, earthquakes, fires, floods, or civil
disturbances, some merchants have taken unfair advantage of consumers by greatly increasing prices for essential consumer goods and services. While
the pricing of consumer goods and services is generally best left to the marketplace under ordinary conditions, when a declared state of emergency results
in abnormal disruptions of the market, the public interest requires that excessive and unjustified increases in the prices of essential consumer goods and
services be prohibited. It is the intent of the city council in enacting this article to protect citizens from excessive and unjustified increases in the prices
charged during or shortly after an emergency for goods and services that are vital and necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of consumers. Further
it is the intent of the city council that this article be liberally construed so that its beneficial purposes may be served. (Ord. 07-O-2522, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-202: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING MATERIALS: Lumber, construction tools, windows, and anything else used in the building or rebuilding of property.
CONSUMER FOOD ITEM: Any article that is used or intended for use for food, drink, confection, or condiment by a person or animal.
DECLARED EMERGENCY: A "local emergency" or "state of emergency" as defined in section 2-4-102 of this chapter.
EMERGENCY SUPPLIES: Includes, but is not limited to, water, flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps, diapers, temporary shelters, tape,
toiletries, plywood, nails, and hammers.
GASOLINE: Any fuel used to power any motor vehicle or power tool.
GOODS: Has the same meaning as defined in subdivision (c) of section 1689.5 of the California Civil Code.
HOUSING: Any rental housing leased on a month to month term.
MEDICAL SUPPLIES: Includes, but is not limited to, prescription and nonprescription medications, bandages, gauze, isopropyl alcohol, and antibacterial
products.
REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION SERVICES: Services performed by any person who is required to be licensed under the California contractors' state
license law (chapter 9 (commencing with section 7000) of division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code), for repairs to residential or
commercial property of any type that is damaged as a result of an event that led to a declared emergency or state of war emergency.
TRANSPORTATION, FREIGHT, AND STORAGE SERVICES: Any service that is performed by any company that contracts to move, store, or transport
personal or business property or rents equipment for those purposes. (Ord. 07-O-2522, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-203: PROHIBITION AGAINST EXCESSIVE AND UNJUSTIFIED INCREASES IN CONSUMER PRICES DURING A
DECLARED EMERGENCY:
A. Consumer Goods And Services:
1. Upon the proclamation of a declared emergency or an event triggering a state of war emergency, and for a period of thirty (30) days following the
proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a state of war emergency, it is unlawful for a person, contractor, business, or other
entity to sell or offer to sell any consumer food items or goods, goods or services used for emergency cleanup, emergency supplies, medical
supplies, home heating oil, building materials, housing, transportation, freight, and storage services, or gasoline or other motor fuels for a price of
more than ten percent (10%) above the price charged by that person for those goods or services immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared
emergency or the event that triggered a state of war emergency.
2. A person may increase prices in excess of the amount permitted in subsection A1 of this section if the seller or vendor can demonstrate that the
increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on that person by the supplier of the goods, or directly attributable to additional
costs for labor or materials used to provide the services, provided that in those situations where the increase in price is attributable to additional costs
imposed by the seller's supplier or additional costs of providing the goods or service during the declared emergency or state of war emergency, the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 50/797
price represents no more than ten percent (10%) above the total of the cost to the seller plus the markup customarily applied by the seller for that
good or service in the usual course of business immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a state of
war emergency.
3. A business offering an item for sale at a reduced price immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event triggering a state
of war emergency may use the price at which it usually sells the item to calculate the price increase permitted pursuant to this subsection.
B. Construction, Repair, And Cleanup Services:
1. Upon the proclamation of a declared emergency or an event triggering a state of war emergency, and for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days
following the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a state of war emergency, it is unlawful for a contractor to sell or offer
to sell any repair or reconstruction services or any services used in emergency cleanup for a price of more than ten percent (10%) above the price
charged by that person for those services immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a state of war
emergency.
2. A person may increase prices in excess of the amount permitted in subsection B1 of this section if the seller or vendor can demonstrate that the
increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on that person by the supplier of the goods, or directly attributable to additional
costs for labor or materials used to provide the services, provided that in those situations where the increase in price is attributable to the additional
costs imposed by the contractor's supplier or additional costs of providing the service during the declared emergency or state of war emergency, the
price represents no more than ten percent (10%) above the total of the cost to the contractor plus the markup customarily applied by the contractor
for that good or service in the usual course of business immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a
state of war emergency.
3. A business offering an item for sale at a reduced price immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event triggering a state
of war emergency may use the price at which it usually sells the item to calculate the price increase permitted pursuant to this subsection.
C. Hotel And Motel Rates:
1. Upon the proclamation of a declared emergency or an event triggering a state of war emergency, and for a period of thirty (30) days following the
proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered a state of war emergency, it is unlawful for an owner or operator of a hotel or motel
to increase the hotel or motel's regular rates, as advertised immediately prior to the proclamation of a declared emergency or the event that triggered
a state of war emergency, by more than ten percent (10%).
2. A hotel owner or operator may increase prices in excess of the amount permitted by subsection C1 of this section if the owner or operator can prove
that the increase in price is directly attributable to additional costs imposed on it for goods or labor used in its business, to seasonal adjustments in
rates that are regularly scheduled, or to previously contracted rates. (Ord. 07-O-2522, eff. 8-10-2007)
2-4-204: EXTENSION OF TIME PERIOD DURING WHICH PROHIBITION IS IN EFFECT:
The provisions of this article may be extended for additional thirty (30) day periods by the director of emergency services or the city council, if deemed
appropriate to protect public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 07-O-2522, eff. 8-10-2007)
Footnote 1: Gov.C. § 8610.
Chapter 5
CIVIL SERVICE, PERSONNEL PROCEDURES, AND EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
Article 1. Civil Service System
2-5-101: ESTABLISHED; CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM:
Pursuant to the authority granted to the legislative body of any city within the State by the provisions of sections 45000 through 45210 of chapter 1,
division 5, title 4 of the Government Code of the State, in order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, and to
place Municipal employment on a basis of merit so that the best qualified persons available shall be brought into the service of the City, a civil service
system is established for the City.
All appointments, promotions, and personnel transactions within the classified civil service of the City shall be based upon merit and fitness ascertained by
means of recognized personnel practices and techniques, and without discrimination due to race, color, religion, political affiliation, marital status, sex, age,
or any other similar discriminatory basis recognized by State or Federal law. (1962 Code § 2-6.101)
2-5-102: CLASSIFIED SERVICE INCLUSIONS:
The classified service of the City is hereby continued. The provisions of this chapter concerning appointments and tenure shall apply to every employee in
the classified service. Other provisions of this chapter shall apply to every employee in the service of the City. The classified service of the City shall
consist of those positions which are designated in the classified service list approved by the Council and filed with the City Clerk's Office. Every officer and
employee who is not expressly included on such list shall be exempt from the classified service.
The council, by ordinance, may place additional departments, appointive officers, or employees under the operation of the civil service system. All
employees and officers placed under the civil service system shall be deemed to be in the classified service of the city. Nothing contained in this article
shall prevent the employment in the classified service on a part time basis of any officer or employee if the council, by ordinance or resolution, determines
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 51/797
such employment to be in the best interests of the city. For the purposes of this article, "part time" shall mean continuous and regular employment at less
than forty (40) hours per week. (1962 Code § 2-6.104)
2-5-103: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
No officer or employee of the city or any other person, directly or indirectly, shall solicit or receive, or in any manner be directly or indirectly involved in
soliciting or receiving, from anyone on the eligible lists or employed in the classified service of the city any assessment, subscription, contribution, or
political service for aiding or assisting in the campaign for election or appointment to any political or official position in the city service or to any position in
the classified service of the city. (1962 Code § 2-6.115)
Article 2. Personnel Procedures
2-5-201: EXAMINATION REQUIRED FOR CLASSIFIED SERVICE POSITIONS:
Applicants for positions in classified service shall be required to pass an examination to qualify for appointment. The director of human services shall
assure wide publicity for classified service positions to encourage qualified persons to compete in the examination process and assure that the best
qualified persons are available for appointment to the positions in the classified service.
A. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may consist of written, oral, performance, physical, medical, or practical tests, or investigations
or evaluations of training, experience, character, or personal traits.
B. Examinations may be specified by the director of human services as promotional only, as open only, or as both open and promotional.
C. In promotional examinations, the director of human services may designate the rank or grade eligible to take the proposed examination.
D. The examination process shall be conducted in such a manner that it does not favor or discriminate against any person because of race, sex, marital
status, arrest record, religion, or national origin.
E. Applicants shall be ranked on a list on the basis of their examination results and any seniority credits which may be applicable. (1962 Code § 2-6.107)
2-5-202: SENIORITY CREDITS:
Seniority credit points shall be applicable only to miscellaneous employees and fire department employees, as designated under the compensation plan as
adopted by council resolution. To qualify for seniority credit points, such employees must pass the qualifying examination for the position, and must be
employed by the city on permanent appointment status. Seniority credits shall be added to the examination score subject to the following conditions:
A. Total seniority credits shall not increase the examination score by more than ten percent (10%) or ten (10) points.
B. Employees entitled to seniority credit shall receive one-half percent (1/2%) or one-half (1/2) point for each year of employment by the city.
C. Employees of the "fire department" classification under the compensation plan shall receive credits in the following manner:
1. In any position below the rank of fire captain, seniority credit as provided in subsection B of this section.
2. Upon attainment of the rank of fire captain, all previous seniority credits shall be forfeited, and seniority credits commence anew upon the date of
appointment to the position of fire captain.
3. Upon attainment of the rank of battalion chief, all previous seniority credits shall be forfeited, and seniority credits commence anew upon the date of
appointment to the position of battalion chief. (1962 Code § 2-6.107)
2-5-203: ELIGIBLE LISTS FOR CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
A. When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the classified service, the director of human services shall submit to the appointing authority the
names of all qualified persons on the appropriate eligible list, or combination of lists, in the order of their priority.
B. The priority of eligible lists for any position shall be as follows:
1. The reemployment list which shall consist of the names of permanent employees who have been laid off or demoted for lack of work or funds or due
to a reorganization.
2. The promotional list from an examination as provided in this article.
3. The original appointment list from an examination as provided in this article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 52/797
C. The name of any probationary employees who are laid off for lack of work or funds, or due to a reorganization, shall be restored to the same eligible list
from which the original appointment was made.
D. Any classified service employee who resigned may apply within one year after resignation for restoration to the eligible list from which their appointment
was made, and if restoration is recommended by their former department head, the city manager may order the name of the employee restored to the
appropriate eligible list. (1962 Code § 2-6.108(c))
2-5-204: APPOINTING AUTHORITY:
A. The city council shall be the appointing authority for the positions of city manager, city attorney, and city clerk.
B. The city manager, subject to the advice and consent of the city council, shall be the appointing authority for all department heads except those
designated in subsection A of this section, and for all assistant and deputy city managers.
C. The city manager shall be the appointing authority for all positions authorized in the city manager's office, except those designated in subsection B of
this section.
D. For all positions below the department head level, and which are not included in subsection B of this section, the respective department head, subject to
approval by the city manager, shall be the appointing authority. (Ord. 16-O-2710, eff. 9-30-2016)
2-5-205: APPOINTMENTS WITHIN CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
The appointing authority shall make appointments to budgeted or subsequently authorized positions in the classified service within thirty (30) days after the
receipt of a certified eligible list containing three (3) or more names. No position for which an eligible list is available shall be allowed to remain unfilled for
over thirty (30) days without authorization from the city manager. Appointment within the classified service may be part time or full time, and shall be made
within the category of either probationary, permanent, or limited term as provided herein:
A. Appointments from eligible lists shall be probationary appointments. The work performance of the appointee shall be evaluated during the probationary
period, and the appointing authority may terminate the employee, with or without cause, at any time during the probationary period. Such termination
shall not be subject to review or appeal by the terminated probationary employee; provided, however, notwithstanding the foregoing, pursuant to the
provisions of section 3304 of the Government Code of the state, sworn police personnel terminated during the probation period shall have the right of
an interdepartmental administrative hearing in accordance with the procedures established by the police chief. Any employee terminated from a
probationary position, and who immediately prior to receiving such appointment held a permanent appointment in another position in the classified
service, shall be returned to the previously held permanent position, unless dismissed for cause. The duration of probationary period shall be a
minimum of:
1. Six (6) months for all probationary employees except police and fire personnel;
2. Twelve (12) months for police personnel above the rank of police officer, for appointees to the rank of police officer laterally transferring from another
police agency, and for fire personnel;
3. Eighteen (18) months for all other police officer appointees.
B. Appointments to permanent status shall be granted upon successful completion of the probationary period if recommended by appointing authority and
approved by the city manager.
C. Appointments for limited term may be made for the period of time designated at the time the appointment is made. The appointee shall be subject to the
probationary provisions of subsection A of this section; however, upon expiration of the designated term, the employment shall automatically terminate,
and there shall be no right of appeal from termination which occurred through expiration of the term of the limited term appointment. Upon authorization
from the appointing authority and approval by the city manager prior to expiration of the limited term appointment, a limited term employee may be
transferred to an established classified position in which the requirements and duties are identical to the limited term position. (1962 Code § 2-6.108)
2-5-206: APPOINTMENTS NOT WITHIN CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
Appointments not within the classified service shall be exempt from classified service provisions, no tenure rights shall accrue, and appointees shall serve
at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Such appointments may be part time or full time, and shall be made within one of the five (5) categories which
follow:
A. Appointments to existing positions which are exempt from classified service.
B. Appointments to seasonal positions where the nature of the work is seasonal, provided that seasonal employees shall not be entitled to sick leave or
vacation benefits.
C. Appointments in an emergency situation which are authorized by the city manager for the duration of the emergency, provided emergency appointees
shall not be entitled to any city employee benefits except the wages designated by the appointment.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 53/797
D. Appointments to temporary positions, provided such appointments shall not exceed a period of three (3) months and such appointees shall not be
entitled to sick leave or vacation benefits.
E. Appointments for the purpose of training a person for a vacant position, where the appointment is to a designated "trainee" position. Trainee
appointments shall expire upon filling the vacant position.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the employment of the police chief and the fire chief shall not be terminated by the city manager without cause provided
that the police chief or the fire chief being terminated has completed five (5) or more years of employment for the city in such position. A decision by the
city manager to terminate the police chief or fire chief for cause may be appealed by the terminated employee to the city council provided that a written
appeal to the council, verified under penalty of perjury, is filed by the employee with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision by
the city manager. A police chief or fire chief who has not completed five (5) or more years of employment for the city in such position may be terminated
by the city manager with or without cause. This paragraph, involving certain terminations without cause of a police chief or fire chief, shall not apply to
any police chief or fire chief first appointed to such position on or after July 1, 2001. (1962 Code § 2-6.108; amd. Ord. 90-O-2098, eff. 9-13-1990; Ord.
01-O-2381, eff. 10-5-2001)
2-5-206.5: APPOINTMENT PROCESS FOR ASSISTANT CITY MANAGERS, DEPUTY CITY MANAGERS AND DEPARTMENT
HEADS:
Appointment of all assistant city managers, deputy city managers and department heads requires the advice and consent of the city council.
The city council shall provide its advice and consent by considering the city manager's recommendation of a candidate to the city council and voting to
authorize or disapprove the city manager moving forward with the hiring process.
Following city council authorization, no further approval from the city council shall be required for that candidate. However, the city manager may conduct
background checks and any other reviews or verifications, as appropriate. In the event that the city manager does not end up hiring that candidate, the city
manager shall seek the city council's advice and consent before hiring a different candidate.
The city council may provide more detail concerning this process in the "City Council Policy And Operations Manual". (Ord. 16-O-2710, eff. 9-30-2016)
2-5-207: OATH OF ALLEGIANCE:
Every person, prior to holding any office or position in the service of the city, shall take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation of allegiance as provided by
state law. (1962 Code § 2-6.116)
2-5-208: DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
A. The appointing authority shall have the right to discipline any employee under their jurisdiction, subject to the employee's right of appeal. All employees
holding positions in the classified service shall be subject to suspension without pay, demotion, reduction in compensation, reprimand, or dismissal
from office or employment for misconduct, incompetency, inefficiency, insubordination, failure to perform duties, falsifying an oath, failure to comply with
the personnel rules and regulations adopted by Council, or failure to observe the rules and regulations of their department. A reduction in pay shall not
be deemed a demotion within the meaning of this section if the reduction is part of a general program to reduce all salaries and wages as an economy
program of the City.
B. The City Council shall have the right to evaluate and dismiss or release any Assistant City Manager, Deputy City Manager, or department head
positions for which advice and consent is required under subsection 2-5-204B of this title.
1. Evaluation: At the request of a Council member, the City Manager shall place on the agenda for a closed session the evaluation of the staff member.
2. Dismissal Or Release: At the request of three (3) or more Council members, the City Manager shall place on the agenda for a closed session the
proposed dismissal or release of the staff member.
Nothing in this subsection in any way limits the right of the City Manager to discipline, dismiss or release any employee. (Ord. 16-O-2710, eff. 9-30-2016)
2-5-209: APPEAL OF DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS AND GRIEVANCES:
An employee's rights regarding appealing a disciplinary action or a grievance shall be governed solely by any provisions related to such appeals that may
be contained in the memorandum of understanding between the City and the employee organization. (Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
2-5-210: ABOLISHMENT OF POSITIONS, LAYOFFS, AND DEMOTIONS:
A. Whenever in the judgment of the council it becomes necessary in the interests of economy or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the
council may abolish any position in the classified service. When classified employees are laid off, demoted, or transferred for lack of work or funds, or
due to a reorganization, such layoffs, demotions, or transfers shall be made in inverse order of seniority according to specific rules adopted by the
council pursuant to the provisions of subsection 2-5-213G of this chapter. Such layoffs, demotions, or transfers shall not be deemed as disciplinary and
shall not be subject to appeal. The abolishment of positions shall be by attrition wherever practicable.
B. If within two (2) years an appointment is to be made to any position or employment for which a former employee on a valid reemployment list possesses
the minimum qualifications adopted by the council, such laid off employee shall have the right, in order of the date such employee's name was entered
on the reemployment list and, then, in order of seniority, to such appointment; except for any such employee who files a waiver in writing with the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 54/797
director of human services, or who fails to report to the director of human services within ten (10) days after a notice is mailed to his or her last known
address. The right to such appointment shall precede the rights of all applicants on any eligible list for the position.
C. An employee demoted pursuant to the provisions of this section, in order of seniority, may be placed on the reemployment list for any position in the
classification from which the employee was demoted. For the purposes of a reappointment to such a position, the rights of a demoted employee shall
be no greater or lesser than laid off employees based on seniority, subject to the specific exceptions, rights, obligations, and procedures set forth in the
personnel rules and regulations adopted pursuant to section 2-5-213 of this chapter.
D. Any employee transferred for any reason to a position within the same classification or within a similar classification with the same salary and similar job
duties as such employee's former position, shall not be entitled to have their name placed on any reemployment list, and no new probation period shall
be required when such a transfer occurs. Transfers pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not be deemed as disciplinary, as a layoff, or as a
demotion. (1962 Code § 2-6.113)
2-5-211: LEAVES OF ABSENCE:
A. Leave of absence without pay may be granted to an employee for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days by the department head with the approval of
the city manager. Leave of absence without pay may be granted to an employee by the city manager for a period not to exceed one year upon the
recommendation of the department head and the director of human services.
B. Leave of absence with pay for any reason may be granted by the city manager upon a recommendation by the department head with the concurrence
of the council.
C. Military leaves shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of state or federal laws. All employees entitled to military leave shall notify their
department head in order to allow the opportunity to determine when such leave shall be taken, within the limits of military regulations. (1962 Code § 2-
6.120)
2-5-212: OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT:
A. Prohibition: A city employee shall not accept, participate, or engage in any outside employment or business, whether or not compensated, which is
inconsistent, incompatible, or conflicts with the employees' duties, functions, or responsibilities as a city employee. Inconsistent or incompatible
employment or business includes, but is not limited to, the following situations:
1. Employment or business which involves hours of work or physical effort which could be reasonably expected to reduce the quality or quantity of the
employee's services to the city;
2. Employment or business which involves hours or locations of work which could be reasonably expected to interfere with the employee's availability
for overtime emergency services to the city, particularly when the employee is on call for emergency services;
3. Employment or business which is directly or indirectly connected with the employee's duties in the city, such as dealing in merchandise or services
with persons contacted in the course of city employment;
4. Employment or business which involves services of the employee in a capacity of advisor, consultant, or witness which could reasonably be
expected to conflict with the interests of the City; or
5. Employment or business which causes the employee to become financially interested in any contract, sale, or transaction to which the City is a party.
B. Authorization:
1. Full time employees who desire to: a) engage in outside employment for compensation or operate a business for compensation; or b) invest or
participate in any business venture conducting business in the City of Beverly Hills (except for stock ownership in any company whose capital stock
is publicly held and regularly traded), shall first obtain the written approval of the applicable department head and the Director of Human Resources,
except that the City Manager, Assistant and Deputy City Managers, and all department heads (including the Chief of Police and Fire Chief), shall first
obtain the approval of the City Council.
The Director of Human Resources shall send written notice to the City Council and City Manager within two (2) business days from the date on which
any approval is granted relating to a member of the executive management group, other than a department head. Any such approval relating to any
member of the executive management group shall not become effective until the expiration of ten (10) business days after dispatch of notice to the
City Council and City Manager. The Council may order a review of any approval relating to a member of the executive management group. Such
review may be ordered by motion of the Council duly adopted within ten (10) business days after dispatch of notice to the City Council. If the Council
orders a review of a decision approving outside employment or engagement or investment in a business venture, the effectiveness of such decision
shall be stayed until Council review is final.
Approval shall not be granted if the employment or business or investment would violate the prohibition set forth in subsection A of this section.
2. Employees who seek approval for compensated outside employment or to engage or invest in a business must describe the outside employment or
business, including the employer, the types of duties or activities involved, the location, hours and duration of employment.
3. The Human Resources Department shall maintain a copy of all written approvals for outside employment, business or investment. Approvals shall
not exceed a period of one year; provided, however, further extensions of one year each may be granted if such extension request is filed not later
than two (2) months prior to the expiration of the one year term. The employee shall immediately notify the City of any change in the extent or
character of the outside employment.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 55/797
C. Compensation: For the purposes of this section, compensation shall not include any cash payment or exchange of noncash goods or services of less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) in any one year. Additionally, free admission and refreshments and similar noncash nominal benefits provided to an employee
during an event at which an employee gives a speech, participates in a panel or seminar, or provides a service, and actual transportation and any
necessary lodging and subsistence provided directly in connection with the speech, panel, seminar, or service, including, but not limited to, meals and
beverages on the day of the activity, shall not be considered compensation for the purposes of this section.
D. Purchase Or Investment In Real Estate: Employees shall also report to their department head the purchase or investment in any real estate or real
property improvements in the City of Beverly Hills, except that the City Manager, Assistant and Deputy City Managers, and department heads shall
make such report to the City Council. (Ord. 15-O-2693, eff. 12-4-2015; amd. Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
2-5-213: ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Council shall adopt personnel rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this chapter and the civil service system provided herein. The
personnel rules and regulations shall be recommended to Council by the City Manager, shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, and shall
provide for such matters as may be necessary or proper in carrying out the intent and purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following
matters:
A. The classification of all positions in the classified service, including a position classification plan and classification specifications;
B. The selection, employment, advancement, suspension, discharge, and retirement of all persons in the classified service;
C. The holding of competitive examinations and the administration of other suitable tests to determine fairly the relative ability of the persons examined to
discharge the duties of the position for which they are examined;
D. The creation of eligible lists for inclusion of the names of successful examination candidates in the order of their standing in the examination;
E. The rejection of candidates who fail to comply with requirements of the city in regard to age, residence, physical condition, or nepotism, or who have
been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony involving moral turpitude, or who have attempted any deception or fraud;
F. The period of probation in a classified position before an appointment or promotion to such position becomes complete;
G. The transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action, and layoff of employees;
H. The evaluation of the performance of employees;
I. The separation of employees from city employment;
J. The standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale, welfare, and
training;
K. The establishment of grievance and appeal procedures not otherwise provided by this code; and
L. Such other rules and regulations as necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter or administration of the personnel system. (1962
Code § 2-6.106)
2-5-214: DEPARTMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Any appointing authority is authorized and empowered to promulgate rules and regulations governing operation of the department and the conduct of
employees under their authority. Any such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules and
regulations adopted by council. (1962 Code § 2-6.101.6)
Article 3. Other Provisions Governing Employees
2-5-301: DUTY OF POLICE AND FIRE SAFETY PERSONNEL TO AID IN DISTRESS SITUATIONS:
In addition to the performance of their regular and ordinary duties, it shall be the duty of all police officers and firefighters at all times, and under all
circumstances, to go to the aid of all persons, animals, or property in immediate distress or danger in the city, and to render such help and assistance as
lies within their power. They shall also render such assistance outside the city limits as ordered by the police chief or by the fire chief. (1962 Code § 2-
6.402)
2-5-302: DUTY OF CITY EMPLOYEES IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 56/797
In an emergency arising from attack, war, mob violence, or similar violence, or from a natural disaster due to the elements, such as earthquake, fire,
explosion, wind, or water, any or all employees of the city may be directed by their acting department head, or directly or indirectly by the director of
emergency services, to go outside the city limits, under approved mutual aid agreements, to perform certain work or services in connection with such
emergency. Each and every employee required to perform such work shall render such service under such circumstances to the best of their ability, and if
injured in the course of complying with these requirements and directions, they shall be deemed to be injured in the course of employment and shall be
entitled to workers' compensation therefor as provided by law. (1962 Code § 2-6.404)
2-5-303: SURETY BONDS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
Surety bonds shall be provided to the city by the following officers and employees prior to assuming office or employment, and shall be maintained at all
times during their tenure. The bonds shall be approved by the city attorney, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by the city. The bonds required
shall be as follows:
A. The city clerk in an amount not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
B. The city treasurer in the amount not less than one hundred thirty five thousand dollars ($135,000.00).
C. Deputy city treasurer in the amount not less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
D. In addition to the above, a blanket surety bond shall be purchased by risk management for coverage of all city employees in an amount not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). (1962 Code § 2-6.501)
Article 4. Retirement System
2-5-401: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
A contract is authorized between the city and the board of administration, California public employees' retirement system, a copy of which, as amended,
shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and is made a part of this article as though set forth herein in full. Such contract shall provide for the
participation of the city in the public employees' retirement system and shall make city employees members of such system with all rights and benefits
conferred by the public employees' retirement law, including benefits for prior service. (1962 Code § 2-6.301)
2-5-402: EMPLOYEE MEMBERSHIP MANDATORY:
Membership in the public employees' retirement system shall be compulsory for each city employee commencing the first of the month following the date
of their initial employment, except where the duration of employment is known to be less than thirty (30) days. (1962 Code § 2-6.122)
2-5-403: CONTINUATION OF RETIREMENT SYSTEM:
Authority and power are vested in the officers, agents, and employees of the city to do and perform any act and to exercise any authority granted,
permitted, or required under the provisions of the public employees' retirement system. The council may terminate any contract with the board of
administration of the public employees' retirement system only under authority granted by the provisions of state law. (1962 Code § 2-6.122)
Article 5. Labor Negotiations
2-5-501: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply when the city council considers adopting or amending a memorandum of understanding. (Ord. 13-O-2651, eff. 1-17-2014)
2-5-502: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING: A formal signed agreement between the city and an exclusively recognized employee organization. (Ord. 13-O-
2651, eff. 1-17-2014)
2-5-503: ADOPTION OF A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING:
A. The city council may adopt or amend a memorandum of understanding only after conducting two (2) public meetings. The purpose of the first meeting
shall be to solicit public input early in the negotiation process concerning potential terms of the proposed memorandum or amendment. The purpose of
the second meeting shall be to place a proposed memorandum or amendment on an agenda, after concluding the negotiation process, for the city
council to consider adoption. The foregoing requirements shall not preclude the city council from conducting more than one public meeting before or
during the negotiation process.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 57/797
B. A proposed memorandum of understanding or amendment to a memorandum of understanding, as well as any fiscal impacts analysis prepared
pursuant to section 2-5-505 of this chapter, shall be posted on the city's official website at least two (2) weeks before the city council meeting at which
the proposed memorandum of understanding or amendment is considered for approval.
C. The adoption or amendment of a proposed memorandum of understanding shall not be placed on the city council's consent calendar. (Ord. 15-O-2679,
eff. 6-18-2015)
2-5-504: CITY REPRESENTATIVE:
Unless reported as provided below, the lead negotiator on behalf of the city during the negotiation of a memorandum of understanding or amendment to a
memorandum of understanding shall not be an employee of the city and shall have demonstrated expertise in negotiating labor and employment
agreements on behalf of municipalities.
If the principal representative of the city does not meet the requirements of this section, then this fact must be reported at the meetings of the city council
at which the memorandum of understanding or amendment is considered. (Ord. 13-O-2651, eff. 1-17-2014)
2-5-505: ECONOMIC ANALYSIS:
Unless reported as provided below, at the conclusion of the negotiation process, the city council shall obtain from a consultant who is not an employee, a
fiscal impact analysis of the final proposed memorandum of understanding or amendment to memorandum of understanding analyzing the costs of the
final proposal being presented to the city council.
If a fiscal impact analysis is not obtained as required by this section, then this fact must be reported orally at the meetings of the city council at which the
memorandum of understanding or amendment is considered. (Ord. 13-O-2651, eff. 1-17-2014; amd. Ord. 15-O-2697, eff. 12-15-2015; Ord. 16-O-2698, eff.
2-5-2016)
Title 3
TAXATION, FINANCE, PURCHASING, AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Chapter 1
TAXATION AND FEES
Article 1. Uniform Sales And Use Tax
3-1-101: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX LAW OF THE CITY. (1962 Code § 8-2)
3-1-102: PURPOSE:
This article is adopted to achieve the following purposes, and is to be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes:
A. To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the state Revenue And
Taxation Code;
B. To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions
are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of said Revenue And Taxation Code;
C. To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state
board of equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; and
D. To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered consistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code,
minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this article. (1962 Code § 8-2)
3-1-103: IMPOSITION OF SALES AND USE TAX:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 58/797
A. There is hereby imposed a tax for the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail upon every retailer in the city at the rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold by that person at retail in the city, and a use tax of one percent
(1%) of the purchase price upon the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased from a retailer for storage, use or
consumption in the city.
B. For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are deemed consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or its agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. In the event a
retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are
consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations as prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. The gross receipts from
such sales for purposes of the sales tax, and purchase price for purposes of the use tax, shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax. (1962 Code § 8-2)
3-1-104: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;
B. The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personalproperty, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales
and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code by any city or county
in the state;
C. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city, and directly
and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States, or
any foreign government;
D. In addition to the exemptions set forth in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as
common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
the state, the United States, or any foreign government. (1962 Code § 8-2)
3-1-105: CONTRACT FOR STATE ADMINISTRATION:
The city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax under
this article, which shall continue in effect so long as the county of Los Angeles has an operative sales and use tax ordinance enacted pursuant to part 1.5
of division 2 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. (1962 Code § 8-2)
3-1-106: PROVISIONS OF STATE REVENUE AND TAXATION CODE APPLICABLE:
In enacting this article, the city adopts the provisions contained in part 1 of division 2 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code, commencing with section
6001 thereof, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, except that the name of the city as the taxing agency shall be substituted for that of the state;
with the exception that the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section
6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in section 6203; and an additional seller's permit shall not be required if one is issued to the seller under section
6067 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. All amendments to the foregoing state code provisions, shall upon enactment by the state, automatically
become a part of this article. (1962 Code § 8-2)
Article 2. Business Tax
3-1-201: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; IMPOSITION OF TAX:
A. Registration Required: No person shall transact, engage in, carry on or permit the operation of any business in the city without first registering and
obtaining a current valid registration certificate from the department of finance administration. A violation of this section or of any other provision of this
article is unlawful and constitutes a misdemeanor as provided in title 1, chapter 3, article 1 of this code.
B. Term Of Registration: Each registration, unless otherwise specified in this article, shall expire annually on December 31.
C. Revenue Measure; Tax Imposed: A business tax is hereby imposed in the amount prescribed in the applicable section. The required business tax is
imposed pursuant to the taxing power of the city of Beverly Hills solely for the purpose of obtaining revenue. A business tax must be paid by every
person engaged in any business or occupation conducted within the city of Beverly Hills.
D. Regulatory Permit May Also Be Required: Where this code requires a regulatory permit to engage in a specific type of business or activity, approval and
issuance of a regulatory permit for such business or activity shall be a prerequisite to commencement of the business or activity.
E. Registration Certificate: A registration certificate shall be prepared and issued by the department of finance administration when the following conditions
have been met:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 59/797
1. The registration form has been completely filled out and signed by the owner, agent, corporate officer or other duly appointed and authorized person.
2. All taxes, penalties and interest owing have been received by the department of finance administration.
3. All required regulatory permits have been approved and issued.
F. Nontransferability Of Registration Certificate: Registration certificates issued pursuant to this article shall not be transferable by the registrant to any
other person or registrant, nor shall any tax paid by any registrant under the provisions of this article be applied in whole or in part to the payment of tax
due, or to become due, from any other person or registrant. This subsection shall not apply to a change in ownership of the registrant where the same
business continues to be conducted thereafter.
G. Identification Sticker: Whenever the business tax for a business imposed under the provisions of this article is measured by the number of vehicles,
devices, machines, or other pieces of equipment used, or whenever the business tax is measured by the gross receipts from the operation of coin
operated devices, the department of finance administration shall issue, in addition toand concurrent with the registration certificate, for each tax period
for which the business tax has been paid, one identifying sticker or symbol for each vehicle, device, machine or for each coin operated device used in a
business where the tax is measured by the gross receipts from such coin operated devices. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-202: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the payment of any tax for engaging in a business or the doing of an act when such payment
would constitute an unlawful burden upon or an unlawful interference with interstate or foreign commerce, or which payment would be in violation of the
constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state of California.
B. Subject to first applying for and obtaining a business tax registration certificate with the classification of exempt from the city, the following persons and
activities are exempt from taxation:
1. Nonprofit or charitable organizations including, without limitation, fraternal, educational, civic, state, military, county and municipal organizations or
associations (hereafter collectively "nonprofit entities"), which have the appropriate tax designation or classification from federal and state taxing
authorities.
2. Religious institutions which have the appropriate tax designation or classification from federal and state taxing authorities.
3. Credit unions which have the appropriate tax designation or classification from federal and state taxing authorities.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, exempt entities shall not be exempt from the payment of a tax in their sponsorship or
participation in events involving the theater or arts, dances, concerts, lectures, sports or similar activities unless all of the net proceeds, defined for
these purposes as the net amount derived from revenues of the event less the direct costs of the event, derived from the event are used for the
operation of these entities or institutions, or for some other nonprofit charitable or benevolent purpose.
D. No person engaged in business in the city shall be entitled to a tax exemption by virtue of the sponsorship or participation of any nonprofit entity or
religious institution (regardless of any revenue sharing or other form of compensation) in an otherwise taxable activity or event, including, without
limitation, those described in subsection B of this section.
E. An exemption granted for any activity set forth in subsection B of this section is void and payment of the entire business tax is required if said activity
was conducted in such a manner thatthe city would not have granted an exemption had same been accurately described or fully disclosed in the
application for an exemption. Furthermore, the failure to use net proceeds in the manner required by subsection C of this section shall result in any
exemption being void and the entire business tax being immediately due. All tax obligations arising by reason of this section shall be immediately due
and payable along with any penalties and interest.
F. For the purposes of this section, city purchases shall be exempt from the calculation of the required business tax as follows:
1. Whenever the measure of the business tax is based on gross receipts, the person subject to the business tax may exclude from the business tax
calculation the dollar value of purchases made directly by the city of Beverly Hills from the person subject to the tax.
2. Whenever the measure of the business tax is based on gross payroll, number of persons employed, number of vehicles, devices, or articles of
equipment used, the person subject to the business tax may exclude from the business tax calculation the dollar value of the payroll, hours related to
the persons employed, hours related to the number of vehicles, devices, or articles of equipment used in providing goods or services related to
purchases made directly by the city of Beverly Hills from the person subject to the tax. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-203: FILING OF EXEMPTION REQUIRED:
A. Any person claiming an exemption from these tax requirements, including exemptions claimed under subsection 3-1-202F of this article, shall register in
the manner prescribed in subsection 3-1-201A, "Registration Required", of this article, and within the time requirements of section 3-1-206, "Due
Dates", of this article, as classification Z, exempt business or exempt business transactions.
B. A request for exempt registration from these tax requirements shall be granted by the director of finance administration only when the requesting person
fully and completely meets the requirements of section 3-1-202 of this article.
C. A request for exempt registration from these tax requirements shall be denied by the director of finance administration if the registration form is
incomplete or proper documentation of tax designation or classification from federal or state taxing authorities is not included or if the person fails to
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 60/797
fully and completely meet the requirements of section 3-1-202 of this article. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-204: UNLAWFUL BUSINESS NOT AUTHORIZED:
No registration or payment of tax required by this article shall be construed as authorizing any person to conduct an illegal business or a legal business in
an illegal manner. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-205: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is
intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
AGENT, AGENCY OR BROKER: A person or business, who by authority acts as an intermediary, representative, or agent, on behalf of, or in the place of
another person in the purchase or sale of insurance, real or personal property, stocks, bonds, securities, notes, negotiation of contracts for personal or
professional services or appearances or other similar items of value and receives compensation, either directly or indirectly, in the form of commission or
otherwise for services rendered. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the definition of agent, agency or broker does not include a "real estate
salesperson" as defined in this section.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building, or portion of a building, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied, as
the home or residence of three (3) or more families.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, activity, enterprise, profession, trade, or undertaking of any nature conducted or engaged in, or ordinarily conducted or
engaged in, with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, whether direct or indirect, to the taxpayer or to another person. The term shall include operations
of subsidiary or independent entities conducted for the benefit of others and at no profit to themselves, including nonprofit businesses and trade
associations. A person shall not be deemed to be engaged in business solely by reason of receipt of dividend or interest income from passive investments.
BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION: The class or type of business activity conducted within the city of Beverly Hills as determined by the director of finance
administration or the director's designates.
BUSINESS TAX: The tax imposed upon a person engaged in business within the city of Beverly Hills and is calculated by multiplying the measurement
focus of the businesses classifications by the tax rate for the businesses classification.
COMMERCIAL REAL PROPERTY: All real property, including improvements thereto, of any kind or nature which is owned, held, used, or operated for
commercial or industrial purposes but shall not include the leasing or rental of real property for residential purposes.
EMPLOYEE: Means and includes any individual who qualifies as an employee within the meaning of division 4, part 1, chapter 2, article 2, of the California
Labor Code and any individual in the service of an employer, under an appointment or contract of hire or apprenticeship, express or implied, oral or written,
whether lawfully or unlawfully employed, and includes, but is not limited to, all of the enumerated categories in subsection (a) through (f) of California
Labor Code section 3351, regardless of whether workers' compensation benefits pursuant to division 4, part 1, section 3200 et seq., of the California Labor
Code are required to be paid. Nothing herein shall be deemed to incorporate any provisions from said Labor Code relating to scope of employment. The
Labor Code provisions in effect at the time this ordinance is effective shall apply.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS: The conducting, operating, managing, participating in or carrying on, of a business by a person whether in the capacity of an
owner, principal, partner, officer, agent, representative, broker, employee, servant, independent contractor, lessee or other person.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An institution as defined by the California Financial Code, section 31041.
GROSS RECEIPTS: Except as otherwise specifically provided, the term "gross receipts" as used in this article shall mean the gross receipts of the
calendar year and is defined as follows:
The total amount of the sales price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever
nature it may be, whether such service, act of employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not, for
which a charge is made or credit allowed, including, without limitation, all receipts, cash, credits, forfeited or retained deposits of any kind and property of
any kind or nature, in any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchasers without any deductions therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expense whatsoever. Gross receipts shall
also include the amount of any federal manufacturer's or importer's excise tax included in the price of the property sold, even though the manufacturer or
importer is also the retailer thereof and whether or not the amount of such tax is stated as a separate charge.
Excluded from gross receipts shall be:
A. Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;
B. The value of property accepted as part of thepurchase price for subsequent resale;
C. Any California state, city or city and county sales or use tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the
consumer or purchaser;
D. Any city of Beverly Hills transient occupancy tax required to be included in or added to the price of a room and collected from a transient;
E. Such part of the sales price of property returned by the purchaser upon the recision of the contract or sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;
F. Deposits which by law or contract must be refunded and are actually refunded;
G. Collections for others when the business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that payments are made to those for whom collected;
H. The cash value of sales, trades, or transactions between departments or units of the same business; and
I. The amount of gross receipts which has been the measure of a business tax paid to any other city.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 61/797
HOTEL, MOTEL OR ROOMING HOUSE: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for lodging persons for a period of less than thirty (30)
consecutive days. Hotels, motels and rooming houses shall include, without limitation, any establishment held out to the public as a hostel, inn, time share
project, tourist court, or motel, but shall not include hospitals or governmental buildings where persons are detained under legal restraint, such as jails or
prisons.
MEASUREMENT FOCUS: The measurement of a business's activities within the city through the use of a standard designated by this article for each
business classification. Measurement focus includes such measures of business activity as gross receipts, gross payroll, gross operating expenses,
number of vehicles, machines, devices or articles of equipment used, or the number of persons employed.
NUMBER OF NONPROFESSIONAL PAYROLL HOURS; PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS: The total number of nonprofessional payroll
hours recorded, including, but not limited to, regular, overtime, part time, vacation, compensated absences, and all other hours for which compensation of
any form is provided, of nonprofessional persons employed in the registrant's business within the city of Beverly Hills in the previous calendar year.
NUMBER OF PAYROLL HOURS; NONPROFESSIONAL BUSINESSCLASSIFICATIONS: The total number of payroll hours recorded, including, but not
limited to, regular, overtime, part time, vacation, compensated absences, and all other hours for which compensation of any form is provided, of persons
employed in the registrant's business within the city of Beverly Hills in the previous calendar year.
NUMBER OF PROFESSIONAL AND SEMIPROFESSIONAL PAYROLL HOURS; PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS: One of the following:
A. Where the professional business being registered bills its clientele based on total professional and/or semiprofessional hours of service provided,
the total number of professional and semiprofessional hours charged to client accounts, whether compensation of any form whatsoever has been
received, in the previous calendar year.
B. Where the professional business being registered does not bill its clientele based on total professional and/or semiprofessional hours of service
provided, the total number of professional and semiprofessional payroll hours recorded, including, but not limited to, regular, overtime, part time,
vacation, compensated absences, and all other hours for which compensation of any form is provided, of professional and semiprofessional persons
employed in the registrant's business within the city of Beverly Hills, in the previous calendar year.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company,
joint stock company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, Massachusetts business or
common law trusts, societies, or any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise transacting and
carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee.
PROFESSIONAL: Any person who engages in an occupation of technical expertise which generally requires a higher education and certification by a
governmental agency.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person furnishing the public with communications, water, light, gas, heat, power, or other public utilities or services subject to
regulation by the public utilities commission of the state.
REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON: A person who, pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 10000 et seq., or its successor, is licensed as a
salesperson, or is licensed as a broker and is acting in the capacity of a salesperson under a written agreement with a broker, and for compensation or in
expectation of acompensation undertakes activities of a salesperson.
REGISTER: To complete, execute and file a city approved application with the department of finance administration by each person prior to the
commencement of business operation and the payment of all required taxes and any penalties and interest. This definition shall include any reference to
"registering" and "registration".
REGISTRANT: A person to whom a registration certificate has been issued by the department of finance administration.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A document issued by the department of finance administration to evidence the satisfactory completion of registration for
a specified period of time.
SEMIPROFESSIONAL: A person who assists or studies under a professional, either as an apprentice or employee, or one who participates in the
operation of a professional occupation as a technical employee.
TAX RATE: The rate of taxation established for each business classification. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996; amd. Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996; Ord.
05-O-2467, eff. 4-16-2005; Ord. 05-O-2467, eff. 4-16-2005)
3-1-206: DUE DATES:
All Business Taxes shall be paid to the Department of Finance Administration in lawful money of the United States and taxes required hereunder shall be
received in advance by the Department of Finance Administration except where otherwise specifically provided, and shall be due and payable at the
following times:
A. Annual Business Taxes: On January 1 of each calendar year, except that the Business Tax for real estate salespersons shall be due quarterly as
follows: April 1, July 1, October 1 and January 1.
B. Newly Established Business: On or before the first day of operation in the City.
C. Construction Project Taxes: On or before the first day work commences on the project.
D. Taxes Arising From Assessment: On the date established by subsection 3-1-213B of this chapter.
E. Taxes Arising From Amendments To This Article: When a person first becomes subject to Business Tax by reason of an amendment of this article, or
because of such an amendment, becomes subject to Business Tax under a section not previously applicable to such person or on a basis not
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 62/797
previously applicable to such person, any new or additional tax required to be paid by reason of this article, as so amended, shall be due and payable
upon the effective date of the amending ordinance unless an operative date different from the effective date of the amendment is specified therein.
(Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996; amd. Ord. 05-O-2467, eff. 4-16-2005)
3-1-207: DELINQUENT DATES; PENALTIES; OVERPAYMENTS; INTEREST:
A. Delinquent Dates: Unless otherwise specifically provided for in other provisions of this article, all Business Taxes required to be paid thereby shall be
deemed delinquent if not received on or before the close of business thirty (30) calendar days after the date the tax first became due.
B. Penalties:
1. Initial Delinquency: Any person who fails to pay the required tax by the date stated in subsection A of this section shall pay a penalty on the first
calendar day of the first day that the tax is delinquent and on each subsequent calendar day, equal to one percent (1%) of the tax due, or unpaid
portion thereof; provided, however, the amount of such penalty to be added for the first thirty (30) calendar days of delinquency shall in no event
exceed ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax due.
2. Continuing Delinquency: Any person who fails to pay any delinquent tax, penalties and interest due on or before the first calendar day of the second
thirty (30) calendar day period that the tax is due shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due, or unpaid portion thereof and on the first
calendar day of each subsequent thirty (30) calendar day period shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the tax due, or unpaid portion thereof;
provided, however, the amount of all initial delinquency and continuing delinquency penalties to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the amount of the total tax due.
3. Reduction Or Elimination Of Penalties: Notwithstanding anything contained in this subsection B, any person that is obligated to pay a penalty as a
result of a delinquency in the payment of taxes, penalties or interest, as provided in subsection B1 or B2 of this section may apply to the Director of
Finance for a reduction or elimination of such penalty or penalties. The Director shall grant a reduction or elimination of such penalty or penalties as
provided below only if the Director determines that the person meets one of the following criteria:
a. The person has voluntarily reported the delinquency that was not otherwise previously known or discovered by the City and has paid the total sum
of delinquent taxes and interest due under subsection D of this section within thirty (30) days after issuance by the City of an audit report
calculating such sum. The voluntary report of delinquency shall be made upon forms and pursuant to procedures to be promulgated by the
Director of Finance; or
b. The person's delinquency was discovered other than by a voluntary report as provided in subsection B3a of this section, but the person
nonetheless has paid the total sum of delinquent taxes, penalties and interest due under subsection D of this section within thirty (30) days after
issuance by the City of an audit report calculating such sum.
If the Director determines that the person has met the criterion set forth in subsection B3a of this section, then the penalty or penalties otherwise
due for such delinquency shall be eliminated. If the Director determines that the person has met the criterion set forth in subsection B3b of this
section, then the penalty or penalties otherwise due for such delinquency shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the amount of the total tax due.
No person shall be entitled to elimination or reduction of any penalty unless timely payment of taxes, interest and any applicable penalties shall be
made as provided in this section. The failure to make a timely payment as provided in this section or the taking of any other action to otherwise
contest the results of the City's audit report shall constitute a complete waiver of any right to seek reduction or elimination of any penalty pursuant
to this section. This subsection B3 shall not apply to any delinquency after that delinquency becomes the subject of an assessment of Business
Taxes.
C. Overpayment: For the purposes of allowing overpayments as credit against underpayments of the aforementioned taxes, whenever such overpayment
has been received by the City within the three (3) years preceding the current tax year, or during any year for which the taxpayer, at the request of the
Director of Finance Administration, has executed a waiver of the defense of the statute of limitations with regard to any claim the City may have for
Business, Sales or Use Taxes, the Director of Finance Administration, when making determinations of the amount of taxes due the City, shall make an
allowance of credit for any such overpayments. Whenever an overpayment has been made prior to an underpayment, no penalty or interest shall apply
upon the amount of the underpayment satisfied by the prior overpayment.
D. Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any person who fails to pay any tax required to be paid by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one
and one-half percent (1.50%) per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first
became delinquent until paid. Interest shall run during any period of time for which an extension of time has been granted by the Director of Finance
Administration. Interest required by any of the provisions of this section shall not be subject to waiver or compromise other than as the Council may
direct.
E. Penalties And Interest Merged With Tax: Except for the purposes of calculation of interest and penalties, every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
F. Audits: Nothing in this article or this section shall obligate the City or the Director of Finance to conduct any audit, including, without limitation, an audit
pursuant to section 3-1-212 of this chapter, as a prerequisite to any assessment or enforcement of the tax, penalty or interest obligations in this article.
(Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996; amd. Ord. 10-O-2580, eff. 5-23-2010; Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
3-1-208: SEPARATE REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION AND EACH BUSINESS TAX CLASSIFICATION:
A. Unless otherwise provided in this article, every person who engages in any business within the City must register with the Department of Finance
Administration and pay a separate Business Tax for:
1. Each establishment or location within the City at which registrant conducts business; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 63/797
2. Each type of business as set forth in section 3-1-219 of this chapter which a registrant conducts at every primary and branch establishment within
the City.
Where business is engaged in from one or more locations outside the city, only one registration for each classification of business is required for engaging
in that business in the city from all such outside locations. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-209: REFUNDS OF OVERPAYMENTS:
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this code shall be made except under the following procedure:
A. No claim for refund shall be accepted nor shall any refund be made by the director of finance administration unless the director receives a complete and
executed claim form with all required supporting documentation or records within one calendar year from the date the claimed overpayment was
tendered to the department of finance administration. Claim forms shall be furnished upon request by the department of finance administration to any
person who seeks a refund.
B. There shall be no refund of taxes paid where a business vacates its premises or otherwise ceases business operations during the term of the business
tax calendar year.
C. The director of finance administration shall refund taxes paid when it has been determined by the director of finance administration that the tax was paid
in error, computedincorrectly, overpaid, or collected illegally.
D. Nothing contained in this section shall modify, extend or suspend the one calendar year deadline to make a claim in the manner stated in subsection A
of this section nor shall the timely filing of a claim extend any state statute of limitations which constitutes a bar to the recovery of a tax refund. (Ord.
96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-210: COMPUTATION OF BUSINESS TAX:
The business tax is computed by multiplying the measurement focus for the classification of the business being registered by the tax rate for the
classification of the business being registered as defined in section 3-1-219 of this article. Where the measurement focus is based on an estimation, the
registrant shall estimate the tax due by multiplying the estimated measurement focus for the classification of the business being registered by the tax rate
for the classification of the business being registered as defined in section 3-1-219 of this article. The business tax shall be based on the estimate, if such
estimate is reasonable as compared to criteria established by the director of finance administration, otherwise the tax shall be based on the criteria
established by the director of finance administration. The registrant shall pay the business tax as determined; provided however, the amount of the tax so
determined shall be tentative only, and the registrant, within thirty (30) calendar days after the expiration of the period for which such tax was deposited,
shall furnish the department of finance administration information showing the actual tax calculation for the period along with any taxes due as a result of
an underestimation by the registrant. Any taxes due and not paid within thirty (30) calendar days after the expiration of the period for which such tax was
deposited shall be considered delinquent and subject to penalties and interest as required by section 3-1-207 of this article. If the registrant overestimated
the tax due, any excess shall first be credited to the renewal of the business registration. After fulfillment of any renewal requirement, or other amounts
owing the city of Beverly Hills, any remaining overpayment shall be refunded to the registrant. (Ord. 91-O-2126, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 96-O-2255, eff.
3-22-1996)
3-1-211: CHANGE OF ADDRESS:
Every person who, under the provisions of this article, is subject to a business tax and who has a fixed place of business shall notify the department of
finance administration in writing of any change in location of such fixed place of business or mailing address within thirty (30) days thereafter. (Ord. 96-O-
2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-212: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE ADMINISTRATION; DUTY TO ENFORCE; POWERS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
A. Duty To Enforce: It shall be the duty of the director of finance administration and the director's deputies, designates or any other person deemed
appropriate by the director, and the director and other such designated individuals are hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this
article, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this article as may from time to time be required by the director of
finance administration. The director of finance administration may make such rules and regulations as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
article as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
The determination of the classification of business a registrant is engaged in, or is about to engage in, or the determination of the number of vehicles,
machines, devices, or articles of equipment used, or the number of persons employed or the gross receipts, gross operating expenses or gross payroll,
for the computation of tax to be paid shall be an administrative function of the director of finance administration or the directors designated
representative.
B. Inspection And Examination Of Places Of Business: The director of finance administration, and the director's deputies, designates or any other person
deemed appropriate by the director, shall have the authority to inspect and examine all places of business in the city to ascertain whether or not the
provisions of this article have been complied with.
C. Audit And Examination Of Records And Equipment: The director of finance administration and the director's deputies, designates or any other person
deemed appropriate by the director, shall have the power to audit and examine all books, and records, and, where necessary, all equipment, of any
person engaged in business in the city for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of business tax, sales or use tax, if any, required to be paid by the
provisions hereof, and for the purpose of verifying the statements, or any item thereof, when filed by any taxpayer pursuant to this article. If such
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 64/797
person, after written demand by the director of finance administration or the director's deputies, designates or any other person deemed appropriate by
the director, refuses to make available for audit, examination or verification such books, records or equipment as the director of finance administration
or the director's deputies, designates or any other person deemed appropriate by the director, requests, the director of finance administration may
make an assessment in the manner provided in 3-1-213 of this article of any taxes estimated to be due.
D. Extension Of Time For Filing: The director of finance administration may extend the time for filing any statement required under the provisions of this
article for a period not to exceed forty five (45) calendar days under the following circumstances:
1. The city council of the city of Beverly Hills has declared astate of emergency within thirty (30) calendar days of the annual renewal date and as a
result of conditions that caused the declaration of emergency the timely filing of annual renewals by local businesses would be affected. The director
of finance administration shall notify the city manager of the director's intent to extend the time for filing prior to issuing notification of the extension. If
the city manager concurs with the director of finance administration's decision to extend the time for filing, all registrants will be notified of the
extension of the time for filing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
2. Upon receipt of a written request from a registrant who is a sole proprietor or the only person with the information necessary to complete the
registration form and who provides proof that the timely filing of registration was not possible as result of the death or severe illness of the registrant
or an immediate family member, herein defined as a spouse, parent, brother, sister, child, grandparent or in-law of the registrant. The decision of the
director of finance administration to either grant or deny an extension shall be served upon the registrant by deposit of the notice in the United States
mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the registrant at the address of the location of the business registered with the department of finance
administration within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the receipt of the request for extension.
If an extension is granted, no penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension in
the manner provided by in this article. Taxes become delinquent on the first day after the last day of the extension.
E. Rules And Regulations; Apportionment: When, by reason of the constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state of California, the
business tax imposed by this article cannot be enforced without there being apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city of
Beverly Hills, or in the state of California, as the case may be, the director of finance administration may make such rules and regulations for the
apportionment of the tax as necessary or desirable to overcome the constitutional objections. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the city
attorney prior to becoming effective.
F. Payments And Requests, Made By Mail: Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is received by the department of
finance administration after the time prescribed by this article for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was
mailed prior to the time prescribed in this article for the receipt thereof, or whenever the director of finance administration is furnished substantial proof
that the payment statement, report, or request for communication was in fact deposited in the United States mail prior to the time prescribed for receipt
thereof, the director of finance administration may regard such payment, statement,report, request or other communication as having been timely
received. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-213: ASSESSMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
A. Assessment Of Taxes: If the director of finance administration is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this article is
correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, or that the business classification has been correctly determined, or that any tax is due or may
be due to the city of Beverly Hills under the provisions of this article, the director of finance administration, or the director's designate, may compute
and determine the amount to be paid and make an assessment upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any
information in the city's possession or that may come into the city's possession. One or more assessments of the amount of tax due for a given period
or periods may be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, an assessment may be made at any time within three (3) years
thereafter as to any tax liability arising from engaging in such business.
B. Application Of Penalties To Assessment; Due Date Of Tax: The due date of the assessed taxes for the purpose of application of penalties shall be one
of the following:
1. The due date of the original tax obligation; or
2. The date the assessment becomes final if the director of finance administration makes the following findings as a part of the assessment:
a. The business was property registered and a current registration certificate was issued or the registrant was eligible for issuance of a current
registration certificate prior to the findings of the assessment; and
b. The assessment is the result of a tax underpayment; and
c. The underpayment of the tax was the result of incorrect information provided, in writing, by fax or documented telephone conversation or other
verifiable means of communication, to the registrant by finance administration staff; and
d. The incorrect information provided by finance administration staff was not the result of incorrect or incomplete information provided by the
registrant but rather by an administrative error by finance administration staff.
C. Notice Of Assessment: A notice of assessment shall be prepared and shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known or estimated to be due by
the director of finance administration and any penalties or interest due as of the date of its preparation.
D. Service Of Assessment: The notice of assessment shall beserved upon the registrant or person by deposit of the notice in the United States mail,
postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the registrant at the address of the location of the business registered with the department of finance
administration. Should the person not have previously registered the business, then the notice of assessment shall be served to the person's last
known address. For the purpose of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 65/797
E. Right To Hearing: Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of service, the registrant or person assessed may apply in writing to the director of
finance administration for a hearing on the assessment.
F. No Timely Request For Hearing: If the registrant or person does not request a hearing upon the assessment within the prescribed time, the amount of
the assessment shall be final and the amount thereof shall immediately be due and owing to the city of Beverly Hills, but penalties and interest as
provided by this article shall continue to accrue until paid.
G. Time Of Hearing; Notice: If the registrant or person requests a hearing, the director of finance administration shall cause the matter to be set for hearing
not later than ninety (90) calendar days after the date of the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the registrant or
person assessed as prescribed in subsection B of this section not later than fifteen (15) calendar days before the date set for hearing and, if the
director of finance administration desires said registrant or person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice shall designate the records
required to be produced.
H. Administrative Hearing: The hearing prescribed by this section shall be before the director of finance administration or the duly appointed representative
of the director of finance administration. At the hearing, the registrant or person assessed may submit evidence why the assessed tax interest and
penalties should not be fixed. The registrant or person may be represented by counsel.
I. Decision Of The Director Of Finance Administration: Upon completion of the hearing, the director of finance administration, or the director's designate,
shall determine the proper tax, interest and penalties to be remitted and shall give written notice to the registrant or person assessed in the same form
and in the same manner as the notice of assessment and within thirty (30) calendar days from the conclusion of the hearing at which time the
assessment shall become final.
J. Effect Of Delay In Administrative Proceedings: Failure of the director of finance administration to set any hearing within the time prescribed in this
section and failure of the director of finance administration to complete any procedure prescribed in this section within the period stated shall not affect
the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder.
K. Effect Of Payment Of An Assessment: Acceptance of any payment upon an assessment shall not preclude the director of finance administration from
subsequently levying another assessment in any case where the original assessment does not correctly reflect the actual tax liability.
L. Appeal From The Decisions Of The Director Of Finance Administration: Any registrant or person assessed not in agreement with the decision of the
director of finance administration with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council as provided in title
1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-214: CONFIDENTIAL CHARACTER OF INFORMATION OBTAINED; DISCLOSURE UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for the department of finance administration, or for any city official, to release information in its possession (hereafter "confidential
information") regarding a registrant to any other person without the prior written authorization of registrant, except in the following instances:
A. For use in the enforcement of any provision of this code. This exception shall include the use of confidential information by the city council or other city
officials or representatives in connection with the resolution, compromise or adjustment of any claim relating to a tax liability;
B. For examination of any governmental taxing authority if reciprocal arrangements with said agency exists, or to a grand jury;
C. To a court of law in an action involving a registrant's tax liability;
D. To the registrant's successor, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, guarantor or a duly appointed agent or representative. The release of
confidential information by the director of finance administration to any such person upon the director's receipt of a request in writing shall not be made
without prior written approval of the city attorney who shall review the legal standing of the person requesting disclosure;
E. The name and address of the registrant may be released to any person requesting this information for any reason;
F. If otherwise required by law. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-215: DELINQUENT TAXES; INSTALLMENT PAYMENT:
A. Registrants indebted to the city of Beverly Hills for unpaid taxes, penalties or interest (hereafter "the delinquency") may,upon a determination by the
director of finance administration that: 1) the registrant lacks the present ability to pay the entire sum due and 2) a reasonable basis exists to believe
that registrant can successfully make monthly payments on a timely basis, enter into a written agreement with the city for a period not to exceed three
(3) years for the installment payment of the delinquency on such terms as the director may approve.
B. Any installment or other partial payment received by the department of finance administration, whether or not as a result of a written agreement
pursuant to this section, shall be applied to that portion of the delinquency which first arose in time.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 66/797
C. Any agreement executed pursuant to this section, shall include, without limitation, provisions reciting the registrant's admission that the delinquency is
presently due, the continued accrual of interest, an acceleration clause, the recovery of attorney fees and costs in any litigation to enforce the
agreement, the reservation of all of the city's rights and remedies to enforce its laws, as well as a recital that no penalties shall be applied to the unpaid
portion of the delinquency for the period covered by the agreement so long as all installment payments are timely made. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-
1996)
3-1-216: DELINQUENT TAXES; SUIT FOR RECOVERY:
Any person who fails to register a business and pay a business tax according to the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city in any action brought
in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-217: DELINQUENT TAXES; DEBT NOT DISCHARGED BY PENAL CONVICTION:
The conviction of any registrant or person for a failure to pay a tax liability or for a violation of any other provision of this article shall not excuse the
obligation to pay a tax, penalty or interest charge, nor shall the total or partial payment of a tax, penalty or interest charged bar a prosecution. The
remedies provided in this code are cumulative and the exercise of one remedy shall not preclude the exercise of any other remedies. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff.
3-22-1996)
3-1-218: EFFECT OF REPEALS AND AMENDMENTS:
Except where a repealing or amendatory ordinance specifically provides otherwise, the amendment or repeal of any provision of this article shall not be
construed to operate as a release or waiver of any liability or sum of money which may be due or owing to the city of Beverly Hills by any person pursuant
to provisions of said article as they existed prior to such amendment or repeal. The rule of construction required by this section is declared to be in
clarification and confirmation of the existing intent of said article, and is not to be construed as applying solely to the effect of repealing or amending
ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this section. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996)
3-1-219: BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS:
Every person who engages in business, whether or not at a fixed place in the city, shall first pay a business tax to the department of finance administration
as computed for the following activities:
A. Classification A; Corporate Headquarters And Business And Personal Services: All registrants engaged in business classified by finance administration
as classification A, corporate headquarters or business and personal services, shall pay an annual basic tax plus a per employee tax for each
employee, based on the annualized average number of persons employed in the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by
the registrant of the average number of persons to be employed during the current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of
taxes, fees and charges" for classification A.
B. Classification B; Retail, Wholesale, Manufacturing, And Contractors: Except as provided in section 3-1-220 of this chapter regarding business license
taxes for contractors, all registrants engaged in businesses classified by finance administration as classification B, retail, wholesale, manufacturing and
contractors, shall pay an annual basic tax plus a gross receipts tax for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts in excess of sixty
thousand dollars ($60,000.00), based on the annualized actual gross receipts of the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate
by the registrant of the gross receipts during the current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges"
for classification B.
All registrants classified as contracting businesses pursuant to section 3-1-220 of this chapter shall pay the gross receipts tax specified in section 3-1-
220 of this chapter.
C. Classification C; Professions And Semiprofessions: All registrants engaged in businesses classified by finance administration as classification C,
professions and semiprofessions, shall pay an annual tax for each professional and semiprofessional, based on the annualized average number of
professional and semiprofessional persons engaged in business in the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the
registrant of the average number of professional and semiprofessional persons to be engaged in business during the current calendar year, plus a per
employee tax for each nonprofessional employee, based on the annualized average number of nonprofessional persons employed in the prior calendar
year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the registrant of the average number of nonprofessional persons to be employed during the
current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification C.
D. Classification D; Used Car Dealers: All registrants engaged in the business of selling used automobiles, other than vehicles accepted as a part of the
purchase price for a new automobile and classified by finance administration as classification D, used car dealers, shall pay an annual basic tax plus a
gross receipts tax for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts in excess of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), based on the
annualized actual gross receipts of the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the registrant of the gross receipts during
the current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification D.
E. Classification E; Residential Property Renting And Leasing: All registrants engaged in the business of conducting or operating a hotel or apartment
house or leasing or renting of any residential property, dwelling unit, or room for dwelling, sleeping, or lodging and classified by finance administration
as classification E, residential property renting and leasing, shall pay an annual gross receipts tax for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts, provided, however, the total gross receipts average greater than three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00) per unit, based on the
annualized actual gross receipts of the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the registrant of the gross receipts during
the current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification E.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 67/797
F. Classification F; Commercial Property Renting And Leasing: All registrants engaged in the business of leasing or renting any commercial property, and
which are not subject to the provisions of subsection E of this section, and classified by finance administration as classification F, commercial property
renting and leasing, shall pay an annual gross receipts tax for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts, provided, based on the
annualized actual gross receipts of the prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the registrant of the gross receipts during
the current calendar year, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification F.
G. Classification G; Agencies, Lenders, Brokerages, And Other Similar Services: All registrants engaged in the business of an agency, lender, brokerage,
or other service, and classified by finance administration as classification G, agencies, lenders, brokerages and other similar services, shall pay an
annual gross receipts tax for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross receipts, provided, based on the annualized actual gross receipts of the
prior calendar year or in the case of a new business an estimate by the registrant of the gross receipts during the current calendar year, as established
in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification G.
G.1. Classification G.1; Real Estate Salesperson: All registrants engaged in the business of a real estate salesperson, and classified by finance
administration as classification G.1, shall pay a quarterly gross receipts tax of one dollar ($1.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of gross
receipts for business activity performed in that quarter. Such gross receipts shall be apportioned between jurisdictions pursuant to administrative rules
and regulations established by the department of finance administration. The quarterly business tax payment shall be collected and remitted by the real
estate broker who employs or otherwise compensates the real estate salesperson. All taxes collected by the real estate broker pursuant to this section
shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city.
H. Classification H; Depository Financial Institutions; Branch And Sale Offices: Depository financial institutions; branch and sale office locations.
I. Classification I; Oil Production: All registrants engaged in the business of extracting oil from a well where the well, or any portion of the well, is located in,
passes through, or is bottomed under real property in the city, and classified by finance administration as classification I, oil production, shall pay an
annual tax within sixty (60) calendar days after December 31 of each calendar year as follows:
1. Wells Located Entirely Inside The City: A basic minimum tax plus a subsequent additional tax, based on each barrel which is produced during the
calendar year in excess of ten thousand (10,000) barrels, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for
classification I, wells inside the city.
2. Wells Located Outside The City: A basic minimum tax plus a subsequent additional tax, based on each barrel which is produced during the calendar
year in excess of ten thousand (10,000) barrels, as established in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees and charges" for classification I
outside the city. (Ord. 96-O-2255, eff. 3-22-1996; amd. Ord. 01-O-2361, eff. 1-2-2001; Ord. 01-O-2370, eff. 3-8-2001; Ord. 05-O-2467, eff. 4-16-
2005; Ord. 05-O-2481, eff. 8-16-2005)
3-1-220: SPECIAL REGISTRATION AND TAX COLLECTION PROCEDURES FOR CONTRACTING BUSINESSES:
A. Contracting Business, Defined: As used in this section, "contracting business" means any business classified by finance administration as classification
B, retail, wholesale, manufacturing and contractors, where the person engaging in the business is required, pursuant to the contractor's state license
law (Business and Professions Code section 7000 et seq.), to hold a license from the state of California in order to engage in such business.
B. Project, Defined: As used in this section, "project" means all operations, transactions, or other business conducted in relation to the construction,
improvement, maintenance, or other development of a single site.
C. Project Registration Required: No person shall, for any project, transact, engage in, carry on, or permit the operation of any contracting business in the
city without first registering for that project with the department of building and safety. A person registering a project under this section need not register
pursuant to subsection 3-1-201A of this chapter with respect to any business conducted by that person on a project registered under this subsection.
D. Contracting Registration: Registration required by subsection C of this section shall be reflected on the building permit or other technical permit issued
for the project when the following conditions have been met:
1. All application materials, as required by the director of building and safety, have been completely filled out and signed by the owner, agent, corporate
officer, or other duly appointed and authorized person.
2. All taxes, penalties, and interest owing under this article for any business covered by the certificate have been received by the department of building
and safety or the department of finance administration.
E. Term Of Registration: A registration under this section shall remain valid until all work is completed by the registrant on the project that is the subject of
the registration.
F. Scope Of Contracting Registration: Each building permit or other technical permit shall clearly indicate on its face both the name of the registrant who
has been issued the contracting registration and a description of the project to which the contracting registration applies.
G. Calculation Of Business Tax On Contracting Businesses: All registrants engaged in contracting businesses shall pay a gross receipts tax on each
project based on an estimate by the registrant of the gross receipts for that project. This tax shall be levied on the entire amount of the gross receipts at
the same rate established for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of annual gross receipts exceeding sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) for
classification B in the city of Beverly Hills "schedule of taxes, fees, and charges". This tax shall be in lieu of any tax that would otherwise be required by
section 3-1-219 of this chapter for gross receipts associated with activities that are taxed pursuant to this section.
H. Due Dates For Business Taxes On Contracting Businesses: As provided in section 3-1-206 of this chapter, any business tax imposed pursuant to this
section shall be paid in lawful money of the United States and shall be collected by the department of building and safety and shall be due and payable
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 68/797
on or before the first day that the taxpayer commences work on the project for which the tax is imposed.
I. Expiration Of Period For Which Tax Is Collected: For the purposes of section 3-1-210 of this chapter, the period for which the tax calculated pursuant to
subsection G of this section has been deposited shall be deemed to expire upon finalization or expiration of all building and technical permits for the
project.
J. Applicability Of This Article To Business Tax Collected Under This Section: Except where specifically made inapplicable by the terms of this section, all
provisions of this article shall apply to the business tax collected under this section.
K. Relation To Previous Collection Method: No person subject to the registration requirements of subsection C of this section shall, in aggregate over all
periods in which a tax is imposed pursuant to this section or section 3-1-219 of this chapter, be required to pay taxes calculated under the provisions of
this section and section 3-1-219 of this chapter that would exceed the amount of taxes that would have been owed by the registrant under section 3-1-
219 of this chapter prior to the enactment of this section. Any payments made by a person in excess of that amount shall be treated as overpayments
as of the final day (the "calculation date") of the first calendar year in which: 1) no taxes were due from that person under this article and 2) no taxes
would have been due from that person under section 3-1-219 of this chapter prior to the enactment of this section. Such overpayments may be
refunded only pursuant to the requirements of section 3-1-209 of this chapter, treating the calculation date as the date the claimed overpayment was
tendered. (Ord. 01-O-2361, eff. 1-2-2001; amd. Ord. 01-O-2370, eff. 3-8-2001)
Article 3. Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax
3-1-301: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX LAW OF THE CITY. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-302: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging, or
sleeping purposes and shall include any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartmenthouse, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping
purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs functions through a managing agent of any type of character other than an employee, the managing agent
shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other
agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days; provided, however, in the event of
the existence of a rental agreement between the operator and any person for the occupancy of space of a hotel, which agreement permits such person to
sublet such space to third persons either with or without the prior consent of the operator, then "transient" shall also mean such person to whom such
space is sublet for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the
period of thirty (30) days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of
occupancy. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-303: TAX IMPOSED:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of fourteen percent (14%) of the rent
charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city, which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the
operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid ininstallments, a
proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If
for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the director of finance administration may require that such tax shall be paid directly to
the city. (1962 Code § 8-3; amd. Ord. 91-O-2125, eff. 9-3-1991; Ord. 94-O-2189, eff. 2-1-1994; Ord. 96-O-2258, 5-7-1996)
3-1-304: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax shall be imposed upon any person or any occupancy which is beyond the jurisdiction of the city to impose a tax pursuant to this article. Any
exemption under this section shall require an exemption claim, on the form designated by the director of finance administration, signed by the operator
under penalty of perjury and filed with the city. If the claim is legally justified, the director of finance administration shall approve the claim for exemption.
(1962 Code § 8-3)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 69/797
3-1-305: OPERATOR'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from each
transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from
the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or
absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this article.
(1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-306: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
The operator of any hotel renting an occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the director of finance administration. A "transient occupancy
registration certificate" shall then be issued to the operator, and the certificate shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such
certificate shall contain the following information:
A. The name of the operator;
B. The address of the hotel;
C. The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
D. A statement as follows:
This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereofhas fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform
Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with the City of Beverly Hills for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and
remitting such tax to the director of finance administration of the City.
(1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-307: REPORTING AND REMITTING TAX:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month immediately following the close of the prior month, or at the close of any shorter reporting
period which may be designated by the director of finance administration, make a return on the form designated by the director of finance administration
stating the total rents charged and received, and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies during such period. At the time the return is filed,
the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the city. The director of finance administration may establish shorter reporting periods and require
payment in the form of a cashier's check for any certificate holder when deemed necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax, and may require further
information in such return. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city. (1962 Code § 8-3; amd.
Ord. 92-O-2155, eff. 12-11-1992)
3-1-308: PENALTIES AND INTEREST FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this article within the designated time shall pay a delinquency penalty as follows:
1. On the first day of the first month that the tax is due and on each subsequent calendar day, one percent (1%) of the tax, or unpaid portion thereof;
provided, however, the amount of such penalty to be added for the first month of delinquency shall in no event exceed ten percent (10%) of the
amount of the tax due.
2. On the first day of the second month that the tax is due and on the first day of each subsequent month, ten percent (10%) of the tax, or unpaid
portion thereof; provided, however, the amount of all penalties to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent (50%) of the amount of the tax due.
B. For purposes of this article, postmarks of the United States postal service shall be accepted as the date of payment made, provided the transmitting
envelope contains a postage cancellation stamp showing cancellation not later than eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on the due date.
C. If the director of finance administration shall determine that the nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this article is due to
fraud, an additional penalty in the amount of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties set
forth in subsection A of this section.
D. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to timely remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall pay interest at the rate
of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent until paid.
E. Every penalty imposed, and all interest which accrues pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the
provisions of this article. (1962 Code § 8-3; amd. Ord. 92-O-2155, eff. 12-11-1992)
3-1-309: DETERMINATION OF TAX UPON NONCOMPLIANCE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 70/797
If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax imposed by this article, or to make within the time provided herein, any report or remittance of such tax, or
any portion thereof, the director of finance administration shall proceed to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. The
director of finance administration shall then proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by the
provisions of this article. The director of finance administration shall then notify the operator of the amount so assessed in writing by personal service or in
accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. Within ten (10) days after the service or mailing of such notice, the operator may file an application
with the director of finance administration for a hearing and reconsideration of the amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not
made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, as determined by the director of finance administration shall become final and
conclusive and immediately be due and payable. When a hearing is requested, the director of finance administration shall hold a hearing upon at least five
(5) days' written notice of such hearing to the operator. The notice shall direct the operator to show cause, at the time and place fixed for the hearing, why
the amount as determined by the director of finance administration should not be imposed. The operator shall be afforded the opportunity to testify and
present evidence at the hearing relative to any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by the director of finance administration. Upon conclusion of the hearing,
the director of finance administration shall reconsider the imposition of any tax, penalty, or interest based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and
shall then impose the appropriate tax, penalty, and interest, and shall notify the operator of the amount due and reasons therefore in accordance with title
1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. The amount determined by the director of finance administration shallbe due and payable on the fifteenth day after
mailing of notice to the operator, unless the decision of the director of finance administration is appealed to the city council pursuant to section 3-1-310 of
this article. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-310: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the director of finance administration relative to the amounts of such tax, interest, or penalties may appeal to the
council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-311: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this article to keep and
preserve, for a period of three (3) years thereafter, all records pertaining to the amount of such tax for which such operator is liable. The director of finance
administration shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-312: REFUNDS:
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by this article has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city, a claim for refund may be filed with the city. The claim shall be on the form designated by the director of finance
administration, shall state the specific grounds upon which the claim is based, shall be signed under penalty of perjury, and shall be filed with the
director of finance within three (3) years of payment.
B. An operator may claim a refund where the person from whom the tax was collected was not a transient, provided, however, a refund shall not be
allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to
the operator.
C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in
the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the director of finance administration or
when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the director of finance administration that the transient has
been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
D. No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section unless a claim is filed as provided in this section and the claimant establishes
entitlement thereto by written records. (1962 Code § 8-3)
3-1-313: ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (1962 Code § 8-3)
Article 4. Real Property Transfer Tax
3-1-401: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX LAW OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS, and is adopted pursuant to the authority
contained in part 6.7 of division 2, commencing with section 11901, of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-402: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted,
assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed, exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 71/797
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) a tax at the rate of twenty seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional
part thereof. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-403: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this article shall not be applicable to those exemptions designated in chapter 3, part 6.7, division 2 of the state Revenue and Taxation
Code. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-404: PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT:
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to
the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-405: ADMINISTRATION:
The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this article in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the state Revenue and
Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-406: CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS:
Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 5, commencing with section
5096, part 9, division 1, of the state Revenue and Taxation Code. (1962 Code § 8-5)
3-1-407: NOTIFYING CITY OF REAL ESTATE SALES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, as an owner in whole or in part of any real property used in the city for residential habitation, or as a real estate agent or
broker or other representative or agent of such owner, to sell, exchange, or otherwise convey the beneficial interest in and to such real property or to
participate in such a sale, exchange, or conveyance unless and until there has been filed with the director of building and safety a notice thereof setting
forth the following information:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the seller;
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the buyer;
C. The address and legal description of the real property to be sold, exchanged, or conveyed; and
D. The scheduled date the sale, exchange, or conveyance is to be accomplished. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
Article 5. Dwelling Unit Construction Tax
3-1-501: TITLE:
This tax shall be known as the DWELLING UNIT CONSTRUCTION TAX OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS. (1962 Code § 8-6)
3-1-502: IMPOSITION OF TAX ON DWELLING UNITS:
A tax is hereby imposed for revenue purposes upon the construction of each dwelling unit in the city as follows: Each person who constructs or causes a
dwelling unit to be constructed in the city shall pay to the city, in addition to any other fees or taxes required to be paid, the sum of five hundred ninety six
dollars eighty five cents ($596.85) for each such dwelling unit, together with the additional sum of one hundred nineteen dollars thirty eight cents ($119.38)
for each bedroom contained in eachsuch dwelling unit. (1962 Code § 8-6)
3-1-503: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
BEDROOM: Any room designed and normally used for sleeping purposes in a dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT: Means and includes each single-family dwelling and each unit of an apartment, duplex, multiple-family dwelling, hotel or motel unit,
condominium, or other structure designed as a separate habitation for one or more persons. (1962 Code § 8-6)
3-1-504: EXCLUSIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 72/797
This article shall not apply to construction of the following development:
A. Any dwelling unit intended and used exclusively to house the elderly or handicapped, which unit is constructed for and operated by a foundation,
agency, or entity which, pursuant to the provisions of section 1(c) of article XIII of the constitution of the state, has been granted a property tax
exemption by the state legislature shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
B. Any new dwelling unit intended and used exclusively to house very low, low or moderate income households provided that all of the following criteria are
satisfied:
1. The dwelling unit is used exclusively to house very low, low or moderate income persons as defined by section 50093 of the California Health and
Safety Code or any successor statute. The occupant(s) of the dwelling unit shall annually submit an affidavit and documentation satisfactory to the
director of planning and community development that their household income meets the applicable income limits established by the state of
California.
2. The maximum rent charged for the dwelling unit does not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the area median income adjusted for household size, as
determined by the United States department of housing and urban development pursuant to section 8 of the United States housing act of 1937.
3. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling unit, the owner of the property executes and files a covenant running with the land
with the city building official for recording with the county recorder. Said covenant shall be approved by the city attorney and shall state that the
dwelling unit shall be used only as a residence for very low, low ormoderate income persons as defined by state law for a period of not less than
fifteen (15) years from the date the final certificate of occupancy is issued. In addition, the covenant shall provide that, subject to any limitations
imposed by paramount federal or state law, during said fifteen (15) year term very low, low and moderate income Beverly Hills residents shall be
given priority on occupying the building (or portion thereof) reserved for very low, low and moderate income households. The covenant shall further
state that if such dwelling unit is used for any other purpose or if the dwelling unit is occupied by a household which does not qualify under the
applicable definitions of very low, low and/or moderate income households prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) year term, the exemption provided
by this section shall not apply and all taxes imposed by this article for the exempted unit shall be due and payable immediately upon such change of
use or occupancy. (1962 Code § 8-6; amd. Ord. 02-O-2419, eff. 1-17-2003)
3-1-505: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall be due and payable to the city upon the issuance by the city of a building permit for the construction
of any dwelling unit. Payment of the tax shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit authorizing the construction of a dwelling unit.
(1962 Code § 8-6)
3-1-506: REFUNDS:
Any tax paid to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for any dwelling unit which is not constructed and for which the building permit issued for
such a dwelling unit has been canceled or surrendered shall be refunded upon an application of the payor. Applications for such refunds shall be made
within one year after the cancellation or expiration of the building permit for entitlement to a refund. (1962 Code § 8-6)
Article 6. Condominium Conversion Tax
3-1-601: TITLE:
This tax shall be known as the CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION TAX OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS. (1988 Code)
3-1-602: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is hereby imposed, for revenue purposes, on the owner of any building with two (2) or more dwelling units, as defined in section 3-1-503 of this
chapter, a condominium conversion tax of three thousand seven hundred fifty dollars ($3,750.00) for each dwelling unit of such building converted to
condominiums. (1962Code § 6-1.215)
3-1-603: DEFINITION:
"Condominium conversion" shall mean the conversion of any existing building into units for sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, as a
condominium project as defined in section 1350 of the Civil Code of the state, or as a stock cooperative as defined in sections 11003.2 and 11004.5(d) of
the Business and Professions Code of the state, or as a community apartment project as defined in sections 11004 and 11004(b) of the Business and
Professions Code of the state. (1962 Code § 6-1.215)
3-1-604: PAYMENT OF TAX:
The tax imposed by this article shall be due and payable to the city upon issuance by the city of any building permit relative to the conversion, or upon
filing of any map relative to conversion, whichever event occurs first in time. (1988 Code)
3-1-605: REFUNDS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 73/797
Any tax paid to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for any units which are not converted to condominiums shall be refunded upon application
of the payor. Applications for refunds shall be made within one year of cancellation of expiration of the building permit, or within one year of withdrawal or
cancellation of the map, for entitlement to a refund. (1988 Code)
Article 7. Parks And Recreation Facilities Tax
3-1-701: TITLE:
This tax shall be known as the PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION TAX OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS. (1962 Code § 8-9.02)
3-1-702: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
There is hereby imposed for revenue purposes on the owner and any person constructing any new building, or rebuilding, remodeling, or renovating any
existing building as provided in section 3-1-703 of this article, a tax in the amount of three dollars seventy five cents ($3.75) for each square foot of floor
area. (1962 Code § 8-9.04)
3-1-703: REBUILDING, REMODELING, OR RENOVATION OF EXISTINGBUILDINGS:
Where a building is partially or completely demolished or removed, all floor area which is constructed to replace that which is demolished or removed from
the building or structure shall be subject to the taxes imposed by this article. For the purposes of this article, floor area shall be considered as being
demolished or removed when the structural floor materials are removed or when fifty percent (50%) or more of the exterior walls surrounding a floor in any
story is demolished or removed. (1962 Code § 8-9.06)
3-1-704: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the construction of the following:
A. Accessory buildings permitted in residential zones;
B. Houses of worship;
C. Any building or structure, or any portion thereof, used for parking;
D. Governmental buildings and structures;
E. The portion of a building developed in accordance with the provisions of title 10, chapter 3 of this code for the housing of the elderly and/or the
handicapped designated and reserved for very low, low or moderate income households as defined under state law; provided, however, if such
designated and reserved portion should be used for any other purpose or if any designated and reserved units are occupied by households which do
not qualify under the definitions of very low, low or moderate income households, this exemption shall not apply and taxes for the exempted portion
shall be payable immediately upon such change of use.
F. Private schools which comply with the requirements contained in California Education Code section 48222, or its successor.
G. The portion of a building developed and reserved exclusively to provide housing for very low, low or moderate income households provided all of the
following criteria are satisfied:
1. The building or a portion thereof is used exclusively to house very low, low or moderate income persons as defined by section 50093 of the
California Health And Safety Code or any successor statute. The occupant(s) of the dwelling unit shall annually submit an affidavit and
documentation satisfactory to the director of planning and community development that their household income meets the applicable income limits
established by the state of California.
2. The maximum rent charged for any dwelling unit designated and reserved for very low, low or moderate income households does not exceed thirty
percent (30%) of the area median income adjusted for household size.
3. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the building, the owner of the property executes and files a covenant running with the land
with the city building official for recording with the county recorder. Said covenant shall be approved by the city attorney and shall state that the
building or a portion thereof shall be used only for residences for very low, low or moderate income persons as defined by state law for a period of
not less than fifteen (15) years from the date the final certificate of occupancy is issued. In addition, the covenant shall provide that, subject to any
limitations imposed by paramount federal or state law, during said fifteen (15) year term very low, low or moderate income Beverly Hills residents
shall be given priority on occupying the building (or a portion thereof) reserved for very low, low or moderate income households. The covenant shall
further state that if the building or any portion thereof is used for any other purpose or is occupied by households which do not qualify under the
applicable definitions of very low, low or moderate income households prior to the expiration of the fifteen (15) year term, the exemption provided by
this section shall not apply and all taxes imposed by this article for the exempted unit shall be due and payable immediately upon such change of use
or occupancy.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 74/797
For the purposes of this section, in any building where only a portion of the dwelling units are designated and reserved for residences for very low, low or
moderate income households, the exemption provided by this section will include the floor area for the exempted dwelling units as well as a pro rata share
(based on the percentage of exempt units to total units) of the floor area for any and all common areas in the building to which the tax imposed by this
article applies. (1962 Code § 8-9.08; amd. Ord. 89-O-2065, eff. 7-6-1989; Ord. 89-O-2077, eff. 11-16-1989; Ord. 02-O-2419, eff. 1-17-2003)
3-1-705: PAYMENT:
The tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall be due and payable upon issuance of any building permit. (1962 Code § 8-9.07)
3-1-706: CALCULATION OF TAX:
The tax shall be calculated based on the floor area of plans submitted for a building permit. "Floor area" for purposes of this section shall be as defined in
section 10-3-100 of this code. Where a field survey indicates that the floor area subject to the tax exceeds the floor area upon which the tax was calculated
and paid, any additional taxes shall be due and payable prior to final city approval, or occupancy, whichever occurs first. (1962 Code § 8-9.05)
3-1-707: REFUNDS:
Any tax paid to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for any building which is not constructed shall be refunded upon application of the payor.
Application for such refunds shall be made within one year of expiration or cancellation of the building permit for entitlement to a refund. (1988 Code)
3-1-708: RESTRICTION ON USE OF FUNDS:
All taxes collected under the provisions of this article shall be held in a separate fund of the city and shall be used solely for the acquisition, improvement
or expansion of public parks or recreational facilities. (1962 Code § 8-9.03)
Article 8. Beverly Hills Fine Art Ordinance
3-1-801: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are applicable to the provisions of this article:
ACT OF GOD: A direct, sudden, and irresistible action of natural forces such as could not reasonably have been foreseen or prevented, as a flood,
hurricane, earthquake, or other natural catastrophe.
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL BUILDING: Any building or structure, all or part of which contains a commercial or industrial use permitted by this code.
"Commercial structure" shall not include any building or structure constructed or reconstructed for the elderly or disabled pursuant to title 10, chapter 3,
article 12.5 of this code.
COMMISSION: The fine art commission.
CONSTRUCTION COST: The total value of all building permits issued by the city as they relate to the construction, reconstruction or addition work on a
commercial/industrial building, or the office or retail portion of a mixed use building in the city.
DECORATIVE ART: Arts and crafts that are employed in the making of ornamental and functional works in a wide range of materials. Decorative arts are
concerned with design, decoration, ornamentation and/or functionality of the object rather than the purely aesthetic.
FINE ART: Art produced or intended primarily for beauty rather than utility. Fine art includes, but is not limited to: sculpture, photography, drawing,
multimedia art and painting. Fine art shall not include the following: a) decorative, ornamental or functional elements designed by the architect or other
design consultant retained for the design and construction of the subject building; b) art objects that are mass produced with a standard design such as
fountains and statuary objects; c) an artistic or architectural element that is a structural part of a building; or d) decorative art.
FINE ART OBLIGATION: The obligation to provide art or make an in lieu payment as specified in section 3-1-802 of this chapter.
MIXED USE BUILDING: A site with two (2) or more different land uses, such as, but not limited to, a combination of residential, office or retail uses in a
single or physically integrated group of structures or the development of a combination of different land uses in a single zone.
PROPERTY OWNER: The titleholder of the subject property.
RECONSTRUCTION: All alterations or repairs made to a commercial/industrial building or the office and/or retail portion of a mixed use building where:
A. Any such alterations or repairs result in changes to the exterior of the building, with the exception of signs and/or awnings;
B. The changes to the exterior of the building are not limited to repair and/or ordinary maintenance; and
C. The building permit valuation of all alterations or repairs to the building equals or exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, reconstruction necessitated by damage due to fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other disaster shall be exempt from this
article. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 75/797
3-1-802: FINE ART OBLIGATION:
A. Any construction, reconstruction or additions, to a commercial/industrial building or mixed use building in the city of Beverly Hills shall be assessed with
the obligation to provide fine art as follows:
1. For projects with total construction costs between five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), the fine art
obligation shall be satisfied by either of the following: a) installation of fine art that has a value equal to, or exceeding, one percent (1%) of the total
construction costs; or b) payment of an in lieu fee to the fine art fund equal to ninety percent (90%) of the value required by the immediately
preceding item a of this subsection.
2. For projects with total construction costs equal to or greater than one million dollars one cent ($1,000,000.01), the fine art obligation shall be satisfied
by either of the following: a) installation of fine art that has a value equal to, or exceeding, one percent (1%) of the first one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) plus one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the amount in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); or b) payment of an in lieu fee
to the fine art fund equal to ninety percent (90%) of the value required by the immediately preceding item a of this subsection.
B. If the in lieu payment option has been chosen pursuant to subsection A of this section, then such in lieu payment shall be made prior to the issuance of
the related building permit. Once the funds for the in lieu payment have been made available to the fine art fund, then the property owner's obligations
under this article shall have been fulfilled. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-803: SEPARATE FUND FOR PURCHASE OF CITY OWNED ART:
All payments made to the fine art fund of the city shall be used solely for the following in connection with fine art: a) planning, b) acquisition (including
appraisal fees), c) installation, d) improvement, e) maintenance (including professional services required to maintain the integrity of the public art
collection), and f) promotional activities associated with city owned fine art for display in the city. Any fine art purchased with such funds shall be the
property of the city, and shall meet the requirements set forth in subsections 3-1-805B through D of this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-804: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPOSED FINE ART:
After final approval by the architectural commission, if required, an application shall be filed with the city for approval of the proposed fine art by the fine art
commission. The application shall be on the form designated by the city, containing the following information:
A. Preliminary sketches, photographs, models, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed fine art;
B. Curriculum vitae of the artist;
C. An appraisal by an independent, qualified fine art appraiser or other evidence satisfactory to the commission of the value of the proposed fine art,
including, but not limited to, bona fide invoices, auction records, and fine art gallery records;
D. Documentation showing at least one piece of the same or comparable medium, size, and condition that has sold in the last five (5) years, at or
above the required fine art obligation value shall be included;
E. Sketches, photographs, or other documentation representing to scale the relationship of the proposed fine art as installed to the proposed
commercial or mixed use structure. Final approval will be contingent upon accurate depiction of proposed artwork and accurate depiction of
installation of artwork; and
F. Such other information as may be requested by the director of community development.
Upon receiving a complete application, the fine art commission shall consider the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting; provided however,
that the complete application must be received at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting at which it will be considered. Ten (10) days' prior written notice
shall be provided to the applicant of the time and place of the meeting at which the application will be considered. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-805: FINE ART CRITERIA:
The fine art commission shall approve the application if the proposed fine art satisfies all of the following criteria:
A. The fine art has the minimum value required by section 3-1-802 of this chapter as determined by the appraisal submitted along with the application
pursuant to section 3-1-804 of this chapter. Such appraisal shall not use the current market value of materials used to produce a comparable art piece
as a basis for determining the value of the proposed fine art. The value of the fine art shall not include the items listed in section 3-1-806 of this chapter.
B. The fine art has been, or will be, created by an established artist. "Established artist" shall mean a professional artist who derives his or her income
primarily from his or her work as an artist and is accepted and recognized in the field of fine art, internationally or nationally. Documentation to support
the artist's stature should include, but is not limited to: 1) inclusion in art journals and art books; 2) fine art gallery representation; 3) museum exhibition
or collection; 4) auction house records; and, 5) letters of support from fine art curators. The members of the architectural, engineering, design or
landscaping firms retained for the design and construction of the commercial or mixed use building under review shall not be considered qualified
established artists for the purposes of this article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 76/797
C. The fine art has intrinsic quality and enduring value.
D. The fine art is compatible with and enhances the aesthetic quality of the proposed installation site. The relationship of the fine art to the site in terms of
physical size, shape and color shall be considered, as well as the social and cultural interaction of the fine art with the space it occupies and the
surrounding area. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-806: INELIGIBLE COSTS:
Expenses for the following do not qualify as fulfilling the fine art obligation:
A. Art consultants;
B. Appraisers;
C. Insurance;
D. Maintenance costs;
E. Shipping;
F. A structure, upon which artwork is displayed (e.g., a pedestal);
G. Professional fees for the artist(s);
H. Labor of assistants, materials, and contracted services required for the installation of the work of art;
I. Any required permit or certificate fees;
J. Business and legal costs directly related to the project;
K. Studio and operating costs;
L. Communication and other indirect costs (insurance, utilities);
M. Travel expenses of the artist for site visitation and research;
N. Transportation of the work of art to the site;
O. Preparation of the site to receive the artwork;
P. Installation of the completed work of art;
Q. Documentation (e.g., color slides and black and white photographs of the artwork); and
R. Directional elements such as super graphics, plaques, or color coding except where these elements are integral parts of the original work of art. (Ord.
15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-807: PLACEMENT AND SIGNAGE OF FINE ART:
A. The fine art required by this article shall be located in a public place. A "public place" means any area on public or private property that is easily
accessible and clearly visible to the general public. If located on private property, the area must be open to the general public during normal business
hours and clearly visible from adjacent public property such as a street or other public thoroughfare or sidewalk.
B. The applicant may request to have the work of fine art placed on city owned property. Upon such request, the fine art commission may recommend a
site on city owned property for approval by the city council. Any work of art installed on city owned property pursuant to this section, would be gifted to
the city with an endowment provided by the current property owner for transport, installation, insurance, and maintenance, in an amount acceptable to
the city council.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 77/797
C. Each work of art shall be identified by a plaque stating the artist's name, title, date the artwork was created, and the year of installation. The plaque will
be placed and maintained in a location near the artwork and easily viewable by the public. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-808: SCHEDULE OF INSTALLATION OF FINE ART:
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit that triggers a fine art obligation, the applicant shall deposit with the city cash, a letter of credit, or other
security satisfactory to the director of community development in an amount equal to the value of the fine art as required by section 3-1-802 of this
chapter. The security shall guarantee installation of fine art, or an in lieu fee, as required by this article.
B. All fine art required by this article shall be installed, as approved by the fine art commission, prior to the final inspection of the construction or
reconstruction that has triggered the requirements of this article. Within seven (7) days of installation of the approved fine art, the applicant shall notify
the fine art commission and city staff to verify compliance.
C. If the fine art required by this article is not installed by the final inspection of the construction or reconstruction that has triggered the requirements of this
article, then the applicant shall forfeit the security posted with the city, and such monies shall be deposited into the fine art fund. In the case of
unforeseeable, and verifiably documented, extenuating circumstances, the deadline to install the fine art may be extended up to a maximum of twelve
(12) months, with the written approval of the fine art commission. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-809: OWNERSHIP, MAINTENANCE, AND INSURANCE BY THE PROPERTY OWNER:
The property owner:
A. Shall, except if the fine art is placed on city owned property, own such fine art, and if the building is sold, shall transfer ownership of the fine art as an
integral part of the sale of the building.
B. Shall execute a recordable covenant running with the land, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, regarding the fine art.
C. Shall maintain such fine art at the on site location as approved by the fine art commission, unless a different on site location is approved by the fine art
commission at the request of the property owner.
D. Shall maintain artwork per the guidelines set forth by the artist who created it, or the artist's representative, if applicable.
E. May request the ability to remove the fine art at a later date by offering to donate the piece to the city or by paying the original or present day value of
the art, whichever is higher. Such request must be reviewed by the fine art commission and approved by the city council. If the piece will be gifted to
the city, the owner must provide the city with an endowment for the piece to pay for transport, storage, reinstallation, insurance and maintenance in an
amount acceptable to the city council. If there is construction, reconstruction or an addition to the property in conjunction with the request to remove the
original fine art, then there will be a new fine art obligation assessed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
F. For all fine art installed after January 1, 2015, shall provide an appraised valuation or other evidence of value satisfactory to the fine art commission, of
the artwork every five (5) years, to guarantee the work is insured to its proper market value. Any appraisal shall be made by an independent, qualified
fine art appraiser and shall be paid for by the property owner. Other evidence of value may include bona fide invoices, auction records, and fine art
gallery records.
G. Shall maintain in full force and effect at all times, insurance coverage in the amount of the most recent appraised value, insuring such fine art against
any loss or damage, including vandalism, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 4 of this title. Annual proof of insurance coverage must be
provided to the city.
H. Shall, in the event that the artwork is destroyed, stolen, damaged, or lost, resulting in an insurance claim against such loss, use any funds that are paid
out to the owner by the insurance company toward the purchase of a replacement work of art, subject to the most current criteria of the fine art
ordinance and equal to the insured valuation of the lost work. Alternatively, the property owner has the option to deposit into the fine art fund an amount
equal to the insured valuation of the lost work. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-810: RECONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS THAT PREVIOUSLY MET THE FINE ART OBLIGATION:
Each reconstruction with a total construction cost of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) shall trigger the fine art obligation.
A. If a building that had previously satisfied the fine art obligation is damaged by an act of God resulting in a reconstruction and the original fine art is intact
or an in lieu fee was previously paid, there will be no additional fine art obligation required. However, if the original fine art is destroyed, a replacement
work of art that meets the requirements of the fine art ordinance currently in effect will be required in an amount equal to the insured value of the lost or
destroyed art piece. Alternatively, the property owner has the option to deposit into the fine art fund an amount equal to the insured valuation.
B. If a building that had previously satisfied the fine art obligation is voluntarily reconstructed and the original fine art is intact or an in lieu fee was
previously paid, a new fine art obligation will be required based on the difference between the construction cost of the new project less the construction
cost of the project that triggered the original fine art obligation. However, if the original fine art is missing or destroyed, a new fine art obligation that
meets the requirements of the fine art ordinance currently in effect will be required in an amount: 1) based upon the construction costs of the new
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 78/797
project as specified in section 3-1-802 of this chapter; or 2) equal to the most recent appraised value of the missing or destroyed original fine art,
whichever is higher. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-811: DENIAL BY THE FINE ART COMMISSION:
A. In the event a work of art proposed by the property owner is denied by the fine art commission, the property owner must present other works of fine art
to the commission. The full application process must be followed for each work of fine art presented to the commission, as set forth in 3-1-804 of this
chapter.
B. The applicant may request that the fine art commission reconsider its decision if changes are made either to the proposed fine art or the subject building
such that there are new facts upon which the commission may reconsider its earlier decision. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-812: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL FOLLOWING DENIAL BY THE FINE ART COMMISSION:
Any final decision of the fine art commission may be appealed to city council under title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-813: GIFTS OF FINE ART:
A. All proposed gifts to the city of fine art with a value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) that are proposed to be installed in a "public place"
(as such term is defined in subsection 3-1-807A of this chapter) shall be reviewed by the fine art commission in accordance with the terms of this
article, prior to being presented to city council for consideration of acceptance. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from accepting gifts of fine
art with a value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) that will not be displayed in a public place, without review by the fine art commission.
B. If the donor requests a receipt from the city containing a specified value of the donated art, such donor will need to provide an appraisal to the city which
supports the stated value. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-6-2015)
3-1-814: DEACCESSIONING OF CITY OWNED FINE ART:
A. Introduction: Deaccessioning is a legitimate part of the formation and care of a collection. However, deaccessioning should be a deliberate and seldom
used procedure. It is the policy of the city not to dispose of artwork simply because it is not currently in fashion, and not to dispose of work whose worth
might not yet be recognized.
B. Definition: "Deaccessioning" shall mean any actions or set of procedures that result in the cessation by the city of its ownership and possession of
works of art, through sale, exchange, gift or any other means not in conflict with state or federal law.
C. Conditions:
1. No artwork shall be deaccessioned within five (5) years of acquisition by the city or installation unless:
a. The piece poses a threat to public health or safety;
b. Authenticity was misrepresented at the time of acquisition or installation;
c. There is a valid challenge to title; or
d. It possesses faults of design or workmanship that result in excessive or unreasonable maintenance, and/or damage to an extent where repair is
unreasonable or impractical.
2. Once the five (5) year period has lapsed, the fine art commission may recommend to the city council the deaccessioning of any work of art if any of
the following conditions apply:
a. The cost to repair the work is more than fifty percent (50%) of current appraised value, or the work is so deteriorated that restoration would prove
unfeasible or misleading;
b. Destruction of, or changes to, the site where the art is located threaten the artwork's survival or result in a significant diminishing of its artistic
integrity or accessibility; or
c. The fine art commission determines that there is an exceptional and unforeseen reason for removing the artwork from its current site, and no other
suitable site in the city can be found.
D. Procedures: If the conditions for deaccessioning are met, the following information, as appropriate, shall be considered by the fine art commission at a
formal meeting:
1. Reasons for the proposed deaccessioning;
2. Opinion of the city attorney's office, if necessary;
3. Process of acquisition method and cost and/or value at the time of acquisition;
4. Expert appraisal of the current market value of the work;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 79/797
5. Costs associated with deaccessioning or removal;
6. A condition report from a professional conservator; and
7. Professional fees associated with the subsequent sale, auction, donation or trade of the artwork.
At the discretion of the fine art commission, where applicable and achievable, the original donor of the work may be given right of first refusal to
purchase the work within sixty (60) days of notification. No works may be sold, traded or transferred to a member of the fine art commission, city of
Beverly Hills officials or staff or their agents.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city council from deaccessioning any piece of city owned art, at any time, if the city council determines that
deaccessioning is in the public interest and that following the procedures set forth in this section is not in the public interest. (Ord. 15-O-2672, eff. 2-
6-2015)
Article 9. Development Fees
3-1-901: SHORT TITLE:
This article may be referred to as the TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES AND PROGRAMS DEVELOPMENT FEE ORDINANCE of the city of Beverly Hills.
(Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-902: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a transportation facilities and program development fee (hereinafter the "development fee") that imposes upon
future commercial, industrial and multiple-family residential development projects an equitable share of the cost of mitigating future transportation facilities
and programs needs created by such project. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-903: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
BUILDING PERMIT: A "building permit" as defined in the uniform building code.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY: An entitlement to occupy and use a building granted pursuant to section 10-3-2724 of this code.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: The construction or addition of commercial or industrial "floor area", as defined in section
10-3-100 of this code, which requires a building permit. "Commercial or industrial development project" also shall mean any change of use of property
which requires a building permit and which will generate additional peak time trips above which can be reasonably associated with the most recent use of
the property.
DEVELOPER: The applicant of a building permit for either acommercial or industrial development project or a multiple-family development project.
GOVERNMENTAL OR PUBLIC FACILITIES: Publicly owned or operated buildings and structures used for the purposes of conducting city, county, state or
federal government business. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, city halls, police and fire stations, offices, equipment yards, sanitation
facilities, schools, recreation centers, and similar facilities. Private commercial development projects leasing publicly owned land shall not be considered
governmental or public facilities.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: The construction of a building used for multiple-family occupancy and the addition of
dwelling units to a building used for multiple-family occupancy.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES: Transportation system improvement projects that require physical alteration of the transportation system, including
ancillary equipment and facilities. Examples of transportation facilities include, but are not limited to, roadway improvements, signalization improvements,
and other ancillary public right of way improvements.
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS: Transportation system improvement projects that do not require physical alteration of the transportation system.
Examples of transportation programs include, but are not limited to, ridesharing programs, transit subsidies, alternative work week scheduling,
education/marketing programs designed to reduce automobile trips, and the personnel and administrative costs of such programs.
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM FACILITIES AND PROGRAMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A systematic program for improving the transportation system
specified in the plan in order to mitigate the adverse impacts on such transportation system by new development. The plan shall describe the nature and
extent of these improvements and their associated cost estimates. The plan shall be approved by the city council prior to or currently with the adoption of a
resolution establishing the amount of the development fee. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-904: ESTABLISHMENT OF A TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES AND PROGRAMS DEVELOPMENT FEE:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, developers of commercial, industrial or multiple-family development projects shall pay a development fee in an
amount established by resolution of the city council. The resolution may provide that the fee shall be paid only by those developments located within the
boundaries of the transportation district defined by such resolution. The development fee established by resolution shall be based upon the cost to
construct transportation system facilities and implement transportation programs to mitigate the additional peak time trips generated by new
commercial,industrial and multi-family residential development anticipated to be constructed by January 1, 2000. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-905: ESTABLISHMENT OF APPLICATION FEE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 80/797
Except as otherwise provided in this article, developers of commercial, industrial or multiple-family development projects shall pay a transportation facilities
and programs development application fee (hereinafter the "application fee") in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application fee
shall be based on the estimated administrative and personnel costs of determining the amount of development fees to be paid by the developer. (Ord. 89-
O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-906: EXEMPTIONS:
The following developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this article:
A. Governmental or public facilities.
B. Single-family residential development.
C. Churches, temples, synagogues, and other buildings or structures used for religious worship.
D. Public elementary schools and secondary schools.
E. Private schools which meet the requirements contained in California Education Code section 48222, or its successor, so that attendance at such
schools complies with California compulsory education requirements.
F. Dwelling units in a multiple-family residential development which are reserved and restricted for occupancy by very low, low or moderate income
households as defined under state law. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-907: CALCULATION OF REQUIRED FEES:
The director of transportation and engineering, or the director's designee, shall be responsible for calculating the transportation facilities and programs
development fees required by this article. This calculation shall be made at the time of application for the building permit for the commercial, industrial or
multiple-family residential development project. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 1-16-1989)
3-1-908: PAYMENT OF FEES:
A. The application fee shall be paid at the time an applicationfor a building permit is submitted for any commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential
development project subject to the transportation facilities and programs development fee.
B. The payment of development fees required by this article shall be made in the following manner:
1. Payment Procedure For Commercial Or Industrial Development Projects: Development fees required by this article from developers of commercial
or industrial projects shall be paid at the time that the city issues a building permit for the commercial or industrial development project.
2. Payment Procedure For Phased Commercial Or Industrial Development Projects: If a commercial or industrial development project will be
constructed in phases, and separate building permits will be issued for each phase, development fees imposed pursuant to this article shall be
calculated on the basis of the floor area of the entire project. However, payment of the fees may be made separately for each phase of the project so
that the amount paid upon issuance of a building permit shall be the percentage of the total fee equal to the percentage of the project's floor area
permitted to be constructed by the building permit.
3. Payment Procedure For Multiple-Family Residential Development Projects: Development fees required by this article from a developer of multiplefamily
residential dwelling units shall be calculated prior to issuance of a building permit and paid for the entire development before final inspection of
the first dwelling unit in that development on which fees are imposed. For the purpose of this section, "final inspection" is defined as that term is
defined in Government Code section 66007, as amended. If a developer of a multiple-family development project does not pay the development fee
before a building permit is issued for that multiple-family residential dwelling unit, the developer shall enter into a contract with the city to pay those
fees prior to final inspection of the dwelling unit. The contract shall be recorded in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder and shall constitute a
lien for the payment of fees required by this article. The lien shall be enforceable against successors in interest to the initial holder of the building
permit. The contract also shall require the building permit holder to provide appropriate notification of the opening of any escrow for the sale of the
property for which the building permit is issued and to provide in the escrow instructions that the fees required by this article be paid from the sale
proceeds in escrow prior to disbursing proceeds to the seller. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-909: FEE ADJUSTMENTS:
A developer subject to a fee required by this article may apply to the city council for a different time or schedule for payment based upon special
circumstances of the developer or developmentproject which justify such different time or schedule for payment, or for reduction, adjustment or waiver of
that fee based upon the absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that person's commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential
development project on the demand for transportation facilities and programs in the city and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to
be provided.
A. Application: Requests for a fee adjustment shall be made on an application form provided by the building official and shall be filed with the city clerk not
later than the time an application is filed for a building permit for the commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential development project. The
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 81/797
application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction, adjustment or waiver.
B. Hearing: The city council shall consider the fee adjustment application at a public hearing within sixty (60) days after the fee adjustment application is
deemed complete by the city clerk. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-910: FEE REFUNDS:
Upon application, fees collected by the city pursuant to this article, except application fees, shall be refunded by the director of finance administration if the
following circumstances have been shown to have occurred:
A. The fees collected pursuant to this article were erroneously collected. An application for refund pursuant to this subsection shall be filed with the director
of finance administration no later than ninety (90) days after the initial payment of the fee pursuant to section 3-1-908 of this article.
B. The building permit has expired, and no extension has been granted, for the commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential development project
upon which fees were imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be filed with the director of finance administration no later than ninety (90) days after
expiration of the building permit. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-911: FEE CREDITS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF OFF SITE TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES:
A person shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the development fees required by this article in an amount to be determined by the director of
transportation and engineering if that person constructs transportation facilities that are included in the transportation system facilities and programs
improvement plan applicable to the development constructed by such person. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-912: ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUND FOR FEES:
Pursuant to Government Code section 66006, there is hereby established a special fund entitled "the transportation facilities and programs improvement
fund" for each transportation district established by resolution. The fees paid pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be placed into the special fund
established for that transportation district and used solely for the purpose of providing transportation facilities and programs within that district. All monies
in the special fund established by this article shall be held separate and apart from other city funds. All interest or other earnings of such special fund shall
be credited to that fund. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-913: EXPENDITURES FROM SPECIAL FUND:
All monies and interest in the special fund established pursuant to city council resolution shall be expended on transportation facilities and programs as
approved by the city council. Such expenditures may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
A. The reimbursement for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the city for the development of transportation facilities and programs pursuant to this
article, including, but not limited to, the costs of land acquisition, planning, legal advice, engineering, design, construction and equipment.
B. The reimbursement for all costs incurred by the city and associated with the administration of each account.
C. The issuance of bonds or notes, secured by the reserve account, for the provision of transportation facilities and programs.
D. Land acquisition, planning, design, and construction (including rehabilitation) which result in the provision of transportation facilities and programs. (Ord.
89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-914: EXEMPTIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT PRIOR TO ORDINANCE:
Development projects for which all discretionary permits have been granted prior to September 19, 1989, shall be exempt from the requirements of this
article. Such exemption shall continue to apply to an exempted development project which is subsequently modified provided that such modification does
not increase the number of dwelling units in a multiple-family residential development project or increase the square footage of a commercial or industrial
development project. This exemption, however, shall not override any condition of approval for a project which specifically requires payment of fees for the
purposes of mitigating impacts on transportation facilities and programs. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-915: REVIEW OF FEE FORMULA:
Prior to July 1 of each year, during the budget review process, the city council shall review the degree to which fees collected pursuant to this article are
mitigating the impacts on transportation facilities and programs caused by new commercial, industrial and multiple-family residential development projects.
Five (5) years after the effective date of this article, the city council shall consider a report by the director of transportation and engineering reviewing the
fee formulae established to implement the provisions of this article, and their bases to determine whether any adjustments in the fee formulae are
warranted. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-916: TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 82/797
This article shall not limit or restrict the city's police power to require the adoption and implementation of transportation programs by developers and other
persons using real property within the city. (Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
Article 10. General Taxation And Fee Provisions
3-1-1001: ANNUAL ADJUSTMENT OF TAXES AND FEES:
Each tax or fee imposed under the provisions of this chapter which is a fixed amount, excluding those taxes or fees which are calculated on gross receipts,
gross revenues, on a percentage basis, the tax imposed by article 4 of this chapter, and the fees imposed by article 9 of this chapter, shall be adjusted by
the director of finance administration annually on July 1 of each year, with the adjustment for each year based upon the "Consumer Price Index, All Urban
Consumers, Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Area", as determined by the United States department of labor, bureau of labor statistics or its successor.
The difference in the cost of living during the preceding year, commencing July 1, shall be computed based on such percentage, and the tax adjusted
accordingly and rounded to the nearest one dollar ($1.00). Should the bureau of labor statistics revise such index or discontinue the preparation of such
indexes, the director of finance administration shall use the revised index of a comparable system as approved by the council for determining the
difference in the cost of living adjustment. (1962 Code § 8-10.01; amd. Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-1002: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director of finance administration, subject to approval of the city manager, may make such rules and regulations as may be necessary or desirable to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 8-10.01; amd. Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-1003: MISREPRESENTATION TO CITY OFFICIALS:
No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact, relative to any tax imposed under the
provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 8-10.01; amd. Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-1004: DELINQUENCIES A DEBT TO CITY:
The amount of tax, fee, penalty, or interest imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in
the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount thereof. (1962 Code § 8-10.01; amd. Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989)
3-1-1005: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any tax,
fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment prevent a criminal prosecution or a civil or administrative penalty
for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar
the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 8-10.01; amd. Ord. 89-O-2076, eff. 11-16-1989; Ord.
00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
Article 11. Environmental Liability Fund
3-1-1101: TITLE:
This article may be referred to as the ENVIRONMENTAL LIABILITY FUND ORDINANCE of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 95-O-2231, eff. 3-10-1995)
3-1-1102: ESTABLISHMENT; ADMINISTRATION; DEPOSITS:
There is hereby established a fund, to be known as the "environmental liability fund", which fund will be administered by the director of finance. In addition
to any other monies appropriated by the city council to the fund, the following amounts will be deposited in the fund:
A. Monies received from commercial solid waste collection enterprises pursuant to the terms of any exclusive or nonexclusive franchise agreement
between the city and such enterprise, which monies are specifically designated for payment into the fund.
B. Monies received from persons in the city conducting business of a nature which creates an actual or potential environmental threat, and where
payments to the fund by proprietors of such businesses are required by the terms of an agreement, or by ordinance or resolution of the city council.
C. All interest earned upon money deposited in the fund. (Ord. 95-O-2231, eff. 3-10-1995)
3-1-1103: EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND:
Upon authorization by the city council, money in the fund may be expended for the following purposes:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 83/797
A. The purchase of one or more environmental impairment liability insurance policies for the purpose of protecting the city, or its franchised commercial
solid waste collection enterprises, or both, against liability attributable to or arising out of the use of landfills or solid waste disposal facilities, or any
other activities involving the collection, transporting, processing or disposal of solid waste.
B. The defense of the city, its elected officials, officers, agents and employees, against claims, suits, fines, penalties, cleanup costs, liabilities, judgments,
losses, damages, attorney fees, costs and expenses of whatever kind or type, including, but not limited to, those filed or asserted by governmental
entities, arising out of, resulting from, or in any manner connected with any of the following:
1. The activities at a landfill or other solid waste disposal facility by any commercial solid waste collection enterprise operating under a franchise
agreement with the city, whether exclusive or nonexclusive.
2. The collection, transporting, processing or disposal by any commercial solid waste collection enterprise operating under a franchise agreement with
the city, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, of any solid waste, residential solid waste, recyclable materials, or any products connected with
recyclable materials.
3. Acts or omissions of any person, including any commercial solid waste collection enterprise operating under a franchise agreement with the city,
whether exclusive or nonexclusive, or the acts or omissions of such person's agents, employees or subcontractors, resulting in claims made against
the city pursuant to any federal, state, county, district, or city statutes, ordinances or regulations relating to the conservation, protection or
remediation of natural resources. (Ord. 95-O-2231, eff. 3-10-1995)
3-1-1104: REPORTS:
Following the end of each calendar quarter, the director of finance will prepare and submit to the city council a report setting forth the total amount then on
deposit in the fund, including any interest earned, and all expenditures from the fund for any purpose authorized in section 3-1-1103 of this article. (Ord.
95-O-2231, eff. 3-10-1995)
Chapter 2
WARRANTS, PAYROLL, AND PROCEDURES
Article 1. Checks And Warrants
3-2-101: REQUIRED SIGNATURES:
The signature of the director of finance administration, or such other officers or employees of the city as the council may designate by resolution, shall be
required upon all checks, drafts, and warrants issued for and in behalf of the city. In addition to the signature of the director of finance administration, the
signature of the city treasurer, or a deputy appointed by the city treasurer, shall be required, except that the signature of the city treasurer shall not be
required on any check, draft, or warrant which does not exceed an amount established by resolution of the council. (1962 Code § 2-12.01)
3-2-102: FACSIMILE SIGNATURES:
The director of finance administration, and any other officer and employee of the city designated by resolution of the council, with the exception of the city
treasurer and any deputy appointed by the treasurer, shall be authorized to use a facsimile signature in lieu of a personal signature on those checks,
drafts, and warrants issued for and in behalf of the city; provided, however, such authorization shall be applicable only to those checks, drafts, and
warrants as are specified by resolution of the council and in the amounts set forth in such resolution. (1962 Code § 2-12.02)
Article 2. Employee Payroll
3-2-201: COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES:
Compensation of all employees, including the heads of city departments, shall be fixed by resolution of the council through adopting or amending the
compensation plan and shall be in accordance with the annual budget as adopted or amended by the council. (1962 Code § 2-6.201)
3-2-202: PAYROLL REVOLVING FUND:
There is hereby created by an advance from the appropriate fund a payroll revolving fund for the city, which fund shall be of an amount approximately
equal to the gross payroll for two (2) weeks as from time to time determined, and which shall be deposited in a national bank in the city, and out of which
fund all employees of the city shall be paid every two (2) weeks. All other payroll transactions on behalf of employees shall be paid as required by checks
drawn on such fund by the director of finance administration. (1962 Code § 2-6.202)
3-2-203: TIME OF PAYMENT:
The two (2) week payroll period shall commence at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight on every other Saturday, and end at twelve o'clock
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 84/797
(12:00) midnight each second Friday thereafter, and the payment of employees for each such payroll period shall be made not later than five (5) calendar
days after the close of the payroll period. (1962 Code § 2-6.203)
3-2-204: PAYROLL REGISTER:
A. It shall be the duty of each department to prepare and file with the department of finance administration, in accordance with a schedule promulgated by
said department, a time report on a form supplied by said department. The report shall contain such payroll information as may be called for by
instructions issued from time to time by said department. Such time report shall be signed by the head of the department or, in his absence, by his
authorized representative.
B. Upon receipt of the time reports, it shall be the duty of the director of finance administration to prepare the payroll for each department, including a
payroll register, the employees' earning records, and the employees' checks.
C. The director of human services shall approve all initial assignments and changes of assignment for all classified personnel and, if found to be in
accordance with existing laws and rules, shall certify the assignment for payment. All changes of assignment, including, but not limited to, transfers and
changes of hours, shall be reported for approval by the director of human services. Each subsequent payroll, following the initial assignment and
certification by the director of human services, shall be certified by the department authorized to submit the payroll that all payments thereon are in
accordance with theoriginal certification by the director of human services. (1962 Code § 2-6.204)
3-2-205: PAYMENT PROCEDURE:
When payroll registers for all departments have been determined appropriate for payment, it shall be the duty of the director of finance administration to
prepare a demand warrant upon the city treasurer, drawn upon the appropriate funds of the city, for total amount of money necessary to meet the payroll
for the period represented by such payroll registers. Such warrant, when so prepared, shall be submitted to the city treasurer who shall pay the same to
the director of finance administration for the payroll revolving fund. Such sum shall thereupon be deposited in the payroll account of such national bank in
the city as shall have been designated for that purpose to reimburse that account for the previous payroll. (1962 Code § 2-6.205)
3-2-206: APPROVAL BY COUNCIL:
The payroll registers, together with the demand drawn by the director of finance administration upon the city treasurer for the reimbursement of the payroll
revolving fund, shall be submitted at the next regular meeting of the council, following such payroll periods, for approval by the council. Should the council
fail to ratify or approve any payment therein set forth, such payment shall be disallowed, and if payment has already been made, the person to whom
payment was made shall be liable for the return of the amount thereof to the appropriate funds of the city. (1962 Code § 2-6.206)
Chapter 3
PURCHASING, PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY
Article 1. General Provisions
3-3-101: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to establish purchasing procedures for the purchase of equipment, supplies and services, to conform to the California Uniform
Construction Cost Accounting Act (Public Contract Code section 22000 et seq.) and to establish procedures for the disposition of property. Nothing in this
chapter is intended to require the City to solicit bids for equipment, supplies or services or accept the lowest bid to provide equipment, supplies or services,
except as required by State law. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-102: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:
CHANGE ORDER: A written authorization from the City directing an addition, deletion, or revision to an awarded purchase order or contract.
CONTRACTING OFFICER: The designated City employee authorized by City Council resolution to engage in level 1, level 2 and level 3 purchasing
transactions.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Finance or his/her designee.
PUBLIC PROJECT: Defined as that term is defined in section 22002 of the California Public Contract Code, or the successor statute thereto.
PURCHASING AGENT: The Director of Finance or his/her designee. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006; amd. Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
3-3-103: PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS REQUIRE ISSUANCE OF PURCHASE ORDER:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 85/797
In order to more efficiently manage all purchases and other contracts, the city shall issue a purchase order to each vendor who agrees to provide goods or
supplies to the city and the city shall issue a purchase order to accompany every contract for the performance of services or public projects unless
otherwise authorized by an administrative regulation signed by the city manager or authorized by the rules and regulations adopted by the director
pursuant to this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, no contract shall be deemed to be an authorization to proceed with work unless
accompanied by a properly authorized and executed purchase order nor shall any vendor or contracting party be authorized to perform any service,
perform any public project, or provide any supplies or equipment without first receiving a properly authorized and executed purchase order. (Ord. 06-O-
2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-104: UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or agent of the city to order the purchase of supplies or equipment, or to contract for services or contract for
the performance of public projects, or otherwise make any contract in violation of this chapter. Any order, purchase, or contract made contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall not be binding on the city, and the city shall not be obligated thereunder. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-105: PROHIBITION AGAINST SPLITTING PURCHASES:
Purchases of supplies, equipment, and services, and the performance of public projects shall not be divided or staged for the purpose of circumventing the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-106: SPECIALIZED CONTRACTING PROCEDURES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from using specialized contracting procedures when authorized by state law. If state law authorizes such
procedures, they need not also be specifically authorized by this chapter. Such specialized procedures may include, without limitation, prequalification of
general contractors or subcontractors and design/build contracting procedures. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-107: PURCHASING LEVELS:
Purchasing and contract procedures are categorized into four (4) different levels as set forth in this chapter. Each level shall govern purchase orders and
contracts of different values. Level 1 shall govern the least expensive purchase orders and contracts and level 4 shall govern the most expensive purchase
orders and contracts. Level 1 purchases may be awarded by the head of the city department for which the purchase is made; level 2 purchases may be
awarded by the purchasing agent; level 3 purchases may be awarded by the city manager; and level 4 purchases may be awarded by the city council. The
city council shall from time to time, as it determines appropriate, establish by resolution the maximum dollar amounts of purchases and contracts that are
authorized pursuant to each of the four (4) levels. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-108: SOLE SOURCE:
Upon approval by the city manager, a purchase order or contract may be awarded without competitive bidding when the requesting department determines
in writing, after conducting a good faith review of the available sources, that there is only one source for the required equipment, good or service or that a
sole source procurement is necessary to ensure compatibility with existing city equipment. The department requesting sole source procurementshall
provide written evidence to support a sole source determination. The city manager may require that negotiations be conducted as to price, delivery and
terms. The city manager may also require the submission of cost or pricing data in connection with an award under this section. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-
20-2006)
3-3-109: BID SECURITY:
Bid security shall be required as a condition of submitting a written bid unless deemed unnecessary by the purchasing agent. Bid security shall be in the
form of a cashier's check or surety bond and shall be no less than ten percent (10%) of the bid amount or such other amount as determined by the
purchasing agent.
A successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute a contract or purchase order with the city. On refusal or failure of the
successful bidder to execute the contract or purchase order, the city may award the bid to the next lowest responsible bidder who is willing to execute the
contract or purchase order. In such case, the amount of successful bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the purchase or contract price
differential between the successful bidder and the next lowest responsible bidder. The remaining security, if any, shall be returned. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff.
10-20-2006)
3-3-110: INTERPRETATION OF BID SPECIFICATIONS:
Oral interpretation of written bid specifications shall not be made to prospective bidders. If the prospective bidder discovers discrepancies or omissions in
any specification, or if the bidder is in doubt as to the meaning of any specification, the bidder shall request a written interpretation or modification from the
City. If interpretations or modifications are deemed necessary, the City will then issue a written addendum to all parties known to have received copies of
the specifications. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-111: CHANGE ORDERS:
A. Any alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from an awarded purchase order or contract as to scope, cost, time for completion, material, or equipment
furnished as a part of the purchase order or contract, or any alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from the nature of work to be performed, shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 86/797
require the completion and issuance of a change order or execution of a contract amendment. Additions to work cannot be combined with deletions to
work to avoid the change order requirement.
B. The appropriate Contracting Officer may approve a change order as long as the combined amount of the original purchase order and the change order
does not exceed the Contracting Officer's purchasing authority. If the original purchase order or contract was approved by the City Council, a change
order may be approved in an amount that does not exceed the Contracting Officer's purchasing authority. All other change orders shall be approved by
the City Council or the person, if any, designated in a contract approved by the City Council. No change order shall be binding on the City until
approved as provided herein.
C. Change orders shall not be issued unless:
1. The change order arises in good faith out of an unknown condition or unforeseen circumstance differing materially from the conditions of the
purchase order or contract, or, alternatively, the change order arises due to an error in the City's specifications that accompanied the bid solicitation;
and
2. The change order does not change the purpose of the purchase order or contract; and
3. With regard to a service contract or a contract for public project performance, the change order is reasonably related to the scope of work authorized
under the original contract; and
4. With regard to the purchase of goods or supplies, the change order is required to allow the goods or supplies to fulfill the purpose for which they
were intended, and such change order does not authorize the purchase of additional goods or supplies that could also be purchased from another
source and used compatibly with the goods or supplies purchased.
D. Any change order for a public project shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the "Standard Specifications For Public Works
Construction", adopted by the Joint Cooperative Committee of the Southern California Chapter of the American Public Works Association and the
Southern California districts of the Associated General Contractors of California. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-112: QUARTERLY REPORT:
The Director shall make a quarterly report to the City Council of the level 2 and level 3 awarded purchases and contracts. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-
2006)
3-3-113: EXCEPTIONS TO BIDDING REQUIREMENT:
Except with regard to public projects of more than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), the bidding requirements of this chapter shall not apply in the
following circumstances:
A. Where competition does not exist, such as membership in professional organizations, attendance at meetings or conventions, travel, and when needed
equipment, supplies or services are proprietary items of original equipment manufacturers and/or their authorized exclusive distributors.
B. Where items to be purchased are for resale to the public.
C. Where items to be purchased are circulating library materials, including books, periodicals, films, and recordings; computer software, hardware
maintenance services or software maintenance services; food, condiments and similar items; or art.
D. Any contract involving the purchase of supplies, equipment or services entered into with another governmental entity.
E. Any contract for professional services such as attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants, accountants, specialized printers or other
individuals or organizations possessing a high degree of professional, unique, specialized or technical skill or expertise.
F. Sole source procurement as set forth in section 3-3-108 of this article.
G. Emergency procurement as set forth in sections 3-3-206 and 3-3-303 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-O-2763, eff. 1-1-2019)
3-3-114: MULTIYEAR CONTRACTS:
Unless otherwise limited by law, the term of a contract shall be as set forth in the contract, and may include extensions as authorized in the contract. The
appropriate Contracting Officer may approve a multiyear contract, provided that the potential cumulative value of the multiyear contract as potentially
extended does not exceed the Contracting Officer's purchasing authority. Otherwise, multiyear contracts shall be approved by the City Council. (Ord. 06-O-
2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-115: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Director is authorized, subject to approval by the City Manager, to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this article. (Ord.
06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 87/797
Article 2. Purchasing Of Supplies, Equipment And Services
3-3-200: SCOPE OF ARTICLE:
This article shall govern the purchase and contracting of supplies and equipment and services. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-201: DEPARTMENT HEAD PURCHASES; LEVEL 1:
Level 1 purchases and contracts may be awarded by the head of the department for which the purchase is made and is authorized without competitive
bidding. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-202: PURCHASING AGENT/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER PURCHASES; LEVEL 2:
A. Level 2 purchases and contracts may be awarded by the purchasing agent and shall require competitive oral bidding. Bids shall be orally solicited from
a minimum of three (3) sources and may be received orally as set forth in the rules and regulations adopted by the Director pursuant to this chapter.
B. With regard to the purchase of supplies or equipment, after the receipt of bids from those who respond to the solicitation, the purchasing agent shall
award the purchase to the lowest responsible bidder, or shall reject all bids, unless the purchasing agent determines that award of the purchase to a
different bidder is in the best interest of the City. The purchasing agent may waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
C. With regard to contracts for services, if the purchasing agent determines that competitive oral bidding for a service contract is in the best interest of the
City, the purchasing agent may require competitive oral bidding for that contract. The purchasing agent shall award the contract to the lowest
responsible bidder only if the purchasing agent determines that such action is in the best interest of the City. The purchasing agent may reject all bids,
or waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
D. The purchasing agent may waive the requirement to orally solicit bids if the equipment or supplies are available from only one source as set forth in
section 3-3-108 of this chapter and may solicit only two (2) bids if the equipment or supplies are available from only two (2) sources.
E. Upon determining that conformance with the procedures set forth in this article would be contrary to the best interests of the City or upon determining
that compliance with the procedures would be impractical, the purchasing agent may waive, in writing, any or all of the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-203: CITY MANAGER PURCHASES; LEVEL 3:
A. Level 3 purchases and contracts may be awarded by the City Manager. Purchases of supplies and equipment shall require competitive written bidding
as follows:
1. Bid specifications shall be prepared and written noticessoliciting written bids shall be disseminated to a list of at least three (3) prospective bidders
chosen by the city manager. Such notices shall include the closing date of the bid.
2. Bids shall be submitted in writing and must be received prior to the bid closing date to be considered.
B. With regard to the purchase of supplies or equipment, the city manager shall award the purchase to the lowest responsible bidder, or shall reject all
bids, unless the city manager determines that award of the purchase to a different bidder is in the best interest of the city. The purchasing agent may
waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
C. With regard to contracts for services, if the city manager determines that a competitive bidding procedure for a service contract is in the best interest of
the city, the city manager may solicit oral bids as provided pursuant to section 3-3-202 of this article or the city manager may require competitive written
bids as provided in this section. The city manager shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder only if the city manager determines that
such action is in the best interest of the city. The city manager may reject all bids, or waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
D. The city manager may waive the requirement to solicit bids if the equipment or supplies are available from only one source as set forth in section 3-3-
108 of this chapter and may solicit only two (2) bids if the equipment or supplies are available from only two (2) sources.
E. Upon determining that conformance with the procedures set forth in this article would be contrary to the best interests of the city or upon determining
that compliance with the procedures would be impractical, the city manager may waive, in writing, any or all of the requirements of this section. (Ord.
06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-204: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL; LEVEL 4 PURCHASES:
A. Level 4 purchases shall be approved by the city council and shall require competitive written bidding as follows:
1. Bid specifications shall be prepared, and notices inviting sealed bids shall be disseminated to at least three (3) prospective bidders approved by the
city manager or purchasing agent.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 88/797
2. Bids shall be sealed, and shall not be opened until the time and place designated in the bid specifications. Bids must be received prior to the bid
opening to be considered.
B. With regard to the purchase of supplies and equipment, the city council shall award the bid to the lowest responsible bidder, or shall reject all bids,
unless the city councildetermines that the award of the purchase to a different bidder is in the best interest of the city. The city council may waive any
irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
C. With regard to contracts for services, if the city council determines that a bidding procedure for a service contract is in the best interest of the city, the
city council may solicit oral bids as provided in section 3-3-202 of this article, solicit written bids as provided in section 3-3-203 of this article or solicit
sealed bids as provided in this section. The city council shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder only if the city council determines that
such action is in the best interest of the city. The city council may reject all bids or waive any irregularities or informalities in any bid or bidding.
D. The city manager may waive the procedures required by this section if the city manager determines that the equipment or supplies are available only
from one source as set forth in section 3-3-108 of this chapter and may send a notice inviting bids to only two (2) prospective bidders if the city
manager determines that the equipment or supplies are available from only two (2) sources.
E. Upon determining that conformance with the procedures set forth in this article would be contrary to the best interests of the city or upon determining
that compliance with the procedures would be impractical, the city council may waive, by motion or resolution, any or all of the requirements of this
section. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-205: ALTERNATIVE PURCHASING PROCEDURES:
In lieu of the purchasing and bid procedures set forth in this article, the following alternative purchasing procedures may be used in the discretion of the
purchasing agent for the purchase of supplies, equipment or services in excess of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00):
A. Purchases from the California Department of General Services, pursuant to California Government Code section 54205, or the successor statute
thereto.
B. Purchases from any joint powers agency or any agency with which the City has entered into a joint powers agreement for purchase of equipment or
supplies; provided that the City Manager determines that the item can likely be obtained at a cost which is less than the City could likely obtain through
the purchasing procedures set forth in this article.
C. Purchases of supplies, equipment or services where competitive bid procedures have already been utilized, such as purchases from Federal, State or
County governments, including, State of California agencies, counties, cities, joint power agencies, special districts, and nonprofit agencies whose
main purpose is to assist cities or other public entities (i.e., League of California Cities, Independent Cities Association, etc.) and the supplies or
equipment are supplied to the City at the same or better price, as was obtained through the competitive bid procedures of that entity. (Ord. 06-O-2504,
eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-206: EMERGENCIES:
A. In case of a locally declared emergency or if the City Manager determines there is an emergency situation, the City Manager or the Director of
Emergency Services (if the City Manager is unavailable), is authorized to expend City funds without limitation on amount and without following the
purchasing or bidding procedures otherwise required by this article. An emergency purchase shall be limited to those supplies, equipment or services
necessary to satisfy the emergency need.
B. Expenditures made during a locally declared emergency or in an emergency situation must be reported to the City Council at the next regular Council
meeting if approval for such expenditures would otherwise have been made by the City Council.
C. As used in this section, an "emergency situation" is defined as an urgent unforeseen situation that threatens life, property or the general public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
Article 3. Public Works Contracts
3-3-301: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS:
The following procedures shall govern the award of contracts for public projects:
A. Public Projects Of Sixty Thousand Dollars Or Less: Public projects of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less, may be performed by City employees,
may be awarded by negotiated contract, or may be awarded by purchase order. A contract or purchase order shall require competitive oral bidding as
described in section 3-3-202 of this chapter unless the purchasing agent determines that a different competitive bidding procedure is in the best interest
of the City. In such case, the purchasing agent may solicit written bids as provided in section 3-3-203 of this chapter or solicit sealed written bids as
provided in section 3-3-204 of this chapter.
B. Public Projects Of More Than Sixty Thousand Dollars, But Less Than Or Equal To Two Hundred Thousand Dollars: Public projects of more than sixty
thousand dollars ($60,000.00), but less than or equal to two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), shall require competitive written bidding as
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 89/797
described in this subsection.
1. Bid specifications shall be prepared and notices inviting sealed bids shall be disseminated as set forth in subsection B2 of this section.
2. All notices inviting sealed bids shall be sent to: a) the construction trade journals specified in California Public Contract Code section 22036, or b) a
list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work and which has been developed in compliance with the criteria issued by the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, or c) both, unless the supplies, equipment or services are proprietary. Such notices
shall be mailed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due. The notices shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more
detailed information regarding the project, and the time and place for the submission of bids.
If all bids received are in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), the City Council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths (4/5)
vote, award the contract at two hundred twelve thousand five hundred dollars ($212,500.00) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, without
complying with the bidding procedures set forth in subsection C of this section, provided that the City Council determines that the cost estimate of the
project was reasonable.
C. Public Projects Of More Than Two Hundred Thousand Dollars: Public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) shall require
competitive written bidding. A notice inviting sealed bids shall be published and sent in compliance with the provisions of California Public Contract
Code section 22037, or the successor statute thereto. In addition, bid plans and working details shall be adopted by the City Council for all public
projects exceeding two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
D. Bid Requirements: When sealed bids are requested, the bids shall be sealed and shall not be opened until the time and place designated in the bid
specifications. Bids must be received prior to the bid opening to be considered.
E. Award: When bids are solicited, the appropriate Contracting Officer or the City Council shall award the bid to the lowest responsible bidder, or reject all
bids pursuant to Public Contract Code section 22038, or its successor statute. The Contracting Officer or the City Council may waive any irregularities
or informalities in any bid or bidding.
F. Waiver: Except with regard to public projects of more than sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00), upon determining that conformance with the procedures
set forth in this article would be contrary to the best interests of the City or upon determining that compliance with the procedures would be impractical,
the purchasing agent may waive any or all of the requirements of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2763, eff. 1-1-2019)
3-3-302: CONTRACTING AUTHORITY FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS:
The City Council shall from time to time, as it determines appropriate, establish by resolution the maximum contracting authority of designated City
employees authorized to approve contracts for public projects without City Council approval. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-303: EMERGENCY PROCUREMENT:
In addition to any other exemption from bidding requirements set forth in this chapter or otherwise provided by law, in a situation determined by the City
Manager to constitute an emergency for a public project pursuant to Public Contract Code sections 22035 and 22050 or in a locally declared emergency,
the City Council delegates to the City Manager or the Director of Emergency Services (if the City Manager is unavailable) the power to order any action
pursuant to Public Contract Code sections 22035 and 22050. The City Manager or Director of Emergency Services shall comply with the applicable
provisions of section 22050. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
Article 4. Disposition Of Property
3-3-401: DISPOSITION OF CITY SURPLUS PROPERTY:
The Director shall dispose of all City owned surplus and obsolete personal property by bid, auction, negotiated sale or exchange. The Director shall
attempt to obtain the best value for the property that can be reasonably obtained. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-402: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY:
The City hereby adopts the procedures set forth in division 3, part 4, title VI, chapter 4 of the California Civil Code concerning disposition of lost and
unclaimed property. (Ord. 06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
3-3-403: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Director is authorized, subject to approval by the City Manager, to promulgate rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this article. (Ord.
06-O-2504, eff. 10-20-2006)
Chapter 4
RISK MANAGEMENT
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 90/797
3-4-1: RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:
There is established a risk management program under the supervision of a risk manager to coordinate risk management functions and facilitate
implementation of appropriate administrative procedures. (1962 Code §§ 2-6.405, 5-8, 7-4, 9-3.1200 et seq.)
3-4-2: INSURANCE:
Insurance required under the provisions of this code shall be governed by the following requirements:
A. Each certificate of insurance shall require approval by the city attorney and risk manager;
B. Insurance furnished must contain a condition that it cannot be modified or cancelled without at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the city;
C. Any insurer shall be authorized to do business in California, and have a minimum A.M. Best and Company rating of B+:VII;
D. The rules and regulations issued under section 3-4-5 of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 2-6.405, 5-8, 7-4, 9-3.1200 et seq.)
3-4-3: INDEMNIFICATION:
When insurance is required under any provisions of this code, except under section 2-5-303 of this code, the insured shall be obligated to indemnify the
city for any damage or injury caused to the city as a result of the conduct or activity requiring insurance. The form of indemnification shall conform to the
rules and regulations issued pursuant to section 3-4-5 of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 2-6.405, 5-8, 7-4, 9-3.1200 et seq.)
3-4-4: BONDS:
Bonds required under the provisions of this code shall comply, with the following requirements:
A. Each bond shall require approval by the city attorney and risk manager.
B. Bonds shall comply with the rules and regulations issued under section 3-4-5 of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 2-6.405, 5-8, 7-4, 9-3.1200 et seq.)
3-4-5: RISK MANAGEMENT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The risk manager, subject to approval by the city manager and the director of human services, shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, for implementation of a city risk management program, including provisions governing insurance and indemnification and
bonding requirements. (1962 Code §§ 2-6.405, 5-8, 7-4, 9-3.1200 et seq.)
Chapter 5
AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
FEE ADMINISTRATOR: The city director of finance administration.
MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAM: Any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution emitted from motor
vehicles pursuant to the California clean air act of 1988 or the air quality management plan for the South Coast air quality management district prepared
and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code sections 40460 through 40470. (Ord. 91-O-2121, eff. 7-19-1991)
3-5-2: AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND:
The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest bearing trust fund account with a financial institution authorized to accept deposits of city funds.
This account shall be known as the air quality improvement trust fund. All interest earned by the account shall be credited to this account. All funds
received by city pursuant to Health and Safety Code sections 44243 and 44244, along with any other funds designated by the city council, shall be
deposited in this account and shall be used for the sole purpose of financing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. The fee administrator shall be
responsible for depositing funds in the air quality improvement trust fund. (Ord. 91-O-2121, eff. 7-19-1991)
3-5-3: AUDITS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 91/797
The city hereby consents to audits, at least once every two (2) years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fees provided by Health
and Safety Code section 44243, provided that such audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast air quality
management district. Audit costs shall be funded as provided in Health and Safety Code section 44244.1. (Ord. 91-O-2121, eff. 7-19-1991)
3-5-4: INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER:
It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this chapter and the interpretation of the term "mobile source air pollution reduction programs" shall
be liberally construed to effectively carry out the purposes of this chapter, which are hereby found and declared to be to further public health, safety,
welfare, and convenience, in accordance with the requirements and limitations of Health and Safety Code sections 44243 and 44244. (Ord. 91-O-2121,
eff. 7-19-1991)
Title 4
REGULATION OF CERTAIN TYPES OF BUSINESSES AND ACTIVITIES
Chapter 1
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR REGULATORY PERMITS
Article 1. Regulatory Permits
4-1-101: GENERAL:
The council finds that certain types of businesses and activities require specific regulation in addition to the general code provisions. Prior to engaging in
any type of business or activity which requires a permit, such person shall obtain a permit under the provisions of this article, and shall comply with the
terms and conditions of the permit and such other provisions of this code as are applicable to such business or activity. (Ord. 90-O-2088, eff. 2-8-1990)
4-1-102: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Applications for regulatory permits shall be filed with the city and shall comply with the following requirements unless otherwise provided for a specific
permit:
A. Completion of an application on the form designated by the city, and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.
B. Applications shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the date requested for issuance of the permit.
C. Payment of the fee as prescribed by council.
D. Such other information as required by the city.
E. Renewal permit applications shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to expiration of any existing permit.
F. Where the applicant is a corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity, applicant shall mean each partner, officer, director, and each
shareholder owning or controlling more than ten percent (10%) of such entity. (1988 Code)
4-1-103: GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. The permit will be issued by the official designated by the city to act on the permit application unless the official finds that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative
characteristics; or
2. The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application; or
3. Operation of the business or engaging in the activity will substantially disrupt the peace and quiet of any area in the city; or
4. Operation of the business or engaging in the activity will substantially impact upon traffic within any area of the city; or
5. Operation of the business or engaging in the activity at the proposed location will be incompatible with other uses in the vicinity; or
6. If the application is for renewal of a permit, that the applicant has violated conditions of the previous permit, or ordinances or regulations of the city in
the conduct of the business or activity; or
7. That the business or activity fails to comply with such other criteria as may be designated under this code for issuance of the regulatory permit for
the specific type of business or activity, or rules and regulations governing the business or activity; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 92/797
8. The building, structure, premises, or the equipment used to conduct the business activity, fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire,
building and safety laws of the state of California or of the city of Beverly Hills.
B. When one or more of the findings is negative to the applicant, a permit may be conditionally issued to the applicant where unique circumstances exist
which justify issuance of the permit, and provided that appropriate conditions are imposed on the permit to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
(Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
4-1-104: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Where the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code, of the denial and reasons
therefor. (1988 Code)
4-1-105: CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON PERMIT:
A. Conditions may be imposed on the permit as are reasonably necessary to protect the peace and tranquillity of any residential area, mitigate traffic
impacts, protect other uses in the area, or protect the public health, welfare and safety.
B. Any person issued a permit pursuant to this title shall comply with all conditions that are imposed as part of the permit pursuant to subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 90-O-2088, eff. 2-8-1990)
4-1-106: TERMS OF PERMITS:
Regulatory permits issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance unless a different period is specified
on the permit, or is designated for the type of permit governing the specific business or activity. A separate permit is required for each location at which the
business or activity is conducted or operated. (1988 Code)
4-1-107: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons:
A. A material false statement contained in the application; or
B. Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations; or
C. Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the permit; or
D. Failure to operate the business or activity in accordance to such orders, rules and regulations as may be applicable; or
E. Conduct of the business or activity in a fraudulent or disorderly manner, or in a manner which endangers the public health, welfare or safety. (1988
Code)
4-1-108: NOTICE OF HEARING AND GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Prior to suspension or revocation of a permit, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit and a
hearing shall be held thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with section 1-5-101 of this code to the permittee at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. (1988 Code)
4-1-109: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Certain types of conduct or activity may create an imminent peril to public health, welfare or safety in specific activities or businesses which are subject to
regulatory permits under this code. Where the conduct or activity of the licensee creates an imminent peril to the public health, welfare or safety, the permit
may be summarily suspended upon notice to the licensee, provided further, that the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing within three (3) days thereafter;
and provided further any temporary emergency suspension shall not exceed fifteen (15) days pending a hearing under section 4-1-108 of this article.
(1988 Code)
4-1-110: CONDUCT OF HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The City Manager shall promulgate rules of procedure for such hearings. Such rules shall recognize the right of the permittee to be heard and to call
witnesses on the permittee's behalf. (1988 Code)
4-1-111: DECISION OF HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 93/797
The decision of the official designated by the City to hear the matter shall be rendered within five (5) days of the close of the hearing. The decision shall be
in writing, and shall set forth the findings and reasons for the decision, and the licensee shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5,
article 1 of this Code. (1988 Code)
4-1-112: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
Prior to transfer of ownership, the transferee "applicant" as defined in section 4-1-102 of this article shall complete the transfer form designated by the City,
and shall pay the transfer fee designated by Council resolution. Transfer of the permit to the new applicant for the remainder of the license term will be
approved if the applicant meets the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this article. (1988 Code)
4-1-113: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any final decision of the official vested with the power to act on permits, may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with title 1, chapter 4, article 1
of this Code. (1988 Code)
Article 2. Identification Cards
4-1-201: IDENTIFICATION CARDS REQUIRED:
Certain types of business activities regulated by permit under this Code require that any employee or agent thereof obtain an identification card. Prior to
commencing employment or engaging in any of these designated businesses or activities, the person shall obtain an identification card issued by the
Police Chief, Chief Financial Officer or designee. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
4-1-202: REQUESTS FOR IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
Requests for identification cards shall be filed with the Police Department or Finance Department and shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Completion of an application form as designated by the Police Chief and Chief Financial Officer, and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury;
B. Identification of applicant;
C. Photograph and fingerprints of the applicant; and
D. Payment of the application fee as prescribed by Council. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010; amd. Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
4-1-203: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
An identification card shall be denied by the Police Chief or Chief Financial Officer if the applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative characteristics; or if the applicant makes false statements on the
application. If the identification card is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and reasons thereof. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
4-1-204: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any decision of the Police Chief or Chief Financial Officer relative to issuance or denial of an identification card may be appealed to Council in accordance
with the procedure set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
4-1-205: IDENTIFICATION CARDS IN EMPLOYEE'S POSSESSION:
Every person required to have an identification card under the provisions of this Code shall carry the identification card on their person at all times when
engaged in the activity requiring such identification card. The identification card shall be displayed to any police officer or other authorized City employee
upon request of such police officer or authorized City employee. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
4-1-206: TERMS AND RENEWAL OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS:
Identification cards shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from date of issuance unless provided otherwise. The police chief and chief financial officer
shall promulgate rules/regulations governing identification cards, including provisions relating to change of employers, and processing of renewal
identification cards. (Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 94/797
Chapter 2
REGULATORY BUSINESS PERMITS
Article 1. Amusement Activities And Devices
4-2-101: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on any amusement activity or devices without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. (1962 Code § 6-3.101 et seq.)
4-2-102: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT ACTIVITY: The conduct of any business or operation for the purpose of providing recreational or amusement facilities to its users or
patrons, including, but not limited to, bowling alleys, skating rinks, and shooting galleries; and shall not include any motion picture theater, carnival, circus,
or nightclub show.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any electrically or mechanically operated instrument, machine, or piece of equipment activated, operated, or played by coins or
tokens or any other similar device not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of title 5, chapter 6, article 4 of this Code. (1962 Code § 6-3.101 et seq.)
4-2-103: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Bowling alleys shall remain closed between the hours from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., unless enclosed in a
soundproof building in which case such business may remain open until two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
B. Nothing in this article shall authorize or permit the maintenance or operation of any gambling device or mechanism that has been judicially determined
to be a gambling device, nor any betting or gambling, or other activity or device prohibited by title 5, chapter 6, article 4 of this Code. (1962 Code § 6-
3.101 et seq.)
4-2-104: INSURANCE:
Any skating rink, shooting gallery, or merry go round, or similar mechanical device or an amusement activity, shall maintain at all times public liability
insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The insurance shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this Code.
(1962 Code § 6-3.101 et seq.)
Article 2. Private Clubs
4-2-201: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of a private club without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this
title. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
4-2-202: DEFINITION:
PRIVATE CLUB: A business, excluding a nonprofit corporation, which offers its facilities exclusively to members for social or recreational purposes and
serves alcoholic beverages on the premises. Such club shall be operated subject to the following requirements and restrictions:
A. Access to the private club facilities shall be restricted to persons who have paid a minimum one year membership fee. The membership fee shall be
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and shall be paid prior to any person being permitted access to the private club facilities, except as a guest.
No additional charge shall be made for the use of the facilities.
B. The private club premises shall be used exclusively at all times for the private club activities.
C. Any member may host a maximum of ten (10) guests provided a guest list shall be maintained, the guests shall be registered to the host club
member, there shall be no charge for the use of the facilities by the guests, and all other charges incurred by the guests shall be payable only by the
host private club member.
D. Private parties shall be hosted on the premises by private club members only, and the private club shall not charge a member or the member's
guests for the use of the facilities for a private party. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
4-2-203: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 95/797
In addition to the requirements of section 4-1-102 of this title, any application for a private club shall also contain the following:
A. The address of the private club facility;
B. A full description of the building or portion thereof to be used for the private club facility;
C. The activities proposed to be sponsored, promoted, or engaged in by the private club;
D. Any facilities to be provided for games or contests by or between private club members and/or their guests;
E. The names of any organizations with which the private club is affiliated;
F. The names, addresses, and fingerprints of the officers, directors, and stockholders owning or controlling more than ten percent (10%) of the stock if the
private club is a corporation or is operated by a corporation;
G. The names, addresses, and fingerprints of the partners if the private club is a partnership or is operated by a partnership;
H. The name, address, and fingerprints of the owner if the private club is owned by an individual;
I. The name, address, and fingerprints of the managing agent or agents of the private club and any person who is a beneficial owner of the private club. A
"beneficial owner" is any person who receives income calculated as a share of the private club's revenues or otherwise shares directly in the profits of
the private club;
J. Whether or not any of those persons named in answer to subsection F, G, H, or I of this section have been convicted of a felony in that name or under
any other name and, if so, the date, place, and particulars;
K. Any previous location used or occupied by the private club, and the location of any private club operated presently or previously by the persons named
in answer to subsection F, G, H, or I of this section;
L. A membership policy previously adopted by the private club, which sets forth at minimum the membership fee and standards relating to the granting or
revocation of membership, all of which are not inconsistent with this article. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
4-2-204: FILING OF RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
Any renewal permit application shall be filed one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
4-2-205: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. Only bona fide members and their guests shall use, frequent, patronize, or participate in any private club.
B. Guests shall comply with all local regulations and permit conditions of the private club.
C. The police department shall be advised of any private party on the premises of a private club not less than seventy two (72) hours prior to such private
party.
D. Dancing in a private club shall be restricted to the members and their guests.
E. No private club shall operate from two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
F. No employee or manager shall be employed by a private club until issued an identification card pursuant to chapter 1, article 2 of this title.
G. A private club shall maintain a current record of the information required by section 4-2-203 of this article and shall notify the police department within
twenty four (24) hours of any and all changes in such information. If the permittee is a partnership, a withdrawal or change, voluntary or involuntary, or
by operation of law, of any partner, or the dissolution of the partnership, shall be reported to the police department within ten (10) days of such
withdrawal or change. If the permittee is a corporation, any change of officers or directors, or any dissolution, merger, consolidation, or other
reorganization of the permittee, or the sale of ten percent (10%) or more of the permittee's stock, whether previously issued or unissued, or the sale of
ten percent (10%) or more of the value of the permittee's assets shall be reported to the police department within ten (10) days of such change or
transfer. Any agreement or arrangement relative to a merger or operational or management change, whether occurring immediately or at some future
time, shall be reported to the police department within ten (10) days of entering such agreement or arrangement.
H. Private clubs shall comply with all city, state, and federal laws, and shall be prohibited from conducting any card game or other game or activity
prohibited by law.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 96/797
I. A private club shall maintain a clearly legible membership list, setting forth the names and addresses of all current and past members. Upon an oral or
written request, directed to any operator or manager, made twenty four (24) hours in advance, the club shall make the membership list available for
inspection and copying to the director of finance administration or police chief, or their designated agents or representatives. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et
seq.)
4-2-206: ADVERTISING OR REPRESENTATION AS PRIVATE CLUB:
No business, excluding a nonprofit corporation, which serves alcoholic beverages and which is social or recreational in nature, shall at any time advertise
or represent that it is a "private club" unless at all times access to its facilities is restricted to bona fide members in accordance with the provisions of this
article and a permit issued under this title. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
4-2-207: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Any operator, manager or employee of a private club shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and
shall have the identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in this activity. (1962 Code § 6-3.201 et seq.)
Article 3. Auctions (Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2265, eff. 10-5-1996)
Article 4. Closing Out Sales
4-2-401: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on a closing out sale without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (1962
Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-402: DEFINITION:
A. "Closing out sale" shall mean any of the following:
1. Any sale, or any offer to sell, to the public, or any group thereof, goods, wares, or merchandise on order, in transit, or in stock in connection with a
declared purpose as set forth by advertising that such sale is anticipatory of or to avoid the termination, liquidation, revision, wind up, discontinuance,
removal, dissolution, or abandonment of the business or that portion of the business conducted at any location;
2. Any sale advertised in any manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale, the
business, or that portion thereof, being conducted at any location will cease, be removed, interrupted, discontinued, or changed;
3. Any sale advertised to be:
Adjuster's sale,
Administrator's sale,
Assignee's sale,
Bankrupt sale,
Benefit administrator's sale,
Benefit of creditor's sale,
Benefit of trustees' sale,
Building coming down sale,
Closing out sale,
Creditor's committee sale,
Creditor's sale,
Damaged goods sale,
End sale,
Executors's sale,
Final days sale,
Fire sale,
Fixtures for sale,
Forced out of business sale,
Forced out sale,
Insolvent sale,
Insurance salvage sale,
Loss of lease sale,
Mortgage sale,
Outselling sale,
Quitting business sale,
Receiver's sale,
Reorganization sale,
Salvage sale,
Selling out sale,
Smoke and water sale,
Smoke sale,
Trustee's sale,
We give up sale,
We quit sale,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 97/797
Wholesale closing out sale,
or any other sale advertised by any similar expression or characterization which is calculated to convey the same meaning;
4. Any sale advertised in a manner calculated to indicate that the goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold, or any part thereof, has been involved in
any business failure or has been derived from a business which has failed, discontinued, or liquidated, or has been closed;
5. Any sale accompanied by notices or advertising indicating that the premises are available for purchase or lease or are otherwise to be vacated;
6. Any sale accompanied by advertising, indicating a business emergency or failure affecting the seller of any previous holder of the goods to be
disposed of.
B. For purpose of this article "advertise" shall mean all methods, whether oral, written, lettered, or printed, used to convey to the public notice of the
conduct of a sale, or notice of intention to conduct such sale, which shall include, but not be limited to, oral or written announcements by the
proclamation, newspaper advertisements, magazine advertisements, handbills, written or printed displays, billboard displays, posters, or radio and
television announcements. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-403: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. A sale conducted by persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction or persons acting in accordance with their
powers and duties as public officials; or
B. Any publisher or publication, newspaper, magazine, or other publication which publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its false,
deceptive, or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-404: APPLICATIONS:
A. In addition to the requirements of section 4-1-102 of this title, an application for a closing out sale shall contain the following information:
1. The nature of the applicant's occupancy, whether by lease, sublease, or ownership, and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy;
2. The dates between which the sale is to be conducted;
3. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods and the
manner in which the sale will be conducted;
4. The means to be employed in advertising such sale and the proposed content of any such advertisement;
5. An itemized inventory of the stock of goods, wares, and merchandise to be offered for sale, together with the name and address of the suppliers
thereof, and the cost thereof. All goods, wares, and merchandise listed upon the inventory shall be described in detail by color, size, manufacturer's
name and lot number, and the individual number of articles in each lot so that the identity of such goods can be readily determined. Each item listed
on the inventory shall be tagged with a label or tag securely attached thereto on which there is written or printed a number corresponding with that
item on the inventory;
6. The place where such stock was purchased or acquired and a statement as to whether or not the merchandise to be sold was purchased at a former
sale;
7. If stock is brought upon the premises within thirty (30) days prior to such application, the amount and time of acquisition of such stock.
B. An application for a closing out sale permit must be filed with the city a minimum of ten (10) days prior to commencement of the sale. (1962 Code § 6-
5.01 et seq.)
4-2-405: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In addition to the criteria set forth in section 4-1-103 of this title, the permit shall be denied for any of the following reasons:
A. The inventory list is incomplete or the merchandise is improperly labeled or tagged;
B. The advertising as proposed is false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading in any respect;
C. The methods to be used in conducting the sale are such as will work a fraud upon the purchasers. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-406: TERM OF PERMIT:
The term of a closing out sale permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days; provided further, that the permit may be extended for one additional period not
exceeding thirty (30) days subject to the following requirements:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 98/797
A. Filing a renewal application of the form designated not less than five (5) days before expiration of the original permit.
B. Inclusion of a complete list of all unsold stock which was listed on the original application, provided further, a renewal permit shall not authorize sale of
any stock which was not listed in the original permit application.
C. Permittee has complied with the provision of this code and terms of the permit since its issuance.
D. Payment of the renewal permit fee as designated by resolution of council. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-407: RECORDS, INVENTORY, AND INSPECTION:
The permittee shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Authorized representatives of city shall have the right to make an examination or investigation of the business, books, records, accounts, or other
papers pertaining to any person permitted to conduct a sale regulated by the provisions of this article.
B. Keep available at the place of the sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and present such duplicate copy to authorized
city officials upon request.
C. Keep all other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the sale inventory filed with city; and all inventoried sale goods shall be tagged to
apprise the public of the status of all such goods.
D. At the close of business each day, a revised inventory list of items disposed of during the day shall be made and shall be at all time available to
investigating or inspecting city officials. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-408: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Closing out sales shall be subject to the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. A closing out sale shall not be conducted at the same location by any person who, as owner or successor in interest, except by operation of law, has in
any way, either directly or indirectly, conducted a similar sale in the city within a period of one year immediately preceding the date of the proposed
sale.
B. An applicant shall not be eligible for a closing out sale permit unless the applicant has been in business at the same location for a period of time in
excess of ninety (90) days prior to filing the application.
C. The closing out sale permit authorizes only the type of sale described in the application at the location named in such application and authorizes only
the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. No additions of stock shall be permitted.
D. A closing out sale shall be incidental to the termination of a legitimate business, and is not permissible for a business which was established for the
purpose of conducting such closing out sale.
E. All goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold in the closing out sale shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without
cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
F. Goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold in the closing out sale shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting such a sale. Any
unusual purchase or addition to the stock of goods of the business within the period of thirty (30) days before the filing of an application for a closing
out sale permit and up to the time of the sale shall be deemed to be of such character.
G. Where a permittee operates more than one place of business, the permit issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application,
and no store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with, or in any way participating in, such sale; nor shall the store or branch
conducting such sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with, or participating in any way, in such sale.
H. The conduct on any closing out sale shall be prohibited during the hours from nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next
succeeding day. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
Article 5. Secondhand Dealers
4-2-501: PERMIT REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 99/797
No persons shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of secondhand dealer without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. (1962 Code §§ 6-12.101 et seq., 6-12.301 et seq.)
4-2-502: DEFINITIONS:
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person, including, but not limited to, a partnership, corporation, joint venture, or firm, whose business includes buying,
selling, trading, taking in pawn, and accepting for sale on consignment secondhand tangible personal property. A "secondhand dealer" does not include a
coin dealer. For purposes of this section, a "coin dealer" shall mean any person, including, but not limited to, a partnership, corporation, joint venture, or
firm, whose principal business is the buying, selling, and trading of coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of gold, or silver, or other precious
metals.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes, but is not limited to:
A. All secondhand tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired or
purchased by the secondhand dealer or pawn broker, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription.
B. All tangible personal property, new or used, received in pledge as security for a loan by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer acting as a
pawnbroker.
C. All personal property commonly sold by secondhand dealers which statistically is found through crime reports to the California state attorney general
to constitute a significant class of stolen goods.
Tangible personal property does not include:
A. Any new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer or distributor or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise by a
secondhand dealer.
B. Coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of gold, silver, or other precious metals. "Commercial grade ingots" means .99 fine ingots
of gold, silver, or platinum, or .925 fine sterling silver art bars and medallions, provided that the ingots, art bars, and medallions are marked by
the refiner or fabricator as to their assay fineness. (1962 Code §§ 6-12.101 et seq., 6-12.301 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2174, eff. 7-23-1993)
4-2-503: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. The business of selling antique goods, wares, or merchandise. "Antique" shall mean anything very old; a relic, or object of ancient art, or the like, made
at a much earlier period than the present, and which, because of age, rarity, or historical significance, has a monetary value greater than the original
value, or which has an age recognized by the United States government as entitling the article to an import duty less than that prescribed for
contemporary merchandise.
B. Auctions.
C. Pawnbrokers.
D. Used car dealers.
E. An authorized representative or agent of the manufacturer, jobber, or distributor of the new goods, wares, or merchandise who accepts or sells any
tangible personal property, wares, or merchandise received as part payment on new goods, wares, or merchandise. (1962 Code §§ 6-12.101 et seq.,
6-12.301 et seq.)
4-2-504: REPORTS, INVENTORY, AND INSPECTION:
A. Secondhand dealers must make and deliver to the Beverly Hills police department on a daily basis a report on a California department of justice form of
all tangible personal property purchased or received by a secondhand dealer. Such report shall be legible, prepared in English and completed where
applicable, and contain the following information:
1. The name and current address of the intended seller or pledgor of the property. Identification which contains a post office box is insufficient for
purposes of this code.
2. The identification of the seller or pledgor of the property. Identification shall be verified by the person taking the information. The following forms of
personal identification are acceptable provided the document is valid, has been issued within the previous five (5) years and contains a photograph
or description, or both, of the person to be identified, is signed by that person, states that person's day, month and year of birth in order to verify that
person is eighteen (18) years or older, and bears a serial or other identifying number:
a. Passport of the United States;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 100/797
b. Driver license issued by any state, or the country of Canada;
c. An identification card issued by any state;
d. An identification card issued by the United States.
3. A complete and accurate description of serialized property, including, but not limited to, the following: serial number and other identifying marks or
symbols, owner applied number, manufacturer's name brand, and model name or number.
4. A complete and accurate description on nonserialized property, including, but not limited to, the following: size, color, material, manufacturer's
patterns, if known, owner applied numbers and personalized inscriptions and other identifying marks or symbols.
5. A certification by the intended seller or pledgor that he/she is the owner of the property or has the authority of the owner to sell or pledge the
property.
6. A certification by the intended seller or pledgor that to his or her knowledge and belief the information is true and complete.
7. A legible fingerprint taken from the intended seller or pledgor as prescribed by the California department of justice.
8. The total dollar amount for each purchase or pledge.
B. Permanent records and any goods, wares or merchandise, transaction slips, copies of reports of property received, shall be maintained on the
secondhand dealer's premises in such a way that access to a particular record is not unreasonably difficult or time consuming for a period of three (3)
years. All such records shall be open for inspection during regular business hours and upon the demand of any California state peace officer or
authorized representatives of the city.
C. Business machine dealers shall report to the Beverly Hills police department all used business machines which are purchased, taken in trade, or
accepted for sale on consignment. Such reports shall be submitted on a California department of justice approved form and forwarded to the Beverly
Hills police department. (1962 Code §§ 6-12.101 et seq., 6-12.301 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2174, eff. 7-23-1993)
4-2-505: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Every secondhand dealer shall retain in his/her possession for a period of thirty (30) days all tangible personal property reported under the provisions of
section 4-2-504 of this article. The thirty (30) day period shall commence on the date the report of its acquisition was made to the chief of police by the
secondhand dealer. The chief of police may, for good cause, as specified by the department of justice, authorize prior disposition of any such property
described in a specific report; provided that a secondhand dealer who disposes of tangible personal property pursuant to such authorization shall report
the sale thereof to the chief of police. (1962 Code §§ 6-12.101 et seq., 6-12.301 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2174, eff. 7-23-1993)
4-2-506: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Any permittee, operator, manager or employee of a secondhand dealer shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2
of this title, and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times when engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code §§ 6-
12.101 et seq., 6-12.301 et seq.)
Article 6. Pawnbrokers
4-2-601: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of pawnbroker without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title.
(1962 Code § 6-12.201 et seq.)
4-2-602: DEFINITION:
"Pawnbroker" shall mean a person who is engaged in the business of receiving tangible personal property in pledge as security for a loan and shall
exclude secondhand dealers as defined in article 5 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 6-12.201; amd. Ord. 93-O-2174, eff. 7-22-1993)
4-2-603: REPORTS, INVENTORY, AND INSPECTION:
A. Every pawnbroker shall report daily or on the first working day after receipt or purchase, all descriptions of all property received in pledge or purchased
as "tangible personal property" as defined in section 4-2-502 of this chapter, in whatever quantity received, including property purchased as tangible
personal property at wholesale, tangible personal property taken in for sale or possess on consignment for sale, and tangible personal property taken
in trade. The report shall be submitted to the chief of police or his or her designees by mail unless otherwise agreed upon by the pawnbroker and the
chief of police or his/her designees. All reports shall be on forms approved by the department of justice. (1962 Code § 6-12.201 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-
O-2174, eff. 7-22-1993)
4-2-604: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Pawnbrokers shall be subject to and comply with the following restrictions and prohibitions:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 101/797
A. Every pawnbroker shall retain pledged goods in his or her possession in conformance with California Financial Code section 21201.
B. Shall not engage in business in any manner from seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the next succeeding day.
C. Shall maintain a sign on the premises which is clearly visible from the sidewalk stating "Licensed Pawnbroker", provided further, where the pawnshop is
located in an office building, a conspicuous sign shall be placed at the door to such pawnbroker. (1962 Code § 6-12.201 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2174,
eff. 7-22-1993)
4-2-605: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Any permittee, operator, manager or employee, of a pawnbroker shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this
title, and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times when engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code § 6-12.201 et
seq.)
Article 7. Peddlers
4-2-701: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of a peddler without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title.
(1962 Code § 6-13.01 et seq.)
4-2-702: DEFINITION:
"Peddler" shall mean any person, traveling by foot, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, house to house, or from street
to street carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, or prepared foods
and offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or any person who traveling from place to place, shall
sell or offer for sale such merchandise from an automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance; or any person who solicits orders and as a separate
transaction makes deliveries to purchaser. "Peddler" shall not include a person engaged in, conducting or carrying on the business of vending on a
sidewalk, pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to article 22 of this chapter. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-703: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to transporting property owned or handled on consignment by the agents or employees of an established place
of business, where such transportation is incidental to such business, and when such property is being transported to or from such established place of
business. "Established place of business" shall mean any permanent warehouse, building, structure, or outdoor vending business established pursuant to
article 19 of this chapter; which is owned or leased, and at which the owner or lessee carries on a legitimate permanent business in good faith and at
which stocks of the goods transported are produced, stored, or kept in quantities usually carried and reasonably adequate to meet the requirements of the
business. (1962 Code § 6-13.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-704: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Peddlers shall be subject to and shall comply with the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. Shall not go in or upon any private residential property for the purpose of selling or disposing of any goods, wares, or merchandise, unless the consent
of the owner or occupant of such private residence shall first be obtained.
B. Shall not between the hours from eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound
devices or musical instrument upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of this City where sound of sufficient volume is emitted to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or
merchandise which the permittee purposes to sell.
C. Shall not keep, maintain, or operate any lunch, meal, or eating cart, wagon, truck, or stand used in selling popcorn, peanuts, candy, or any other article
of food or drink in or upon any public street or other public place within two hundred feet (200') of the nearest property line of any property on which a
public school building is located.
D. Shall not sell, offer for sale, give away, distribute, solicit the sale of, or expose for sale any fruit, vegetables, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream, article
of food, or any goods, wares, or merchandise upon the grounds of any public school without first having obtained the written permission of such school
or of the Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent of the Beverly Hills schools or the School Board of the Beverly Hills Unified School District.
E. Where food of any kind is dispensed from a vehicle, pushcart or other conveyance, shall maintain a clearly designated litter receptacle in the immediate
vicinity, marked with a sign requested use by patrons; and provided further, prior to leaving the location, shall pick up, remove, and dispose of all trash
or refuse which consists of materials originally dispensed by that person, including any packages or containers, or parts thereof, used with or for
dispensing such food. (1962 Code § 6-13.01 et seq.)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 102/797
4-2-705: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
Peddlers shall be subject to the following parking restrictions:
A. Parking at any location shall not exceed thirty (30) minutes; and regardless of the length of time parked at any location, shall not within a period of four
(4) hours be again parked within five hundred feet (500') of such location.
B. Parking in a Residential Zone shall be prohibited from the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. through eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next succeeding day.
(1962 Code § 6-13.01 et seq.)
4-2-706: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Any permittee, operator, or employee of a peddler shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and shall
have such identification card in their possession at all times when engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code § 6-13.01 et seq.)
Article 8. Commercial Solicitors And Canvassers
4-2-801: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of solicitor or canvasser without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. (1962 Code § 6-18.01 et seq.)
4-2-802: DEFINITION:
"Solicitor" or "canvasser" shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the City or not, traveling by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any type of
conveyance from place to place, house to house, or from street to street, conducting any survey or poll for public opinion or statistical data or taking, or
attempting to take, orders for the sale of goods or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes a sample of the subject of such sale or whether collecting advance payments on such sales;
and also includes any person who, through invitation or suggestion, advertises the availability of goods, property, or services on a personal basis while
traveling from place to place, house to house, or street to street, or who hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, hotel room, shop,
automotive vehicle, or any other place within the City for the purpose of exhibiting samples or taking orders for future delivery. This definition excludes the
sale of goods, wares, or merchandise at wholesale or soliciting orders at wholesale in a Nonresidential Zone. "Solicitor" or "canvasser" shall not include a
person engaged in, conducting or carrying on the business of vending on a sidewalk pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to article 22 of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-803: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. No person shall use any lobby or public room in any hotel for the purposes of solicitation; and no person shall linger, loiter, sit, stand, or otherwise use
for such purposes any lobby or public room in any hotel in violation of the expressed wish of the owner or manager of such hotel.
B. No person shall use the street or sidewalk in front of or adjacent to any place of business where goods, wares, or merchandise are sold, or where
services are offered for gain, or any entrance, doorway, or hallway immediately opening upon any public way for the purpose of importuning or
soliciting patrons by word of mouth or gesture, or by any sound making device, to enter such place of business for the purpose of examining or
purchasing any goods, wares, or merchandise or hiring or bargaining for any services therein; and provided further, no person shall use any public
street, sidewalk, or way, doorway, or entranceway to any building for business purposes, or solicit for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise or
services of any kind or character, wheresoever situated, except for those special businesses for which permits or licenses are issued pursuant to the
provisions of this Code.
C. No solicitor or canvasser shall ring the bell or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, or apartment, or attempt to gain admittance thereto,
whereon a sign is posted bearing the words "No Solicitors", "No Solicitors or Peddlers", or words of similar import indicating that solicitors are not
desired.
D. No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises within the City after being notified by the owner, lessee, occupant, or another
person in charge thereof to leave.
E. No solicitor of canvasser shall ring the bell or knock on the door of any residence, dwelling, or apartment, or attempt to gain admittance thereto, for the
purposes of commercial soliciting or canvassing on any Sunday, or any holiday; or before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on
any other day. (1962 Code § 6-18.01 et seq.)
4-2-804: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
The permittee, and any agent or employee of permittee engaged in soliciting or canvassing shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions
of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times when engaged in the activity regulated by this
article. (1962 Code § 6-18.01 et seq.)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 103/797
Article 9. Escort Bureau
4-2-901: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of escort bureau without having a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. (1962 Code § 6-6.101 et seq.)
4-2-902: DEFINITION:
"Escort bureau" shall mean any business or agency which, for pecuniary compensation or any consideration, furnishes, or offers to furnish, escorts or
persons who accompany others to, from, or about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly, or places of amusement, or who consort with
others, for hire or reward, about any place of public resort or within any private quarters; provided further, the lawful business of any employment agency
licensed under the laws of the state is excluded from the provisions of this article. (1962 Code § 6-6.101 et seq.)
4-2-903: SPECIFIC PROVISIONS GOVERNING PERMITS:
Permits shall be issued only to individual persons and no permit shall be issued to or in the name of any organization, group, corporation, partnership, or
entity other than an individual person; provided, however, the escort bureau may be advertised and carried on by the permittee under a fictitious name as
permitted by law provided that the proposed name is designated in the application for the permit. (1962 Code § 6-6.101 et seq.)
4-2-904: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age shall be employed by an escort bureau.
B. An escort bureau shall maintain in duplicate a record of every transaction whereby any escort is employed, engaged, or arranged for on behalf of any
patron, customer, or person, and the duplicate shall be filed with the police department within twenty four (24) hours of the transaction. The record shall
contain the following information:
1. The date and hour of the transaction; and
2. The name, address, and telephone number of the patron, customer, or person requesting or employing the escort; and
3. The name of the escort furnished.
C. The permittee of an escort bureau shall notify the police department in writing within twenty four (24) hours of any change in personnel employed by
such escort business. (1962 Code § 6-6.101 et seq.)
4-2-905: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
The permittee and any escorts employed by permittee shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and
shall have such identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code § 6-6.101 et seq.)
Article 10. Introductory Services
4-2-1001: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of an introductory service without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1
of this title. (1962 Code § 6-6.201 et seq.)
4-2-1002: DEFINITION:
"Introductory service" shall mean a service offered or performed for any pecuniary consideration by any person, the principal purpose of which is to aid
individuals to become socially acquainted or to otherwise assist individuals to meet for social purposes, or which service is generally known by the offering
or performing party to be used by the recipients thereof for the purpose of obtaining information about others to be used for social purposes; provided
further, an employment agency licensed under the laws of this state is excluded from the provisions of this article. (1962 Code § 6-6.201 et seq.)
4-2-1003: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
The permittee of an introductory service shall notify the police department in writing within twenty four (24) hours of any change in personnel employed by
such introductory service. (1962 Code § 6-6.201 et seq.)
4-2-1004: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 104/797
The permittee and all persons employed by an introductory service shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of
this title and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code § 6-6.201
et seq.)
Article 11. Massage Parlors
4-2-1101: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of massage parlor without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this
title, unless every masseur employed or engaged by the massage parlor is certified by the California massage therapy council. (Ord. 12-O-2635, eff. 1-4-
2013)
4-2-1102: DEFINITIONS:
MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place of business where massages, alcohol rubs, fomentations, baths, electric or magnetic treatments, physiotherapy,
manipulations of the body, or similar treatments are given by a masseur.
MASSEUR: Any person who administers to another person for any form of consideration a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic
treatment, physiotherapy, manipulation of the body, or similar treatment. (Ord. 12-O-2635, eff. 1-4-2013)
4-2-1103: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, nurses, physical therapists, or any other natural person duly
licensed by the state to perform the services of a masseur, nor shall it apply to or affect a state licensed cosmetologist engaged in authorized activities
pursuant to that license. (Ord. 12-O-2635, eff. 1-4-2013)
4-2-1104: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
The permittee shall ensure that each person who does not hold a certificate issued by the California massage therapy council and is employed or engaged
as a masseur at permittee's massage parlor shall have first obtained a masseur identification card under chapter 1, article 2 of this title. (Ord. 12-O-2635,
eff. 1-4-2013)
4-2-1105: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Unless certified by the California massage therapy council, any owner, operator, manager of a massage parlor, and any person employed or engaged in
the activity of a masseur, shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and have such identification card
in his or her possession at all times when engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (Ord. 12-O-2635, eff. 1-4-2013)
Article 12. Patrol/Night Watch Services
4-2-1201: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of patrol/night watch service without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article
1 of this title. (1962 Code § 6-10.01 et seq.)
4-2-1202: DEFINITION:
"Patrol/night watch service" shall mean the activity of going from building to building, or from property to property, along or on the public streets, alleys, or
other public ways adjacent to such buildings or properties, at more or less regular intervals during the day or at night, for the purpose of watching the
properties or buildings to protect any interest of the owner or occupant. (1962 Code § 6-10.01 et seq.)
4-2-1203: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. Any patrol/night watch service which is engaged exclusively in protecting only one building or property.
B. Any private detective licensed by the state who carries proper credentials for means of identification while doing private investigation work for another
person. (1962 Code § 6-10.01 et seq.)
4-2-1204: DISTINCTIVE UNIFORM AND BADGES REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 105/797
Any person while employed or engaged in patrol/night watch service shall wear a distinctive uniform, and a distinctive badge, which is different in color
from, and does not resemble the uniform or badge of the Beverly Hills police department. (1962 Code § 6-10.01 et seq.)
4-2-1205: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
Any person employed or engaged in patrol/night watch service shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this
title, and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in the activity regulated by this article. (1962 Code § 6-10.01 et
seq.)
Article 13. Private Solid Waste Collection (Repealed)
Article 14. Vehicle Towing Services
4-2-1401: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on a "vehicle towing service" without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title.
(1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1402: DEFINITIONS:
EMERGENCY TOWING: Means and includes the towing of a vehicle when authorized by the California Vehicle Code or other law and requested by an
officer of the city's police department, or any officer or employee of the city manager's office, fire department or transportation department who is
authorized to do so pursuant to section 1-3-201 of this code.
HEAVY DUTY TOW: The towing of a vehicle described in California Vehicle Code section 34500.
LIGHT DUTY TOW: The towing of a vehicle that does not fall within the description set forth in California Vehicle Code section 34500.
NONEMERGENCY TOWING: Includes, but is not limited to, the towing of a vehicle when: a) the vehicle has been involved in a collision and is inoperative;
b) the vehicle has experienced mechanical failure but has been removed from traffic lanes and no longer constitutes a hazard; c) the vehicle is
mechanically inoperative and is towed for convenience; or d) such towing is authorized by the California Vehicle Code and is requested by an officer of the
city's police department, or any officer or employee of the city manager's office, fire department or transportation department who is authorized to do so
pursuant to section 1-3-201 of this code.
VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE: The activity of towing vehicles for compensation within the city, including the storing of vehicles and all other services
performed incident to towing. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 95-O-2244, eff. 9-1-1995; Ord. 02-O-2401, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-2-1403: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. Tow service which is exclusively to members of an association, automobile club, or similar organization and receives remuneration only from the
sponsoring association, automobile club, or similar organization;
B. Tow service furnished without charges or fee for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the tow service;
C. Tow service for other vehicles owned or operated by the individual or organization furnishing the tow service, but which are being operated under the
terms of a rent or lease agreement or contract, and such towing is performed on a nonprofit basis or such fee is part of the rent or lease agreement or
contract;
D. A vehicle towing service operating from outside of city boundaries which enter the city on a nonemergency towing assignment for the purpose of towing
a disabled vehicle to a location outside of the city for repair. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1404: PROHIBITIONS:
Any vehicle towing service shall not:
A. Respond to, undertake, or interfere with any police request for emergency towing, unless such vehicle towing service has received authorization from
the city by means of a resolution, ordinance, or contract with the city to perform such services for the city.
B. Attach a vehicle to a tow unit on a nonemergency towing assignment without first receiving written authorization to do so by the registered owner, legal
owner, driver, or other person in control of such vehicle. Such authorization shall list the services offered and the rates and charges required therefor,
and a copy of such authorization shall be furnished to the person authorizing the tow. Such copy shall list the name, address, and telephone number of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 106/797
the vehicle towing operation, and the days and hours the business is open for the release of vehicles. Such copy shall be signed by the tow unit
operator performing the authorized service.
C. Make any repairs or alterations to a vehicle without first being authorized by the legal owner, the registered owner, or insurance carrier of the legal or
registered owner, or the authorized agent of the legal owner, registered owner or insurance carrier. Parts or accessories shall not be removed from any
vehicle without authorization except as necessary for security purposes, and the parts or accessories removed shall be listed on the itemized statement
which shall be kept in the business office of the vehicle towing service. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit permittees from
making emergency alterations or repairs necessary to permit towing of such vehicle. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1405: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In addition to the criteria set forth in section 4-1-103 of this title, the permit shall be issued if a vehicle towing service maintains a business office and
storage yard that complies with each of the following requirements:
A. A vehicle towing service that performs light duty tow, or light duty tow and heavy duty tow shall maintain a business office and adjacent vehicle storage
yard within seven (7) miles of the city boundaries, or such greater distance as approved by the chief of police. A vehicle towing service that does not
provide city with light duty tow shall maintain a business office and adjacent vehicle storage yard within a distance determined by the police chief at the
time that its vehicle towing service permit is issued.
B. Ensure a safe, secure, and convenient physical location and environment for vehicle storage.
C. A vehicle towing service that provides light duty tow shall provide a storage yard with storage capacity for a minimum of forty (40) vehicles. A vehicle
towing service that does not provide city with light duty tow shall maintain a storage yard with storage capacity to be determined by the police chief at
the time that its vehicle towing service permit is issued.
D. Whenever the storage yard is unattended, it shall be patrolled by at least one dog trained as a guard dog or shall have other security systems approved
by the police chief at the time that its vehicle towing service permit is issued.
E. Provide a minimum average lighting intensity in the storage yard of three-fourths (3/4) foot-candle at all times.
F. Additional vehicle storage yards that do not comply with the provisions of this section may be maintained by the permittee provided any such additional
yards are approved in writing and subject to the written conditions of the police chief. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 02-O-2401, eff. 6-20-
2002; Ord. 12-O-2631, eff. 10-12-2012)
4-2-1406: RATES AND CHARGES:
A. Applicants for vehicle towing service permits shall file a schedule of rates and charges for each service offered with their application. No charge other
than the rates and charges specified in such schedule shall be made, except as provided in this chapter.
B. A schedule of rates and charges shall be posted and maintained listing the rates and charges of all services offered. Such signs shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or other place where customer financial transactions occur. The letters on such signs shall be a minimum of one inch (1") high with
one-fourth inch (1/4") stroke. The letters shall be a contrasting color from the background.
C. Changes in rates and charges may be made by written notice to the police chief setting forth the new schedule of rates and charges. Such notice shall
be filed with the police chief a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such charges. A duplicate copy of such notice shall be posted for a
period of ten (10) days in the office next to the posted schedule of the existing rates and charges. Upon the expiration of the ten (10) day period, the
existing rates and charges may be changed in accordance with such notice.
D. An itemized statement of charges shall be furnished without charge by permittee to the following persons or their agents: any person authorizing towing
service, the registered or legal owner of the vehicle, or the insurance carrier of either the registered or legal owner. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1407: HOURS OF OPERATION:
Any vehicle towing service shall provide continuous operations, twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week, including holidays. Facilities shall
be open and available for release of vehicles, at a minimum, between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. through four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of each day
Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1408: INSPECTIONS:
Permittee shall at all times allow authorized police personnel inspection of the permittee's premises and towing equipment. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1409: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 107/797
Upon issuance of the permit, and at all times that the permit is in effect, the permittee shall maintain public liability insurance covering permittee's
operations in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The insurance shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
(1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1410: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
In addition to the grounds for revocation set forth in section 4-1-107 of this title, a permit issued under this article may be revoked for the following reasons:
A. The permittee maintained or operated vehicles used for towing operations in an unsafe manner;
B. The permittee, his agents, or employees obtained a tow contract by use of fraud, trickery, dishonesty, or forgery;
C. The permittee, his agents, or employees stopped on any street, highway, or other public thoroughfare to render vehicle towing service to a person or
disabled vehicle without first being requested to do so;
D. The permittee, his agents, or employees towed a vehicle to a location other than designated as the business address of such permittee without first
receiving authorization to do so by the person authorizing the tow;
E. The permittee, his agents, or employees, after towing a vehicle to the business location of the permittee without authorization, towed such vehicle to
another location for storage;
F. The permittee, his agents, or employees conspired with any person to defraud any owner of any vehicle, or any insurance company, or any other person
financially interested in the cost of the towing or storage of any vehicle by making false or deceptive statements relating to the towing or storage of any
vehicle;
G. The permittee, his agents, or employees removed a vehicle involved in a collision prior to the arrival of the police, and a person, as a result of such
collision, suffered death or injury, or the driver of an involved vehicle, or a party to such collision, was under the influence of an intoxicant of any nature,
or there is evidence that such vehicle was involved in a hit and run collision;
H. The permittee, his agents, or employees charged for services not performed, equipment not employed or used, services or equipment not needed, or
otherwise materially misstated the nature of any service performed or equipment used. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1411: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
The permittee and all persons employed by permittee in vehicle towing operations shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter
1, article 2 of this title. The applicant for an identification card under this article shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and shall possess a valid
driver's license issued by the state of California. In addition to the criteria set forth in section 4-1-203 of this title, the police chief shall deny the
identification card if the applicant:
A. Has been convicted of reckless driving or driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics within seven (7) years preceding filing of the application.
B. Has been convicted of a moving traffic violation within one year preceding filing of the application.
C. Has physical impairments which create an unreasonable risk to persons or property in the performance of vehicle towing operations.
D. When one or more of the findings is negative to the applicant, an identification card may be conditionally issued to the applicant where unique
circumstances exist, and provided that appropriate conditions are imposed to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et
seq.)
4-2-1412: REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
Any identification card issued under this article shall be automatically revoked upon the suspension or revocation of the cardholder's California driver's
license. (1962 Code § 6-21.101 et seq.)
4-2-1413: HEARING FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
A. Where the identification card is denied pursuant to section 4-2-1411 of this article, the applicant has fourteen (14) days from the date of the denial to
appeal the decision to the transportation official for a hearing.
B. Prior to the suspension or revocation of an identification card, the holder of the identification card shall be notified in writing of the grounds for
suspension or revocation, and a hearing before the transportation official shall be held thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10)
days prior to such hearing.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 108/797
C. Where the identification card is automatically revoked pursuant to section 4-2-1412 of this article, the identification card holder shall be notified in writing
of the grounds for the automatic revocation and the identification card holder has seven (7) days from the date of the automatic revocation to appeal
the decision to the transportation official for a hearing. (Ord. 02-O-2401, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-2-1414: DECISION ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
The decision of the transportation official regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of the identification card shall be rendered within five (5) days of
the hearing. The decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the findings and reasons for the decision, and the applicant or holder of the identification
card shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 02-O-2401, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-2-1415: APPEAL TO TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
Any final decision of the transportation official denying, suspending or revoking an identification card under this article, may be appealed to the traffic and
parking commission. Any appeal shall be filed with the transportation official within fourteen (14) days of the decision by the transportation official. The
traffic and parking commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal, and the appellant shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of such hearing. The
hearing shall be held under the rules of procedure adopted by the traffic and parking commission. The traffic and parking commission shall have the
authority to sustain, modify, or overrule the decision of the transportation official. The decision shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the decision
and the appellant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. Any decision rendered by the traffic and parking
commission under this section shall be final and shall not be appealable to city council. (Ord. 02-O-2401, eff. 6-20-2002)
Article 15. Automobile Parking And Shuttle Services
4-2-1501: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of automobile parking and shuttle service where movement of vehicles is on or over any
public street, alley, right of way, or public property without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-
1999)
4-2-1502: DEFINITION:
"Automobile parking and shuttle service" shall mean any person, firm, or corporation engaging in the activity of parking or shuttling vehicles for patrons,
guests, or other persons, whether employed by or under contract to the business or other organization for which the vehicles are being parked or whether
such activity is operated independently. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1503: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements of section 4-1-102 of this title, at the time of filing the application with the city the applicant shall furnish the following
information:
A. The name and location of the business to be served and a signed statement from the owner or manager of the business to be served that there is a
need for the services of the automobile parking shuttle service;
B. Information as to the seating or other capacity of the business operation to be served;
C. The hours of operation and the number of employees of the automobile parking and shuttle service who will be assigned to carry out the activity for
which the permit is sought;
D. The name, location, and telephone number where a responsible person, employee, or agent of the automobile parking and shuttle service will be
available at all times during hours of operation;
E. The location or locations where vehicles will be parked or stored during operation;
F. The routes to be used between any passenger loading zone or other vehicle pick up point and the parking or storage location;
G. A signed agreement in the form required by city from the owner or lessee of any parking facility designated as the parking or storage location as to that
facility's availability to accept permittee's vehicles, the number of spaces in such parking facility, and estimates of the percent of usage of the facility
prior to, and subsequent to, the proposed use by permittee. In cases where the parking facility is part of a building or premises devoted to other uses
which require off street parking, the agreement shall also include information as to the number of parking spaces which were required by law to be
provided in the parking facility to serve such other uses when said uses were established. Such agreement shall also contain a provision that the
written contract or covenant between the applicant and the operator of any parking facility designated as the parking or storage location, cannot be
cancelled without at least thirty (30) days' notice to the other party and to the city; and
H. The location of any proposed signs and any proposed attendant stands. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 109/797
4-2-1504: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In addition to the criteria set forth in section 4-1-103 of this title, the permit shall be issued unless the transportation official finds that:
A. The proposed automobile parking and shuttle service would unduly interfere with normal traffic flow on public streets, alley, or other public property, or
would create a hazard to public safety.
B. Any of the automobile parking and shuttle service owner(s), including, without limitation, the corporate officers of a corporation, fail to meet the criteria
set forth in section 4-1-103 of this title. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1505: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. An automobile parking and shuttle service shall not park or leave standing at the following locations, any vehicle for which automobile parking and
shuttle service is rendered:
1. Upon a public street, alley, or public property unless written authorization has been granted by the city.
2. Upon any private property unless the written authorization has been granted by the owner or lessee of such property.
B. An automobile parking and shuttle service shall at all times maintain the permit required by this article at the site of its operations, or at such other site
as may be designated by the permit.
C. Any person violating this section shall be subject to an administrative citation as provided by title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this code or such other
penalties as determined by the city prosecutor. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 10-O-2588, eff. 10-22-2010)
4-2-1506: SPECIAL SHORT TERM TEMPORARY PERMIT:
A. In a situation involving a nonrecurring special event or an urgent need to commence automobile parking and shuttle service operations prior to the time
an application can be processed for regular permit issuance, a short term temporary permit for a period of operation not exceeding forty five (45)
calendar days may be issued upon the submittal of an application therefor, accompanied by the applicable fees and the indemnification and certificate
of issuance required by this article.
B. The permittee, or any person employed by or engaged in automobile parking and shuttle service operations that seeks a special short term temporary
permit as described in subsection A of this section, shall not be required to obtain an identification card as set forth in section 4-2-1510 of this chapter,
except as provided in subsection C of this section.
C. An automobile parking and shuttle service that obtains a special short term temporary permit more than twice in a twelve (12) month period shall be
required to obtain identification cards for the owner(s) or corporate officer(s) of the automobile parking and shuttle service as required in section 4-2-
1510 of this chapter.
D. All temporary permit applications as described in subsection A of this section shall be subject to review by the police department. If the police
department determines that additional traffic control is necessary to protect the public safety and welfare due to the impacts of the permit or the event
for which parking or shuttle service is being provided, then police or other appropriate personnel shall be assigned as deemed appropriate by the police
department and the applicant shall compensate the city for the cost of such personnel by depositing the anticipated cost of such personnel prior to their
assignment. Any specially assigned personnel shall be deemed to be on regular duty. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-
2008)
4-2-1507: INDEMNIFICATION:
It shall be a condition of each permit issued pursuant to this article that the permittee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, and its
council and each member thereof, and every officer and employee of the city, from any and all liability or financial loss resulting from any suits, claims,
losses, or actions brought by any person and from all costs and expenses of litigation brought against the city, and its council and each member thereof,
and any officer or employee of the city, by reason of injury to any person, including, but not limited to, officers and employees of the permittee, or damage,
destruction, or loss of property of any kind whatsoever and to whomsoever it may belong, including, but not limited to, that of the permittee, resulting
directly or indirectly from any or all activities and operations of the permittee, or any person employed by the permittee, performed under or pursuant to
such permit or any or all activities, operations, and conditions in any manner connected therewith or pertaining thereto. Such indemnity shall include, but
not be limited to, any and all liabilities, demands, claims, damages, losses, costs, and expenses caused, or alleged to have been caused, by any negligent
or other act of any such permittee. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1508: INSURANCE:
Upon issuance of the permit, and at all times during the time the permit is in effect, the permittee shall comply with the following insurance requirements:
A. The permittee shall carry, maintain, and keep in full force and effect, a policy or policies of comprehensive general liability insurance with minimum limits
of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit coverage and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate against
any injury, death, loss or damage as a result of wrongful or negligent acts or omissions by the permittee.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 110/797
B. The permittee shall carry, maintain, and keep in full force and effect, insurance coverage commonly known as garage keeper's legal liability coverage
with minimum limits of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate.
Garage keeper's legal liability coverage may be secured as a separate insurance policy or secured as part of an insurance policy or secured as part of
an insurance policy providing other required coverages.
C. The permittee shall carry, maintain, and keep in full force and effect, a policy or policies of comprehensive vehicle liability insurance covering personal
injury and property damage with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit, covering any vehicle in
the possession of the permittee, its agents and employees in conjunction with the operation of vehicles pursuant to the permit.
D. The permittee shall carry, maintain, and keep in full force and effect workers' compensation insurance as required by law.
E. Deductibles not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per occurrence are authorized in connection with the comprehensive general liability
coverage, garage keeper's legal liability coverage, and comprehensive vehicle liability coverage.
F. The permittee shall maintain on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance on the city's form, showing that the policies of insurance
required by this section are in effect in the required amounts and showing the amount of any deductibles. The policies of insurance required by this
section shall contain an endorsement naming the city as an additional insured. All of the policies required under this section shall contain an
endorsement specifically stating that the coverage contained in the policies affords insurance pursuant to the terms and conditions as set forth in this
section.
G. The insurance provided by the permittee shall be primary to any coverage available to city. The policies of insurance required by this section shall
include provisions for waiver of subrogation.
H. The insurance required by this section shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1509: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTION ON TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
In addition to the restrictions imposed on the transfer of permits in section 4-1-112 of this title, the permit shall not be transferred if at the time the transfer
form is completed by the applicant, less than sixty (60) days remains until expiration of the permit. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1510: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
The permittee and any person employed by, or engaged in automobile parking and shuttle service operations and who drives a vehicle of a customer, or
who handles keys of a vehicle of a customer shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title. In addition to
the criteria set forth in section 4-1-203 of this title, the transportation official shall deny, suspend or revoke the identification card if the applicant:
A. Has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative characteristics.
B. Has made a material misrepresentation in the application.
C. Within the preceding seven (7) years from the date of application, the applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to reckless driving or driving
under the influence of alcohol or narcotics within seven (7) years preceding the filing of the application in any state.
D. Within the preceding twelve (12) month period from the date of the application, the applicant has been convicted or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more
moving violations or has been determined to be at fault by the department of motor vehicles in two (2) or more accidents in any state.
E. The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age and does not possess a valid driver's license issued by the state of California or the applicant's
driver's license issued by the state of California has been suspended or revoked. The identification card shall be automatically revoked upon the
suspension or revocation of applicant's California driver's license.
F. Has physical impairments which create a material risk to persons or property.
When one or more of the findings is negative to the applicant, an identification card may be conditionally issued to the applicant where unique
circumstances exist, and provided the appropriate conditions are imposed to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-
1999)
4-2-1511: AUTOMATIC REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
Any identification card issued under this article shall be automatically revoked upon the suspension or revocation of the identification card holder's
California driver's license. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1512: HEARING FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 111/797
A. Where the identification card is denied pursuant to section 4-2-1510 of this chapter, the applicant has fourteen (14) days from the date of the denial to
appeal the decision to the transportation official for a hearing.
B. Prior to the suspension or revocation of an identification card, the holder of the identification card shall be notified in writing of the grounds for
suspension or revocation, and a hearing before the transportation official shall be held thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10)
days prior to such hearing.
Where the identification card is automatically revoked pursuant to section 4-2-1511 of this chapter, the identification card holder shall be notified in
writing of the grounds for the automatic revocation and the identification card holder has seven (7) days from the date of the automatic revocation to
appeal the decision to the transportation official for a hearing. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1513: DECISION ON DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
The decision of the transportation official regarding the denial, suspension or revocation of the identification card shall be rendered within five (5) days of
the hearing. The decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the findings and reasons for the decision, and the applicant or holder of the identification
card shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1514: APPEAL TO TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
Any final decision of the transportation official denying, suspending or revoking an identification card under this article may be appealed to the traffic and
parking commission. Any appeal shall be filed with the transportation official within fourteen (14) days of the decision by the transportation official. The
traffic and parking commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal, and the appellant shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of such hearing. The
hearing shall be held under the rules of procedure adopted by the traffic and parking commission. The traffic and parking commission shall have the
authority to sustain, modify, or overrule the decision of the transportation official. The decision shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the decision
and the appellant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. Any decision rendered by the traffic and parking
commission under this section shall be final and shall not be appealable to city council. (Ord. 99-O-2328, eff. 6-4-1999)
4-2-1515: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation official shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of
this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. The permittee and any person employed by, or
engaged in automobile parking and shuttle service operations and who drives a vehicle of a customer, or who handles keys of a vehicle of a customer who
is required to obtain an identification card pursuant to section 4-2-1510 of this chapter, shall comply with such rules and regulations and any violation shall
constitute a violation of this code subject to an administrative citation as provided by title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this code or such other penalties as
determined by the city prosecutor. (Ord. 10-O-2588, eff. 10-22-2010)
Article 16. Vacant Lot Businesses
4-2-1601: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or carry on any business on a vacant lot without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (1962
Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-1602: DEFINITION:
"Vacant lot" shall mean any lot which is not improved with a substantial permanent building. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-1603: LANDSCAPING AND IMPROVEMENTS:
Vacant lots upon which a business is conducted shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Shall be graded.
B. Shall be graveled or paved, with the exception that the following areas shall be covered with grass:
1. The front ten feet (10') adjacent to the sidewalk of any lot on Wilshire Boulevard.
2. The front five feet (5') adjacent to the sidewalk of any lot on any other street.
C. Where the vacant lot is adjacent to a residentially zoned property, a fence or hedge six feet (6') in height shall be placed on the property to shield the
business activity from the residential zone. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-1604: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 112/797
The criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title, with the exception of subsection A thereof, shall apply to issuance or denial of the permit. Minor deviations from
the provisions of section 4-2-1603 of this article may be granted in issuing the permit, where such modifications will not impact upon surrounding uses, and
will not adversely affect the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
4-2-1605: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. Any business on a vacant lot shall comply with permitted uses under the city zoning regulations.
B. Any used car business shall be prohibited on a vacant lot; provided further, that used cars may be offered for sale if incidental to an adjacent new car
dealership. (1962 Code § 6-5.01 et seq.)
Article 17. Veterinary Clinics And Pet Shops
4-2-1701: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, carry on, or conduct an animal hospital or a pet shop without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this
title. (1962 Code § 5-1.401 et seq.)
4-2-1702: DEFINITIONS:
PET SHOP: Any store or place of business where animals, birds or reptiles are sold, or kept for sale, or for the purpose of dealing therein.
VETERINARY CLINIC: Any clinic, hospital, or other establishment for the treatment of sick, injured or diseased animals. (1962 Code § 5-1.401 et seq.)
4-2-1703: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title shall be applicable, except for subsection A thereof, to the issuance or denial of the permit. (1962 Code § 5-
1.401 et seq.)
4-2-1704: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Veterinary clinics and pet shops are prohibited within fifty feet (50') of any residence, dwelling house, lodging house, hotel, school, theater, church, or
restaurant. (1962 Code § 5-1.401 et seq.)
Article 18. Alcoholic Beverage Services
4-2-1801: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
No person who serves or delivers, or is the manager of a person who serves or delivers any alcoholic beverage to a customer in a place of business
engaged in dispensing beer, wine or distilled spirits to customers under a state on-sale license shall engage in such activity without an identification card
issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title. Such person shall have an identification card in their possession at all times when engaged
in this activity. (1962 Code § 4-6.01 et seq.)
4-2-1802: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF IDENTIFICATION CARD:
The provisions of section 4-1-203 of this title shall not be applicable for an identification card required by this article. An identification card required by this
article shall be issued upon compliance with the requirements of section 4-1-202 of this title. (1962 Code § 4-6.01 et seq.)
4-2-1803: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED PRIOR TO PERFORMING SERVICE:
No business issued a state on-sale license shall employ or engage any person to perform the services requiring an identification card under section 4-2-
1801 of this article unless such person has a valid identification card in their possession. (1962 Code § 4-6.01 et seq.)
Article 19. Outdoor Vending On Private Property
4-2-1901: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or carry on any outdoor vending business except in compliance with the provisions of this article and as authorized by a permit
issued by the Director of Planning and Community Development pursuant to chapter 1, article 1 of this title. The permit shall specify any conditions
imposed upon the outdoor vending business pursuant to section 4-1-105 of this title. Pursuant to section 4-1-102 of this title, applications for an outdoor
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 113/797
vending permit shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Community Development in a form satisfactory to the Director. This article shall not apply
to a person engaged in, conducting or carrying on the business of vending on a sidewalk pursuant to a valid permit issued pursuant to article 22 of this
chapter. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-1902: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
BUSINESS TRIANGLE: That real property within the City of Beverly Hills that is circumscribed by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of
Santa Monica Boulevard north roadway, and the centerline of Crescent Drive.
CART: A nonmotorized vehicle.
OUTDOOR VENDING: The selling of goods from a cart.
VENDOR: A person who conducts or carries on an outdoor vending business on private property within the business triangle, pursuant to this article. (Ord.
94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-1903: OUTDOOR VENDING LOCATIONS:
Unless otherwise specifically authorized pursuant to this Code, no outdoor vending shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Outdoor vending may be
permitted on private property that is located within the business triangle pursuant to a permit issued in compliance with this article. In addition, the City
Council may authorize outdoor vending on property owned by the City, other than the public right-of-way. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-1904: PROPERTY OWNER AS COAPPLICANT:
Both the vendor and the owner of the private property on which a vendor intends to conduct business shall be designated as applicants on an application
for an outdoor vending permit. Each applicant shall be individually and separately responsible for compliance with the requirements of this article and the
outdoor vending permit. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-1905: VIOLATIONS OF RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Any violation of the provisions of this Code, or any violation of an outdoor vending permit issued pursuant to this article, shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the outdoor vending permit as provided in chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-1906: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A vendor shall comply with the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. Sales from carts shall be limited to the following products: nonalcoholic beverages; bakery goods, such as pastries, cakes, and similar items; frozen
desserts, such as ice cream, yogurt, popsicles, and similar novelties; fruits; and flowers. No products, other than beverages, shall be cooked or heated
at the cart.
B. No more than one cart shall be located on any site area, as that term is defined in title 10 of this Code. Furthermore, carts shall be located only in those
outdoor areas on private property which are at least four hundred fifty (450) square feet in size.
C. No cart shall exceed a height of eight feet (8'), a width of three feet (3') or a length of eight feet (8').
D. Carts shall not impede or obstruct ingress to or egress from any private property or any structure.
E. Carts shall at all times remain at least six feet (6') from the public sidewalk.
F. Carts shall not be permitted in any private surface parking lot or parking structure, nor shall any cart occupy any existing parking space or loading area
or impede or obstruct ingress to or egress from any parking space or loading facility.
G. Carts shall be stored, and fully enclosed by walls and a roof, within a permanent building when not in use for the purpose of conducting an outdoor
vending business.
H. Carts shall not be accompanied by accessories, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas except that one chair and one
umbrella may be provided for the purpose of allowing the vendor or an employee to be seated in shade. In addition, notwithstanding the foregoing, a
vendor shall place and maintain a clearly designated litter receptacle in the immediate vicinity of the cart.
I. Prior to leaving an outdoor vending location, a vendor shall pick up and place in an appropriate litter receptacle all trash and refuse which consists of
materials used by the vendor in preparing or dispensing products, including any packages or containers left by patrons.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 114/797
J. No vendor shall make an outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device or musical instrument for the purpose of attracting the attention of
potential patrons.
K. All carts, all signage associated with any cart, and all accessories permitted or required pursuant to subsection H of this section, shall be subject to
architectural review pursuant to title 10, chapter 3, article 30 of this code.
L. Vendors shall comply with all requirements and regulations of the Los Angeles County department of health. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-2-1907: APPLICATION FEE:
The city council shall establish, by resolution, an application fee to recover the costs of processing an application for an outdoor vending permit. (Ord. 94-
O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
Article 20. Fortune Telling
4-2-2001: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the business of "fortune telling" as defined in this article without a permit issued under the provisions of
chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
4-2-2002: DEFINITION:
For the purposes of this article, the following term shall have the following meaning:
FORTUNE TELLING: The practicing or carrying on of any art, profession, or business which shall include, but not be limited to, the telling of fortunes,
forecasting of futures, or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, for or without pay. "Fortune telling"
shall include, but not be limited to, psychic reading, occult reading, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship,
seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind reading, tarot card reading, reading tea leaves, telepathy, or other craft, art science,
cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, and crystal reading of any kind or nature. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff.
10-7-1995)
4-2-2003: EXEMPTIONS:
A. This article shall not apply to the licensed practice of psychology, psychotherapy, counseling, hypnotherapy, hypnotism, or any other related licensed,
healing art regulated pursuant to the state Business and Professions Code.
B. This article shall not apply to any person who is engaged solely in providing fortune telling services to groups by demonstrations of mind reading,
mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other
persons and at which no questions are answered except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.
C. This article shall not apply to any religious service. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
4-2-2004: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the application requirements set forth in section 4-1-102 of this title, at the time of filing the application with the city, the applicant shall
provide the following information:
A. The two (2) most recent previous business and residential addresses of the applicant;
B. Photographs and fingerprints of the applicant and each employee;
C. The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth;
D. The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city or state has had a license or
permit for a fortune telling business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor;
E. The applicant's convictions, within the last five (5) years, of the crimes specified in subsection 4-2-2005A1 of this article.
F. In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the fortune telling business or service is or will be located, the
application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the property acknowledging that a fortune telling business or
service is or will be located on the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, applicant shall furnish the name and address of the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 115/797
owner of record of the property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the fortune telling business or
activity is or will be located. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
4-2-2005: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF FORTUNE TELLING PERMIT:
A. In lieu of the general criteria set forth in subsection 4-1-103A of this title, a permit authorizing a person to engage in, carry on or conduct the business of
"fortune telling", as that term is defined in this article, shall be issued by the Beverly Hills police department official designated by the city to act on the
permit application, unless the official finds that one or more of the following criteria exists:
1. The applicant has been convicted within the last five (5) years in any court of competent jurisdiction of: a) violating section 484 of the California
Penal Code, and the act which led to the conviction was committed while the applicant was simultaneously engaged in the act of "fortune telling" as
that term is defined in section 4-2-2002 of this article; b) violating section 532 of the California Penal Code, and the act which led to the conviction
was committed while the applicant was simultaneously engaged in the act of "fortune telling" as that term is defined in section 4-2-2002 of this article;
or c) violating a statute of any jurisdiction outside California where the statute prohibits the same activity prohibited by section 484 or section 532 of
the California Penal Code, and the act which led to the conviction was committed while the applicant was simultaneously engaged in the act of
"fortune telling" as that term is defined in section 4-2-2002 of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the Beverly Hills police department, either by
questioning the applicant or by using the information available to law enforcement agencies, to determine whether the applicant is disqualified under
this subsection A1 from receiving a fortune telling permit.
2. The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application.
3. Operation of the fortune telling business will disturb the peace in any adjacent "residential zone" (as defined in title 10, chapter 3 of this code) of the
city during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. A fortune telling business disturbs the peace pursuant to this subsection
A3 if noise caused by the operation of the fortune telling business is audible inside any residence located in an adjacent residential zone.
4. If the application is for renewal of a permit, that the applicant has violated conditions of the previous permit, or that the applicant satisfies any one of
the other criteria in this section.
5. The building, structure, premises, or the equipment used to conduct the business activity, fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire,
building and safety laws of the state of California or of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
4-2-2006: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF FORTUNE TELLING PERMIT:
A. In lieu of the reasons set forth in section 4-1-107 of this title, a permit authorizing a person to engage in, carry on or conduct the business of "fortune
telling", as that term is defined in this article, shall be revoked or suspended by the city for any of the following reasons:
1. The permittee satisfies any one of the criteria set forth in subsection 4-2-2005A1, A2, A3, or A5 of this chapter.
2. The permittee has failed to comply with any condition imposed by the City on the issuance of the permit. (Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
Article 21. Tobacco And Electronic Cigarette Retailer Permitting Regulations
4-2-2101: PURPOSE:
The City Council recognizes the inherent danger of tobacco products and that the use of tobacco products has devastating health and economic
consequences. The City Council further recognizes that tobacco use is the leading cause of preventable illness and death in the United States, and that
tobacco product use is started and established primarily during adolescence.
Allowing tobacco products to be sold in the City increases access to these harmful and dangerous products and does not promote the City's image as a
healthy city. To that end, no tobacco products shall be sold in the City except as specifically enumerated below.
For those limited number of tobacco and electronic cigarette retailers that will be permitted to operate in the City, the City Council seeks to encourage
responsible tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco and electronic cigarette related laws, especially those that
discourage the sale or distribution of electronic cigarettes, tobacco and nicotine products to minors. (Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2102: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR: A taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco
product or any byproduct produced by the tobacco product, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating to menthol, mint, wintergreen, fruit,
chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, or spice.
CIGAR LOUNGE: A retail or wholesale tobacco shop that: a) contains an enclosed area in or attached to the retail or wholesale tobacco shop that is
dedicated to the use of cigars and pipes, b) does not sell cigarettes, e-cigarettes, vaping products or flavored tobacco products, and c) only permits
patrons who are twenty one (21) years of age or older to enter the premises.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: An electronic and/or battery operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an
inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. The
term does not include any inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any tobacco product that imparts a characterizing flavor. A public statement or claim made or disseminated by the
manufacture of a tobacco product, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 116/797
such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence that the tobacco product is
a flavored tobacco product.
PERMITTEE: Any proprietor holding a permit issued by the City pursuant to this article.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or
character.
PROPRIETOR: A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten
percent (10%) or greater interest in the stock assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall
be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share ultimate control over the day to day operations of a business.
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE PARAPHERNALIA: Includes cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, electronic cigarettes and their component
parts, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco or products
prepared from tobacco.
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE RETAILER (Sometimes Referred To As RETAILER): Any person or business that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or other place at which the person or business sells, offers for sale, or exchanges or offers to exchange for any form of consideration,
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia.
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE RETAILER PERMIT: A permit issued by the City authorizing a proprietor to engage in tobacco and electronic
cigarette retailing.
TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE RETAILING: The selling, offering for sale or exchanging or offering to exchange for any form of consideration
tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco or electronic cigarette paraphernalia products.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Includes: a) any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, cigarillo, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, and smokeless tobacco; and b) any electronic cigarette. "Tobacco
product" does not include a drug, device, or combination product authorized for sale by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a tobacco use
cessation product. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 18-O-2758, eff. 9-21-2018; Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2103: TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE RETAILER PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a tobacco product or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia in the City without first obtaining a tobacco
and electronic cigarette retailer permit.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco and
electronic cigarette retailer permit pursuant to this article for each location at which that activity is to occur.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title ("general provisions"), the issuance, suspension, and revocation of a tobacco and
electronic cigarette retailer permit, and all related procedures, shall be governed solely by this article.
D. Failure to obtain a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit prior to commencing the sale of tobacco products, or tobacco or electronic cigarette
paraphernalia, shall constitute a separate violation of this section for each day such business is carried on without a permit.
E. Beginning May 21, 2019, the City shall not issue any new tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permits except as set forth in sections 4-2-2115 and
4-2-2116 of this article. (Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2104: APPLICATION PROCESS:
A. An application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct tobacco and
electronic cigarette retailing and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. An application is required for each location where
retail tobacco or electronic cigarettes or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia sales are to occur.
B. All applications shall be submitted to the Finance Department on a form supplied by the City and shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor;
2. The business name, address, and telephone number of the fixed location for which a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit is sought;
3. The name and mailing address authorized by each applicant to receive all permit related communications and notices (the "authorized address").
Failure to supply an authorized address shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection B2
of this section;
4. Whether any applicant has previously been issued a permit pursuant to this article that is or was at any time suspended or revoked and, if so, the
dates of the suspension period or the date of revocation;
5. Proof that the location for which a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit is sought has been issued a valid State tobacco and/or electronic
cigarette retailer permit, as applicable, by the California Board of Equalization; if such permits are not issued by the California Board of Equalization
for electronic cigarette retailers, this proof of permit shall not be required for electronic cigarette sales;
6. Such other information as the City deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 117/797
C. All information required to be submitted in order to apply for a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be updated whenever the information
changes. A tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer shall provide the City in writing with any updates within ten (10) business days of a change.
D. Beginning May 21, 2019, the City shall not accept or process an application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit, except in compliance
with section 4-2-2115 or 4-2-2116 of this article. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018; Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2105: PERMIT FEES:
The annual fee for a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council. A tobacco and electronic
cigarette retailer permit is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-2-2106: ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
A. Upon receipt of both the application for a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit and the permit fee, the Director of Finance or his or her
designee, shall issue a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit to the extent allowed pursuant to section 4-2-2115 or 4-2-2116 of this article
unless:
1. The application is incomplete or the information presented in the application is inaccurate or false;
2. The application seeks authorization for tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing by a proprietor who has a suspended or revoked tobacco and
electronic cigarette retailer permit;
3. The application seeks authorization for tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this article, or that is unlawful pursuant
to any other local, State or Federal law;
4. The proprietor has not obtained a valid State tobacco and/or electronic cigarette retailer permit, as applicable, from the California Board of
Equalization. If such permits are not issued by the California Board of Equalization for electronic cigarette retailers, then failure to obtain a permit
from the California Board of Equalization shall not be grounds for denial of an application to sell electronic cigarettes pursuant to a tobacco and
electronic cigarette permit from the City;
5. The City has information that the applicant or his or her agents or employee(s) has violated any local, State or Federal tobacco or electronic cigarette
control law at the location for which the permit or renewal of the permit is sought within the preceding thirty (30) day period.
B. A tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be valid for one year and must be renewed not later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of
the permit, but no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the permit. Unless revoked on an earlier date, all permits shall expire one year
after the date of issuance, or December 31, 2020, whichever is earliest.
C. A tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To reinstate a permit that has expired, or
to renew a permit not timely renewed, the proprietor must:
1. Submit the permit fee plus a reinstatement fee and the application renewal form; and
2. Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco and electronic cigarette
paraphernalia after the permit expiration date and before the permit is renewed.
D. Where the permit is not approved or renewed, the Director of Finance shall notify the applicant of the specific grounds for the denial in writing. The
notice of denial shall be served personally or by mail not later than five (5) calendar days after the date of the denial. If by mail, the notice shall be
placed in a sealed envelope, with postage paid, addressed to the applicant at the address as it appears on the application. The giving of notice shall be
deemed complete at the time of deposit of the notice in the United States mail without extension of time for any reason. In lieu of mailing, the notice
may be served personally by delivering to the person to be served and service shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. Personal service
to a corporation may be made by delivery of the notice to any person designated pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure to be served for the
corporation with summons and complaint in a civil action. (Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2107: PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE:
A. A tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit is nontransferable and is valid only for the person(s) and location specified in the permit application. If
a permittee changes business location, that permittee must obtain a new permit prior to acting as a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer at the new
location. If a business permitted to conduct tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing is sold, the new owner must obtain a permit for that location before
acting as a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a person may apply for a hardship exemption allowing for the transfer of a permit. Applications shall be
submitted to the Finance Department on the form supplied by the City and shall contain, at minimum, the following information:
1. Name of applicant;
2. Relationship of applicant to the permittee (if applicable);
3. Explanation of why the transfer request is being requested;
4. Explanation of why the applicant will suffer undue hardship if the transfer request is denied;
5. Any supporting document;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 118/797
6. Any additional information requested by the Director of Finance.
The Director of Finance shall approve the transfer request if the applicant can demonstrate the applicability of the non-transferability clause would
constitute an undue hardship on the applicant. Examples of undue hardship include, but are not limited to, death of a family member whose name
was originally listed on the permit application. The Director of Finance shall act upon the application within thirty (30) days of receipt of the transfer
request and shall provide notice to the applicant of the decision. If the request is denied, the Director of Finance shall notify the applicant of the
specific grounds for the denial in writing. The Director of Finance's decision on the transfer request shall be final. The notice of denial shall be served
personally or by mail not later than five (5) calendar days after the date of the denial. If by mail, the notice shall be placed in a sealed envelope, with
postage paid, addressed to the applicant at the address as it appears on the application. The giving of notice shall be deemed complete at the time
of deposit of the notice in the United States mail without extension of time for any reason. In lieu of mailing, the notice may be served personally by
delivering to the person to be served and service shall be deemed complete at the time of such delivery. Personal service to a corporation may be
made by delivery of the notice to any person designated pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure to be served for the corporation with summons and
complaint in a civil action. (Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2108: PERMIT CONVEYS A LIMITED, CONDITIONAL PRIVILEGE:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit any status or right
other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer at the location identified on the face of the permit. A tobacco
and electronic cigarette retailer permit does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code section
6404.5. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-2-2109: REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION:
A. It is the responsibility of each tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer to be informed of the laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco and electronic
cigarette retailer's permit.
B. The sale of tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia from other than a fixed location, including, but not limited to, tobacco
and electronic cigarette retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited and no permit shall be issued under this article for any such activity.
C. The display of an advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia that promotes the same or distribution of
such products from the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such product can be
obtained at that location without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer's permit pursuant to this article, is
prohibited.
D. The tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer shall prominently display the tobacco and electronic cigarette retail permit in a publicly and readily visible
location at the permitted location.
E. No person engaging in tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco and electronic cigarette
paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of thirty (30) years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm
that the recipient is at least the minimum age under State law to purchase and/or possess the tobacco products or electronic cigarettes.
F. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by State law for the purchase or possession of any tobacco product or electronic cigarette
shall engage in tobacco and electronic cigarette retailing.
G. It shall be a violation of the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit for a permittee or his or her agent or employee to violate any local, State, or
Federal tobacco or electronic cigarette related law.
H. It shall be unlawful for any tobacco retailer or any of the tobacco retailer's agents or employees to sell or offer for sale any flavored tobacco product.
This regulation is not intended to impose any requirement which is different from, or in addition to, any requirement under the provisions of the Family
Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act relating to tobacco product standards, premarket review, adulteration, misbranding, labeling, registration,
good manufacturing standards, or modified risk tobacco products. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 18-O-2758, eff. 9-21-2018)
4-2-2110: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
The City shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco product and electronic cigarette purchases or possession against a person who
otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the age of a purchaser of tobacco or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia (hereinafter
"youth decoy") if the potential violation occurs when: a) the youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a Code
enforcement official of the City; or b) the youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through
subcontracting, by the Los Angeles County Health Department or the California Department of Health Services. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-2-2111: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE RETAILER PERMIT:
A. In addition to any other remedy authorized by law, the following penalties shall be imposed if the City finds that the permittee or his or her agents or
employees has or have violated any of the provisions of this article:
1. Upon a finding by the City of a first violation within any five (5) year period, the permittee shall pay a civil penalty to the City in the amount of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 119/797
2. Upon a finding by the City of a second violation within any five (5) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be
suspended for ninety (90) days and the permittee shall pay a civil penalty to the City in the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
3. Upon a finding by the City of a third violation within any five (5) year period, the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be revoked and
the permittee shall pay a civil penalty to the City in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
B. A tobacco or electronic cigarette retailer permit shall be revoked if the City finds that either one or both of the following conditions exist:
1. One or more of the bases for denial of a permit under section 4-2-2106 of this article existed at the time the application was made or at any time
before the permit was issued.
2. The information contained in the permit application, including supplemental information, if any, is found to be false in any material respect.
C. In the event the City suspends or revokes a permit, written notice of the suspension or revocation shall be served upon the permittee within five (5) days
of the suspension or revocation in the manner prescribed in section 4-2-2106 of this article. The notice shall contain:
1. A brief statement of the specific grounds for such suspension or revocation;
2. A statement that the permittee may appeal the suspension or revocation by submitting an appeal, in writing, in accordance with the provisions of
section 4-2-2112 of this article, to the City Clerk, within ten (10) calendar days of the date of service of the notice; and
3. A statement that the failure to appeal the notice of suspension or revocation will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing,
and the suspension or revocation will be final.
D. A permittee for whom a permit suspension is in effect must remove all tobacco products, tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia and tobacco
and electronic cigarette related advertising from public view at the address that appears on the suspended permit. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
4-2-2112: DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION; APPEALS:
A. Any applicant or permittee aggrieved by a decision denying, suspending, or revoking a permit, may appeal the decision by submitting a written appeal
to the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation. The written appeal shall
contain:
1. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant;
2. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested action should be reversed or
otherwise set aside;
3. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; and
4. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. The appeal hearing shall be conducted by an Administrative Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to section 1-3-317 of this Code.
C. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the
City either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
D. Failure of any person to file a timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an
administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof.
E. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
F. Any suspension or revocation of a permit shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal which is properly and timely filed pursuant to this section.
G. After December 31, 2020 this section shall only apply to cigar lounges and hotels. (Ord. 10-O-2587, eff. 10-1-2010; amd. Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-
2019)
4-2-2113: HEARINGS REGARDING DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. At the time set for hearing, the Hearing Officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of the City, the appellant, and other competent persons respecting
those matters or issues specifically listed by the appellant in the notice of appeal.
B. The proceedings at the hearing shall be electronically recorded. Either party may provide a certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the
proceedings at the party's own expense.
C. The Hearing Officer may, upon request of the appellant or upon request of the City, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon
his or her own motion.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 120/797
D. In any proceedings under this article, the Hearing Officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts. Hearings need
not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. (Ord. 10-O-2587, eff. 10-1-2010)
4-2-2114: FORM AND CONTENTS OF DECISION; FINALITY OF DECISION:
A. If it is shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, that one or more bases exist to deny, suspend, or revoke the permit, the hearing examiner shall
affirm the City's decision to deny, suspend, or revoke the permit. The decision of the hearing examiner shall be in writing and shall contain findings of
fact and a determination of the issues presented.
B. The notice of decision shall inform the appellant that the decision is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code
of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. Copies of the decision shall be delivered to the parties personally or sent by certified mail to the address shown on
the appeal. The decision shall be final when signed by the hearing examiner and served as provided in this section. (Ord. 10-O-2587, eff. 10-1-2010)
4-2-2115: EXCEPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any section to the contrary, a cigar lounge that is operating in compliance with State law and that holds a valid tobacco and electronic
cigarette retailer permit on March 25, 2019 may apply annually to renew an existing tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit, and said
application shall be approved if all criteria set forth in section 4-2-2106 of this article is satisfied.
B. Notwithstanding any section to the contrary, hotels may apply annually to renew or obtain a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit, and may
sell tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia so long as the following requirements are met:
1. Tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia shall only be sold to hotel guests who can present proof of current hotel
occupancy;
2. Any sale of tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia shall be conducted through a hotel "service", such as through
concierge services, guest services, room service, and not through a retail location that is open to the public; and
3. The tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia shall not be publicly displayed in the hotel.
C. All other tobacco and electronic cigarette retailers that hold a valid tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer permit on May 21, 2019 shall be permitted to
apply annually to obtain a renewal of that permit, and will be permitted to operate as tobacco and electronic cigarette retailers until December 31, 2020.
D. To the extent the City is preempted by State law, a person shall not be prohibited from selling tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia if that
paraphernalia will be used for a substance that is not a tobacco product or flavored tobacco product. (Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2116: HARDSHIP EXEMPTION:
A. Any permittee, other than cigar lounges and hotels, that wishes to operate a tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer on or after January 1, 2021, may
apply for one hardship exemption as provided for in this section.
B. A permittee must submit a complete application for a hardship exemption at least ninety (90) days before the permit is set to expire, but no sooner than
six (6) months before the permit is set to expire. Such application shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the Director of Finance and shall be
accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. The permittee shall bear the burden of proof in establishing by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the application of section 4-2-2115 of this article to the permittee's business is unreasonable, and will cause
significant hardship to the permittee by not allowing the permittee to recover his or her investment backed expectations. The permittee applying for the
exemption shall furthermore be required, in order to meet its burden of proof, to submit the documents set forth in this section.
C. A complete application for a hardship exemption shall include the following:
1. The permittee's name and street address of business;
2. The address to which notice is to be mailed, at the permittee's option, a telephone number and/or email address;
3. The permittee's signature;
4. A declaration, under penalty of perjury, that all the information in the application is true and correct;
5. The term of the requested extension;
6. Documentation relevant to the information requested in subsection D of this section; and
7. The required filing fee.
D. In determining whether to grant a hardship exemption to the permittee, and in determining the appropriate length of time that the permittee will be
authorized to continue to operate as a retailer, the Hearing Officer, or City Council on appeal by the applicant, may consider, among other factors:
1. The percentage of the retail sales over the last three (3) years that have been derived from tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette
paraphernalia;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 121/797
2. The amount of investment in the business;
3. The present actual and depreciated value of any business improvements dedicated to the retail sale of tobacco products and tobacco and electronic
cigarette paraphernalia;
4. The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional non-confidential equivalent;
5. The remaining useful life of the business improvements that are dedicated to the sale of tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette
paraphernalia;
6. The remaining lease term of the business, if any;
7. The ability of the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer to sell other products;
8. The opportunity for relocation of the business and the cost of relocation; and
9. A business plan demonstrating how long the business will need to sell tobacco products and tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia to
recoup any investment backed expectations, and a plan for phasing out the sale of those products.
E. The hardship exemption hearing shall be conducted by an Administrative Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to section 1-3-317 of this Code and shall
be conducted pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 4-2-2113 of this article. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at
least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the permittee by the City either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the
permittee personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the address shown on the hardship exemption
application.
F. Within forty five (45) days after a completed application is filed, the Hearing Officer shall open the hearing on the hardship exemption. The Hearing
Officer shall receive and consider evidence presented by the permittee, and shall determine whether to grant or deny the hardship exemption, and if
granting the hardship exemption, the length of time that the tobacco and electronic cigarette retailer will be permitted to operate. The Hearing Officer
shall make written findings in support of the decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive, unless a timely and complete
appeal is filed by the applicant with the City Clerk pursuant to subsection G of this section.
G. Any decision of the Hearing Officer may be appealed by the applicant by filing a complete notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days
after notice of the decision was mailed to the applicant. To be deemed complete, the notice of appeal shall be signed by the applicant, shall state the
grounds for disagreement with the decision of the Hearing Officer, and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City
Council.
H. Failure of any person to file a timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an
administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the hardship exemption.
I. A retailer may continue to sell tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco and electronic cigarette paraphernalia while a hardship exemption application is
pending before a Hearing Officer or on appeal to the City Council.
J. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. (Ord. 19-O-2783,
eff. 7-5-2019)
4-2-2117: ENFORCEMENT:
A. In addition to any other remedy, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such violation continues.
B. In addition to other remedies provided by this article or by other law, any violation of this article may be enforced by a civil action brought by the City
Prosecutor, including for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings; Civil or Criminal Code enforcement proceedings; and
suits for injunctive relief. The City may recover reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit in any civil action brought by the City Prosecutor to remedy
any violation of this article.
C. Any violation of this article may, in the discretion of the City Prosecutor, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors.
D. Violations of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances subject to abatement by the City.
E. In addition to criminal sanctions and other remedies set forth in this article, administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article
3 of this Code against any person violating any provision of this article. Imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of administrative
penalties imposed shall be conducted pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code.
F. The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
G. The City shall not enforce a violation of subsection 4-2-2109H of this article against any tobacco retailer that is lawfully operating in the City until
December 21, 2018. (Ord. 10-O-2587, eff. 10-1-2010; amd. Ord. 18-O-2758, eff. 9-21-2018; Ord. 19-O-2783, eff. 7-5-2019)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 122/797
Article 22. Sidewalk Vending
4-2-2201: DEFINITIONS:
A. For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise:
BUSINESS TRIANGLE: That real property within the City that is circumscribed by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of Santa Monica
Boulevard north roadway, and the centerline of Crescent Drive.
CERTIFIED FARMERS' MARKET: A location operated in accordance with chapter 10.5 (commencing with section 47000) of division 17 of the
California Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
CIVIC CENTER: The grounds, buildings, structures and open areas bounded by Crescent Drive to the west, Civic Center Drive to the east, North Santa
Monica Boulevard to the north, and Burton Way/South Santa Monica to the south.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Finance of the City or his or her designee.
FIRE STATION: Any facility where fire engines and other equipment of the City's Fire Department are housed.
FOOD: Any type of raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, including any food product or beverage.
MERCHANDISE: Any tangible goods or items that are not food.
PARK: A public park designated in section 8-1-101 of this Code.
POLICE STATION: Any facility where police vehicles and other equipment of the City's Police Department are housed.
ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR: A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
SIDEWALK: A public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path or walkway specifically designed for pedestrian travel.
SIDEWALK VENDOR: A person who vends from a vending cart or from one's person, upon a sidewalk.
STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR: A sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.
SWAP MEET: A location operated in accordance with article 6 (commencing with section 21660) of chapter 9 of division 8 of the California Business
and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
TEMPORARY SPECIAL PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area,
including but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming,
parades, outdoor concerts, festivals, carnivals, and street fairs.
VEND OR VENDING: To barter, exchange, sell, offer for sale, display for sale, or solicit offers to purchase, food or merchandise, or to require someone
to negotiate, establish, or pay a fee before providing food or merchandise, even if characterized as a donation.
VENDING CART: A pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for vending, that is
not a vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2202: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of vending on a sidewalk without a permit issued under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 19-
O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2203: PERMIT APPLICATION:
Every person, prior to engaging in, conducting, or carrying on the business of vending on a sidewalk, shall file an application for a permit with the Director,
accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall be in a form prescribed
by the Director and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
A. The legal name, current mailing address and telephone number of the applicant;
B. If the applicant is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, corporation, or other entity, the name and business address of the principal;
C. A copy of a California driver's license or identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number, or a social security number. The number
collected shall not be available to the public for inspection, is confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the permit or
comply with a State law or State or Federal court order;
D. A description of the food and/or merchandise for vending;
E. A description, map, or drawing of the areas in which the sidewalk vendor proposes to operate;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 123/797
F. The dimensions of the vending cart;
G. The hours per day and the days per week during which the sidewalk vendor proposes to operate, and whether the sidewalk vendor intends to operate
as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;
H. A current valid Business Tax registration certificate issued pursuant to title 3, chapter 1, article 2 of this Code;
I. A current valid California seller's permit number pursuant to section 6067 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code;
J. Proof of a policy or policies of comprehensive general liability insurance with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence,
combined single limit coverage and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate against any injury, death, loss or damage as a result of
wrongful or negligent acts or omissions by the permittee, with an endorsement naming the City as an additional insured. In addition, the permittee is
required to carry workers' compensation and automobile coverage sufficient to meet requirements of the State of California. The insurance shall comply
with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this Code;
K. If a vendor of food, certification of completion of a food handler course and proof of all required approvals from the Los Angeles County Department of
Public Health, including a current mobile food facility permit;
L. An agreement by the applicant to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers and employees, for any damage or injury caused to the City as a
result of the sidewalk vending conduct or activity. The form of indemnification shall conform to the rules and regulations issued pursuant to section 3-4-
5 of this Code;
M. Certification by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true to his or her knowledge and belief; and
N. Any other reasonable information regarding the time, place, and manner of the proposed sidewalk vending activities.
Applications for permits shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the date requested for issuance of the permit. Renewal permit applications
shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of any existing permit. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2204: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In lieu of the criteria for issuance or denial of a permit under provisions of section 4-1-103 of this title, the Director shall approve the issuance of a permit
unless he or she determines that:
A. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative
characteristics;
B. The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application;
C. The applicant has failed to demonstrate an ability to conform to the operating requirements set forth in section 4-2-2215 of this article;
D. The applicant has failed to provide a complete application, after having been notified of the requirement to produce supplemental information or
documents;
E. The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of nearby residents to the quiet and peaceable enjoyment of their property;
F. If the application is for the renewal of a permit or a subsequent permit, the applicant has failed to pay all previous administrative fines, completed all
community service or completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this article; or
G. If the application is for the renewal of a permit or a subsequent permit, the applicant has had a permit issued under this article rescinded within the last
twelve (12) months. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2205: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Where the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this Code, of the denial and the
reasons therefor. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2206: CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON PERMIT:
Any person issued a permit pursuant to this article shall comply with all operating requirements that are imposed as part of the permit pursuant to sections
4-2-2215 and 4-2-2216 of this article. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 124/797
4-2-2207: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2208: PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE:
No permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2209: RESCISSION OF PERMIT:
The Director may rescind a permit issued under this article for any of the following reasons:
A. The sidewalk vendor has made a material misrepresentation in the application;
B. The sidewalk vendor has committed violations of this article on four (4) or more separate days;
C. The sidewalk vendor has failed to maintain the insurance required by this article;
D. The sidewalk vendor has failed to comply with Federal, State or local laws and regulations; or
E. The sidewalk vendor has conducted the vending in a manner which endangers the public health or safety. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2210: NOTICE OF HEARING AND GROUNDS FOR RESCISSION:
Prior to the rescission of a permit issued under this article, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for the rescission of the permit and a
hearing shall be held thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with section 1-5-101 of this Code to the permittee at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2211: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Where the conduct or the activity of the permittee creates an imminent peril to the public health or safety, a permit issued pursuant to this article may be
summarily suspended upon notice to the permittee, provided that the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing within three (3) days thereafter and any
emergency suspension shall not exceed fifteen (15) days pending a hearing under section 4-2-2210 of this article. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2212: CONDUCT OF HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR RESCISSION:
The Director shall promulgate rules of procedure for such hearings, which shall recognize the right of the permittee to be heard and to call witnesses on
the permittee's behalf. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2213: DECISION OF HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR RESCISSION:
The decision of the Director shall be rendered within five (5) days of the close of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing and shall set forth the findings
and reasons for the decision, and the permittee shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff.
2-8-2019)
4-2-2214: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any final decision of the Director to issue, deny, rescind or suspend a permit pursuant to this article may be appealed to the City Council in accordance
with title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2215: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as otherwise permitted in this article or this Code, no sidewalk vendor shall vend in the following locations:
1. Any public property other than a sidewalk, including, without limitation, streets, alleys, plazas, and City-owned parking structures, as defined in
subsection 5-6-1308B of this Code;
2. Within two hundred feet (200') of any other sidewalk vendor;
3. Within five hundred feet (500') of the nearest property line of any property on which a place of worship or a large or general child day care facility is
located while the same is in use;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 125/797
4. Within five hundred feet (500') of the nearest property line of any property on which a school building or facility, including an athletic field, is located
while the same is in use, including for afterschool child care, enrichment classes and sports;
5. Within one hundred feet (100') of a public picnic area, playground area or playground equipment while the same is in use;
6. Within one hundred feet (100') of a public community center, athletic field, softball/baseball diamond, basketball court, handball court, pickle ball
court, tennis court, soccer field, or volleyball court while the same is in use;
7. Within one hundred feet (100') of a police officer, firefighter, or emergency medical personnel who is actively performing his or her duties or providing
services to the public;
8. If a stationary sidewalk vendor, within any sidewalk that is not a minimum width of eight feet (8'), exclusive of curb width;
9. Within one hundred feet (100') of a street intersection or traffic signal;
10. Within one hundred feet (100') of any entrance to a park or Beverly Canon Gardens Park (241 N. Canon Drive in the City);
11. Within one hundred feet (100') of the portion of any City facility that is renting merchandise to the public or where rental merchandise is stored;
12. Within twenty five feet (25') of a litter receptacle, bike rack, or restroom;
13. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, traffic signal controller, or streetlight controller;
14. Within twenty five feet (25') of a door or emergency exit of any business during the hours that the business is open to the public or to persons
having or conducting lawful business within the premises;
15. Within twenty five feet (25') of a pedestrian entrance/exit or elevator lobby of a City-owned parking structure;
16. Within five feet (5') of metered parking along a curb;
17. Within four feet (4') of non-metered parking along a curb;
18. Within three feet (3') of a red curb if not adjacent to a parking meter or loading zone or a curb if posted for permanent no parking;
19. Within one hundred feet (100') of an alley, parking lot or parking garage vehicle entrance/exit;
20. Within ten feet (10') of any driveway or driveway approach;
21. Within ten feet (10') of a marked crosswalk;
22. Within ten feet (10') of the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk;
23. Within any median strip or dividing section;
24. Within forty feet (40') of a tour bus loading zone or staging zone during the time posted;
25. Within twenty five feet (25') of a limousine staging zone during the time period posted;
26. Within twenty five feet (25') of a bus stop, trolley stop, taxi stand, bus bench, or bus shelter;
27. Within twenty five feet (25') of a space lawfully used by an automobile parking service pursuant to a valid valet parking permit issued pursuant to
article 15 of this chapter during any time when such automobile parking service is authorized to operate valet parking operations;
28. Within two hundred feet (200') of a police station or fire station;
29. Within two hundred feet (200') of a subway station entrance or exit;
30. Within fifteen feet (15') of an automated teller machine or parking pay station;
31. If a stationary sidewalk vendor, within a park owned or operated by the City if the City has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively
permits the sale of food or merchandise by the concessionaire;
32. Within two hundred feet (200') of the Civic Center;
33. Within two hundred feet (200') of a backup City Emergency Operations Center, identified in the City's Emergency Operations Plan, during the
operational period;
34. Along Rodeo Drive between North Santa Monica Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard beginning May 15th of each calendar year and ending the
following September 15th and beginning the third Thursday of November of each calendar year and ending the following January 7th;
35. Along North Beverly Drive between North Santa Monica Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard; along North Canon Drive between North Santa Monica
Boulevard and Wilshire Boulevard; and along South Beverly Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard beginning May 15th of each
calendar year and ending the following September 15th and beginning the third Thursday of November of each calendar year and ending the
following January 7th;
36. Within the Business Triangle and along South Beverly Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard for the duration of the special
event permit for the annual car show hosted on Rodeo Drive, provided that any notice provided by the City to affected businesses or property owners
under such special event permit is also provided to sidewalk vendors with a valid current sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this article;
37. Within the Business Triangle and along South Beverly Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard for the duration of the special
event permits for each of the Spring and Fall Beverly Hills Art Shows, provided that any notice provided by the City to affected businesses or
property owners under such special event permits is also provided to sidewalk vendors with a valid current sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant
to this article;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 126/797
38. Within the Business Triangle and along South Beverly Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard for the duration of the special
event permit for each of the Summer BOLD Kickoff, Holiday Lighting Celebration, and the Next Night Block Party, provided that any notice provided
by the City to affected businesses or property owners under such special event permits is also provided to sidewalk vendors with a valid current
sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this article;
39. Within the Business Triangle and along South Beverly Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Olympic Boulevard for the duration of the special
event permit for any large scale special event which includes a street closure, provided that any notice provided by the City to affected businesses or
property owners under such special event permit is also provided to sidewalk vendors with a valid current sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to
this article;
40. Along the route of, or within five hundred feet (500') of the route of, the Los Angeles Marathon until five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the day of such
marathon, provided that any notice provided by the City to affected businesses or property owners under the special event permit for the marathon is
also provided to sidewalk vendors with a valid current sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this article;
41. Within Beverly Canon Gardens Park (241 N. Canon Drive in the City) beginning May 15th of each calendar year and ending the following
September 15th and beginning the third Thursday of November of each calendar year and ending the following January 7th;
42. Within Greystone Mansion and Gardens: the Doheny Estate (905 Loma Vista Drive in the City);
43. Within the Lilly Pond located in Beverly Gardens Park, just north of Santa Monica Boulevard north roadway between North Canon Drive and North
Beverly Drive;
44. If a stationary sidewalk vendor, within areas zoned exclusively for residential use or within one hundred seventy feet (170') of any areas zoned
exclusively for residential use;
45. Within five hundred feet (500') of a permitted certified farmers' market or a permitted swap meet within the hours of operation;
46. Within five hundred feet (500') of an area designated for a temporary special event permit for the duration of the temporary special permit, provided
that any notice provided by the City to affected businesses or property owners under such special event permit is also provided to sidewalk vendors
with a valid current sidewalk vending permit issued pursuant to this article;
47. Within fifty feet (50') of a public art installation; or
48. Within one hundred feet (100') of an open air dining area.
B. Sidewalk vendors shall ensure that all required insurance is maintained for the duration of the permit, and shall show proof of insurance to a City official
upon request.
C. Sidewalk vendors must at all times maintain a clearance of not less than forty eight inches (48") on all sidewalks so as to enable persons to freely pass
while walking, running, or using mobility assistance devices.
D. In areas not zoned exclusively for residential use, sidewalk vending is permitted only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M., except that the hours of operation shall not be more restrictive than the hours of operation imposed on other businesses or uses on the
same street.
E. In areas zoned exclusively for residential use or within one hundred seventy feet (170') of any areas zoned exclusively for residential use, sidewalk
vending is permitted only between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
F. If a sidewalk vendor of food other than solely prepacked food, the vendor shall possess hand sanitizer for use by the sidewalk vendor and patrons.
G. If a stationary sidewalk vendor, the vendor shall maintain a clearly designated litter receptacle in the immediate vicinity, marked with a sign requesting
use by patrons. The litter receptacle must be large enough to accommodate customer litter without resort to existing litter receptacles located on any
block for use by the general public. The vendor's litter receptacle may not be left on the sidewalk upon leaving any vending location. The vendor shall
not empty its litter receptacle into a City refuse container.
H. If a roaming sidewalk vendor vending from a vending cart, the vendor shall maintain a litter receptacle attached to the vending cart large enough to
accommodate customer litter without resort to existing litter receptacles located on any block for use by the general public and marked with a sign
requesting use by patrons. The vendor shall not empty its litter receptacle into a City refuse container.
I. Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a neat, sanitary, hazard and trash-free ten foot (10') radius of the vending location during hours of operation, and prior
to leaving any vending location, the sidewalk vendor shall pick up, remove, and dispose of all litter generated by the vending operations within a ten
foot (10') radius of the vending location in the sidewalk vendor's litter receptacle. Sidewalk vendors shall not throw, deposit, or leave, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, or left, any litter, food, or other discarded or abandoned objects, in or upon any street, sidewalk, gutter, storm drain, inlet, catch
basin, or other drainage structure, or upon any public or private land in the City, so that the same might be or become a pollutant.
J. Sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities that falls on public property.
K. If a stationary sidewalk vendor remains in place for one hour or longer, the sidewalk vendor must be located within one hundred feet (100') of a publiclyaccessible
restroom.
L. Sidewalk vendors must ensure that food and merchandise are securely fastened to the vending cart in such a manner that the food or merchandise
does not fall off or extend outside of the frame of the vending cart.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 127/797
M. All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the vending cart or carried by the sidewalk vendor.
N. Vending carts shall not be placed on any public property other than a sidewalk.
O. Vending carts shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to poles, signs, trees,
lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans or traffic barriers, or other objects on
public property or in the public right-of-way.
P. All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor must be attached to the vending cart or the sidewalk vendor's person, and shall
not be electrical, flashing, wind-powered or animated.
Q. A vending cart approved by the Los Angeles County Department of Health to vend one type or types of food may not be used to vend a different type of
food.
R. Sidewalk vendors shall possess at all times, while vending, a copy of a valid current permit issued pursuant to this article, as well as any other permit
required by any other appropriate governmental agency. The sidewalk vendor permit shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the vending cart
or the sidewalk vendor's person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a vending cart or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall
wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner. With respect to all other required permits, the sidewalk vendor shall display a copy of the
permit upon request by authorized City employees.
S. If a sidewalk vendor of food, the vendor shall possess and display in plain view on the vending cart a valid current mobile food facility permit from Los
Angeles County Department of Public Health and, if issued by the Los Angeles County Department of Health, a grade.
T. Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all applicable State and local laws, as amended from time to time, including without limitation, title 5, chapters 1,
"Noise Regulations", and 6, article 14, "Aggressive Solicitation", of this Code, division 1 of title 11 (County Health Code) and division 1 of title 8 (Public
Health Licenses) of the Los Angeles County Code, State food labeling and preparation requirements, Fire Codes and regulations, and the Americans
With Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336) and other disability access standards (both State and Federal).
U. Not including an attached litter receptacle, vending carts shall not exceed a length of four feet (4'), a width of four feet (4'), or a height, including a roof,
umbrella, or awning, of ten feet (10') provided that any umbrella or awning shall be no less than seven feet (7') above the surface of the sidewalk.
V. Vending carts shall not be accompanied by accessories, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, benches and umbrellas except that one chair and
one umbrella may be provided for the purpose of allowing the vendor or an employee to be seated in shade.
W. Vending carts for merchandise, if stored in the City, shall be fully enclosed by a structure with walls and a roof when not in use for sidewalk vending.
X. Vending carts for food shall be stored in accordance with all requirements of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health.
Y. Vending carts shall have locking wheels to prevent uncontrolled movement.
Z. Vending carts shall not be left unattended.
AA. Vending carts shall not be left overnight on any public property or rights-of-way.
BB. Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:
1. Using verbal or physical conduct that would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her safety;
2. Intentionally causing physical contact with any member of the public;
3. Following a person who walks away after expressing a desire to not be vended to;
4. Approaching a person on a bicycle or occupying a motor vehicle other than a commercial vehicle or emergency vehicle offering services to the
public;
5. Approaching a person standing in line, seated in an outdoor dining area, or similarly stationary for a specific purpose, so that to a reasonable person,
it is apparent that the purpose would be frustrated by relocation to avoid the sidewalk vendor;
6. Intentionally blocking the path of the person being vended to or who has expressed a desire to not be vended to;
7. Impeding or obstructing ingress to or egress from any private property or any structure, parking space or loading facility;
8. Renting merchandise to customers;
9. Vending lottery tickets, alcohol, cannabis, adult oriented material, or tobacco or electronic cigarette products;
10. Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of vending;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 128/797
11. Vending illegal or counterfeit merchandise;
12. Bartering, exchanging, selling, offering for sale, displaying for sale, or soliciting offers to purchase services;
13. In parks, interfering in any way with anyone engaged in a physical activity or approaching spectators who are watching a sporting activity to vend;
14. To prevent dangerous distractions, making any outcry, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, or using any sound devices or musical instrument for the
purpose of attracting the attention of potential patrons;
15. Damaging public or private property, including trees, shrubs, grass, flowers, plants or vegetation;
16. Causing vehicles to stop in traffic lanes or persons to stand in traffic lanes or parking spaces; or
17. Vending in a manner that blocks or obstructs the free movement of vehicles, including parked vehicles. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2216: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
Every sidewalk vendor shall obtain an identification card issued under chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and shall have a valid and current identification card
in their possession at all times when engaged in sidewalk vending. Such card shall be displayed to any police officer or other authorized City employee
upon request of such police officer or authorized City employee. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
4-2-2217: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS:
A. A violation of this article by a sidewalk vendor who has a valid current permit issued by the City pursuant to this article is punishable only by an
administrative citation pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code, in amounts not to exceed the following:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.
2. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.
3. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.
4. The City may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations.
B. A person engaged in sidewalk vending without a valid current permit issued pursuant to this article is punishable only by an administrative citation
pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code, in amounts not to exceed the following, in lieu of the amounts set forth in subsection A of this
section:
1. Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation.
2. Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.
3. One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.
4. Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the City pursuant to this article, the administrative citations set forth in this paragraph shall be reduced to the
amounts set forth in subsection A of this section.
C. It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every hour during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision
or requirement of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by any person.
D. A violation of this article shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor and a person alleged to have violated any provision of this article shall
not be subject to arrest except when permitted under law. Further, failure to pay an administrative citation issued pursuant to this article shall not be
punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those authorized herein shall
not be assessed.
E. When assessing administrative citations pursuant to this article, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall take into consideration the person's ability to
pay the fine. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and
shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person may request an ability-to-pay
determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive
collection program.
F. If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b) of California Government Code section 68632, the City shall accept, in full satisfaction,
twenty percent (20%) of an administrative citation imposed pursuant to this article.
G. The Administrative Hearing Officer may allow a person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative citation, may waive the
administrative citation, or may offer an alternative disposition. (Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-2019)
Chapter 3
OTHER ACTIVITIES REQUIRING REGULATORY PERMITS
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 129/797
Article 1. Motion Picture Productions And Still Photography
4-3-101: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the business of motion picture productions or still photography on private or public property without a
permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-102: DEFINITIONS:
MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTIONS: All activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and
commercially prepared radio broadcasts.
STILL PHOTOGRAPHY: All activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial still photographs. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-103: EXEMPTIONS:
The permit requirements of this article shall not be applicable to the following:
A. Reporters, photographers, or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service, radio broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in on the
spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.
B. Any motion picture, television, or radio broadcasting studio operating at its established or fixed place of business in the City. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et
seq.)
4-3-104: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
In addition to the application requirements of section 4-1-102 of this title, the application shall be accompanied by the written consent of all property
owners and persons in possession of property which are affected by the activity regulated by this article as designated in the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Director of Finance Administration. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-105: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be based on the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title, excluding subsection A1 thereof; and with the additional criteria
that the permit shall be denied where engaging in the activity will create a substantial risk of injury to persons or property. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-106: TERM OF PERMITS:
Fees for permits regulating motion picture productions and still photography shall be on a per diem basis as designated by Council resolution, and the
permit shall designate the specific effective dates of the permit. A change of dates may be granted by the City official granting the permit, upon a showing
of good cause by the permittee. (1962 Code § 6-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-107: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall engage in any motion picture, radio, or television production or still photography activity which would constitute a hazard to public safety or
interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet, peaceful, and unmolested enjoyment of their property. (1962 Code § 6-9.01
et seq.)
4-3-108: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director of finance administration is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the
council, governing the activity regulated by this article. All permittees under this article shall comply with such rules and regulations. (1962 Code § 6-9.01
et seq.)
Article 2. Parades And Assemblies
4-3-201: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on the activity of a parade or assembly without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. The permit may authorize the use of sound amplifying equipment in conjunction with a parade or assembly without a permit issued under article 5
of this chapter. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 130/797
4-3-202: DEFINITIONS:
ASSEMBLY: Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, gathering, or group of twenty five (25) or more persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination
thereof, having a common purpose, design, or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or other public place, which assembly substantially
inhibits the usual flow of pedestrian or vehicular travel or which occupies any public area, other than a "parade", as defined in this section.
PARADE: Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, having
a common purpose, design, destination, or goal; upon any public place, which parade, march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, or promenade does
not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or control. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.)
4-3-203: EXEMPTIONS:
The permit application provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
A. Funeral processions.
B. Spontaneous parades or assemblies occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three (3) days of such parade or assembly,
provided that the organizers thereof give written notice to the city at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such parade or assembly. Such written notice
shall contain all of the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the parade or assembly. This person or these persons shall
be considered a permittee for the purposes of this article.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, if any, and of the organizer or responsible head of such
organization by whom or on whose behalf the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will chair the parade or assembly and who will be responsible for its conduct.
4. The location and date of the proposed parade or assembly, including the assembly area, disbanding area, and the route to be traveled.
5. An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the parade or assembly and an estimate of the approximate number
of persons who will be observing the parade or assembly.
6. The time at which the parade or assembly will start and conclude.
7. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure that participants are properly directed.
C. The city manager or the city manager's designee may deny permission to conduct the parade or assembly within eighteen (18) hours of the submission
of the notice pursuant to subsection B of this section if the city manager or the city manager's designee makes a finding requiring denial pursuant to
subsection B of this section. If the city manager makes a finding requiring denial pursuant to that subsection, the city manager shall immediately
provide notice of the denial, including the reason for the denial, by telephone to the permittee and shall also provide written notice of the denial
including the reason for the denial. If the permittee provides a fax number for the purpose of receiving notices, the city manager shall provide written
notice of the denial by fax immediately upon making the denial decision. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-204: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this article shall file an application with the city manager or the city manager's designee, on forms
supplied by the city.
B. The application shall be filed with the city manager or the city manager's designee in accordance with the following time limitations:
1. Not less than six (6) days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in or
along the roadway portion (other than within crosswalks) of the following streets in the city of Beverly Hills: Wilshire Boulevard, Olympic Boulevard,
Santa Monica North Roadway, Sunset Boulevard, La Cienega Boulevard, or Robertson Boulevard;
2. Not less than four (4) days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in
or along the roadway portion (other than within crosswalks) of any other street in a commercial zone within the city of Beverly Hills;
3. Not less than three (3) days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in a residential zone, or
outside of the roadway in a commercial zone, but within the sidewalk or any other portion of the public right of way;
4. Not less than two (2) days prior to the date of the parade or assembly if the parade or assembly is proposed to take place in whole or in part on, in or
along any park or other publicly owned traditional public forum in the city of Beverly Hills not governed by subsections B1 through B3 of this section.
C. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the parade or assembly.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, if any, and of the organizer or responsible head of such
organization by whom or on whose behalf the parade or assembly is proposed to be conducted.
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will chair the parade or assembly and who will be responsible for its conduct.
4. The location and date of the proposed parade or assembly, including the assembly area, disbanding area, and the route to be traveled.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 131/797
5. An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the parade or assembly and an estimate of the approximate number
of persons who will be observing the parade or assembly.
6. The hours when the parade or assembly will start and conclude.
7. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure that participants are properly directed.
8. The minimum and maximum speeds that the parade is to travel, if applicable, and the maximum number of platoons or units, if any, in the parade or
assembly and the maximum and minimum interval of space to be maintained between the units of such parade or assembly.
9. The maximum length of such parade or assembly in miles or fractions thereof.
10. The number and type of vehicles in the parade or assembly, if any.
11. Whether any of the participants in the parade or assembly will be wearing any type of mask or other face covering.
12. A statement to be signed by the person seeking the permit that the permittee will hold harmless and indemnify the city of Beverly Hills, its elected
officials, officers, employees and agents from any damages which may arise as a result of the conduct of the parade or assembly for which the
permit is sought.
13. If the assembly or the parade set up or dispersal is to be conducted on private property, the applicant must submit with the application proof of the
property owner's permission for the property to be used for that purpose.
D. Within twenty four (24) hours after the submission of the application, the city manager or the city manager's designee must notify the applicant, in
writing, whether the application is complete. If no such notice is given within twenty four (24) hours after submission, the application will be deemed to
be complete. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-205: GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. In lieu of the criteria for issuance or denial of a permit under the provisions of section 4-1-103 of this title, the following criteria shall apply to issuance or
denial of a parade or assembly permit.
B. The permit shall be issued by the city manager or the city manager's designee unless there is a finding that:
1. The information contained in the application is false or intentionally misleading; or
2. The parade or assembly is proposed to take place in the roadway portion of any street in a commercial zone between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or between the hours of four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M., Monday through Friday,
unless the parade or assembly will occur on a national holiday; or
3. The parade or assembly is proposed for a time and location for which another parade or assembly permit has been previously issued; or
4. The parade or assembly will require the simultaneous closure of the roadway portion of more than two (2) streets that run in a generally north and
south direction between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, or between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Saturday, unless the parade or assembly will occur on a national holiday; or
5. The parade or assembly will require the simultaneous closure of the roadway portion of more than two (2) streets that run generally in an east and
west direction between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., Monday through Friday, or between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Saturday, unless the parade or assembly will occur on a national holiday; or
6. The parade or assembly, by itself or in combination with other parades or assemblies, will require closure of the roadway portion of any street in a
commercial zone for more than three (3) hours in any one day between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., Monday
through Friday; or
7. The proposed route or location of the parade or assembly traverses a street or other public right of way that was scheduled for maintenance,
construction or repair prior to the application for that parade or assembly permit and the conduct of the parade or assembly would interfere with such
maintenance, construction or repair or the maintenance, construction or repair would represent a threat to the health or safety of the participants in
the parade or assembly; or
8. The proposed area for the assembly or for the set up or dispersal of a parade could not physically accommodate the number of participants
expected to participate in the parade or assembly, as reflected in the application completed and submitted pursuant to the requirements of this
article; or
9. The parade would result in a violation of any Federal, State or local law or regulation.
Upon making any finding set forth in this subsection, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall deny the permit application.
C. As a condition of the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this article, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may require that the
parade or assembly be limited to a portion of the width of the street or right-of-way upon which the applicant seeks to conduct the parade or assembly,
provided that such limitation does not limit or interfere with the conduct of the parade or assembly or cause the parade or assembly to violate any other
provision of this article or any other Federal, State or local law or regulation. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-206: NONDISCRIMINATION:
The official designated by the City to act on permit applications shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in
granting or denying applications; and, shall not deny any permit based upon political or religious grounds or reasons. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 132/797
4-3-207: NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall approve or deny the permit application within the following time limitations, and shall notify in
writing the applicant of the action taken:
If the permit is sought under the provisions of subsection 4-3-204B1 or B2 of this article, within two (2) days after submission of the application. If the
permit is sought under the provisions of subsection 4-3-204B3 or B4 of this article, within twenty four (24) hours after submission of the application.
B. If the permit is denied, the notice of denial shall set forth the reasons for denial. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-208: INTERFERENCE WITH PARADE OR ASSEMBLY:
No person shall knowingly join or participate in any parade or assembly conducted under permit from the City in violation of any of the terms of said permit,
nor knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade or assembly without the consent of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or
orderly conduct. (1962 Code § 4-9.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-209: PROHIBITIONS:
The following prohibitions shall apply to all demonstrations, rallies, picket lines, parades and assemblies:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess, while participating in any parade or assembly, any length of lumber, wood, or wood lath greater
than one foot (1') in length, unless such object is of wood, is blunted at its ends, and is one-fourth inch (1/4") or less in thickness and two inches (2") or
less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-fourths inch (3/4") in its thickest dimension.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any length of plastic pipe or metal greater than one foot (1') in length or greater than one-quarter
inch (1/4") in its thickest dimension.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of wood as specified in subsection A
of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque, or notice is constructed solely of a cloth, paper, or cardboard material no greater than one-quarter inch
(1/4") in thickness.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless
specifically authorized by a permit.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any projectile launcher or other device which is commonly used for the purpose of launching,
hurling, or throwing any object, liquid, material or other substance.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess weapons such as firearms, knives, swords, sabers or other bladed devices, axes, hatchets, ice
picks, razor blades, nun chucks or martial arts weapons of any kind, box cutters, pellet or BB guns, conducted electrical weapons (CEWs), including,
but not limited to, tasers or stun guns, metal/composite/wooden knuckles, or any chain greater than twenty inches (20") in length or greater than onefourth
inch (1/4") in diameter.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any balloons, bottles or any other container containing any flammable, biohazard, or other
noxious matter which is injurious, or nauseous, sickening or irritating to any of the senses.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any aerosol spray, tear gas, mace, pepper spray or bear repellant.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess glass bottles, whether empty or filled.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess shields made of metal, wood, hard plastic or any combination thereof.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess bricks, rocks, pieces of asphalt, concrete, pellets or ball bearings.
L. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess baseball or softball bats, regardless of composition or size; provided, however, that such items are
permissible when configured of cloth, cardboard, soft plastic, foam or paper for expressive purposes.
M. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess or wear, any gas mask or similar device designed to filter all air breathed and that would protect the
respiratory tract and face against irritating, noxious or poisonous gases.
N. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to abide by the instructions of a traffic control officer given for the purpose of accommodating traffic, including
emergency vehicles, through and across a parade route, demonstration, rally, picket line or assembly.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 133/797
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a disabled person from carrying a cane, walker, or similar device necessary for providing mobility so that the person
may participate in a demonstration, rally, picket line, parade or assembly. (Ord. 18-O-2753, eff. 5-25-2018)
4-3-210: CONTENT OF PERMIT:
In each permit, a copy of which shall be maintained and kept upon the person in charge of the parade or assembly at the parade or assembly site at all
times during the parade or assembly, including during assembly and dispersal, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, shall set forth the
following information as that information is set forth in the approved application:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the permit is issued.
B. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the sponsoring organization, if any.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the chairperson of the parade or assembly.
D. The date for which the parade or assembly is scheduled.
E. The assembly area for the parade or assembly.
F. The starting and ending time for the parade or assembly.
G. The minimum and maximum speeds at which the parade is to progress, if applicable.
H. The route which the parade or assembly will take.
I. The maximum number of platoons or units, if any, in the parade or assembly and the maximum and minimum interval of space to be maintained between
the units of such parade or assembly.
J. The maximum length of such parade or assembly in miles or fractions thereof.
K. The disbanding area for the parade or assembly and the disbanding time.
L. The number and type of vehicles in the parade or assembly, if any.
M. Whether participants in the parade or assembly shall be wearing masks.
N. The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure participants are properly directed.
The parade or assembly permit shall also set forth any condition imposed pursuant to subsection 4-3-205C of this article. Additionally, the permittee shall
advise all participants in the parade or assembly, of the terms and conditions of the permit, prior to the commencement of the parade or assembly. (Ord.
00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-211: CITY'S COSTS TO BE PAID BY PERSON OR ORGANIZATION RESPONSIBLE FOR PARADE OR ASSEMBLY:
A permittee under the provisions of this article shall reimburse the City for all traffic control costs incurred in connection with diverting traffic due to the
closure of streets. These costs shall be established by the City Council by resolution. No fee shall be charged based upon the need for security or
increased police protection due to the nature of the parade or assembly. (Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-212: VIOLATION:
Any violation of the terms or conditions of a parade or assembly permit, or a parade or assembly notice pursuant to section 4-3-203 of this article, by the
permittee or any participant in a parade or assembly is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
4-3-213: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any applicant or permittee pursuant to this article may seek judicial review of any decision made pursuant to this article in accordance with the provisions
of section 1-5-302 of this Code. (Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 134/797
Article 3. Dances
4-3-301: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct or carry on public dancing, and no person owning, controlling or managing any premises within the city shall allow public dancing
upon such premises without a public dance permit. The public dance permit shall be issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1, of this title. The
planning commission shall be the reviewing authority for applications to permit dancing in nightclubs within the business triangle and the director of finance
shall be the reviewing authority for all other public dance permit applications. If in the opinion of the director of finance a public dance permit application,
for which the director is the reviewing authority, merits review by the city council, the director may refer such application to the city council, and the city
council shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested permit. For the purposes of this section,
the "business triangle" shall mean the area bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard, south roadway,
and the centerline of the alley between Canon Drive and Crescent Drive. (1962 Code § 4-3.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 98-O-2295, eff. 5-1-1998)
4-3-302: DEFINITION:
"Public dancing" shall mean all dancing or dances in or upon premises to which the public, or a portion of the public, is admitted, except dances which are
not held for profit, and to which only bona fide members of organizations conducting the dances, and their bona fide guests are admitted, or to which only
bona fide friends of individuals conducting the dances, and their bona fide guests are admitted. (1962 Code § 4-3.01 et seq.)
4-3-303: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be based on the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title; and with the additional criteria that the permit shall be denied
unless such dancing is incidental to some other bona fide principal activity conducted on the premises by the applicant. (1962 Code § 4-3.01 et seq.)
4-3-304: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Music or other noise in connection with dancing or dances, public or otherwise, which disturbs the public peace shall be prohibited. (1962 Code § 4-3.01 et
seq.)
Article 4. Bingo
4-3-401: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on bingo without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (1962 Code § 4-7.201
et seq.)
4-3-402: DEFINITIONS:
BINGO: A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random.
NONPROFIT CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: A tax exempted organization, as defined in section 23701 of the state Revenue and Taxation Code and
nonprofit senior citizens organizations; provided, however, such organization shall also satisfy all of the following requirements:
A. Have an office or other place of business in the city;
B. Have members who reside in the city; and
C. Perform or offer charitable services which directly benefits, or which offer potential direct benefit to, residents of the city. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et
seq.)
4-3-403: QUALIFICATIONS FOR PERMIT:
To qualify for issuance of a permit for bingo the applicant shall meet the following requirements:
A. Be a nonprofit charitable organization or nonprofit senior citizen's organization meeting the requirements defined in section 4-3-402 of this article.
B. Such organization must own or lease the premises upon which the bingo is conducted.
C. Such organization must use such premises for an office or performance of purposes for which the organization was founded; provided further, such
premises are not required to be used exclusively by such organization. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et seq.)
4-3-404: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 135/797
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be based on the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title, and with the additional criteria that the permit shall be denied:
A. Where the applicant has previously engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise.
B. Where the kind or method of the bingo game, or the time when it will take place, or its duration are such that the game will not be in the interest of, and
is inimical to, the safety, convenience, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et seq.)
4-3-405: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
The following restrictions and prohibitions apply to bingo:
A. Bingo shall be prohibited between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. the next succeeding day.
B. The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for
each separate game which is held.
C. All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
D. Permittee's expenses for rental of property, overhead, and administrative expenses shall not exceed the lesser of: five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
month; or the portion of the proceeds derived from the bingo, not exceeding ten percent (10%) after deduction for prizes.
E. No person except the organization authorized to conduct the bingo shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo.
F. No person other than the permittee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. The bingo
shall be operated and staffed exclusively by members of permittee.
G. No person shall receive a profit, wage, or salary from a bingo.
H. Permittee shall not in any way represent that the bingo permit is an endorsement by the city.
I. All bingo shall be open to the public, and not restricted to the members of permittee.
J. No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.
K. No minor shall be allowed to participate in a bingo. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et seq.)
4-3-406: REPORTS REQUIRED:
On the first business day following any bingo, the permittee shall file a report with the police department stating the following information:
A. Amount of all monies derived from the bingo.
B. Itemization of all costs incurred from the bingo.
C. Net profits from the game, if any.
D. Itemization of all awards provided. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et seq.)
4-3-407: TERM OF PERMIT AND RENEWAL:
Permits issued for bingo shall expire ninety (90) days after issuance. Renewal applications shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to expiration of
the permit. (1962 Code § 4-7.201 et seq.)
Article 5. Amplified Sound
4-3-501: PERMIT REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 136/797
No person shall use, or operate any loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck or other
vehicle for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, or lectures or for transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons,
in or upon, any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place, or public property without first obtaining a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of
this title. (1962 Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
4-3-502: EXEMPTIONS:
The permit requirements of this article shall not be applicable to law enforcement personnel of government agencies acting in their official capacity. (1962
Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
4-3-503: DEFINITIONS:
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, or by which the human
voice, music, or any other sound is amplified. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the
occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include warning devices on authorized
emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or
attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. (1962 Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
4-3-504: FILING OF APPLICATION:
Permit applications shall be filed with the city a minimum of five (5) days prior to the date on which the permit is required. (1962 Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
4-3-505: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be based on the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title, excluding subsections A1 and A3 thereof; and with the following
additional criteria which require denial of the permit if:
A. The conditions of any motor vehicle movement are such that the use of the equipment would constitute a substantial and unreasonable interference to
traffic safety; or
B. The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that the use of the equipment would constitute a substantial detriment to traffic safety. (1962 Code § 4-
8.501 et seq.)
4-3-506: FEES AND TERMS OF PERMITS:
Fees for permits regulating amplified sound shall be on a per diem basis as designated by council resolution, and the permit shall designate the specific
effective dates of such permit. (1962 Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
4-3-507: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
The use or operation of sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. The use or operation of sound amplifying equipment shall be prohibited between the hours from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of the
next succeeding day;
B. No sound emanating from sound amplifying equipment shall exceed fifteen (15) dbA above the ambient as measured at any property line;
C. The volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be substantially and unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness within the area of audibility;
D. The only sounds permitted to be amplified shall be either music or human speech, or both. (1962 Code § 4-8.501 et seq.)
Article 6. News Racks
4-3-601: PURPOSE AND CRITERIA FOR REGULATIONS:
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of the placement, appearance, servicing, and insuring
of news racks on the public right of way so as to:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 137/797
A. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.
B. Restrict the unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into or egress from any residence or any place of
business or from the street to the sidewalks by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles.
C. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, and mailboxes and access to locations used
for public transportation purposes.
D. Eliminate newsracks which may result in a visual blight on the public rights of way or which may unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store
window displays, adjacent landscaping, and other improvements.
E. Maintain and protect the values of surrounding properties.
F. Reduce the unnecessary exposure of the city to personal injury and property damage claims.
G. Provide for and maintain the freedom of speech for newspapers or periodicals using newsracks for distribution purposes.
H. Preserve the unique atmosphere of the 200 - 400 blocks of N. Rodeo Drive and the "golden triangle".
I. Implement the city's urban design program. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 04-O-2448, eff.
6-4-2004)
4-3-602: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
BLOCK: One side of a street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets.
NEWSRACK: Any type of unmanned device placed upon any public right of way for the vending of, or free distribution of, newspapers, periodicals.
NEWSSTAND: Any stand, shelter, case, cabinet, box or other structure installed, used or maintained for the display, sale or storage of newspapers or
periodicals which is attended by the owner or his employee while making sales therefrom.
PREEXISTING PAPER: A newspaper or periodical that on November 1, 2003, was distributed on a particular block of the urban design program area from
a lawfully installed newsrack.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any public street, highway, sidewalk, parkway or alley.
URBAN DESIGN PROGRAM AREA: The following streets: 200 - 400 blocks of N. Beverly Drive; 9300 to 9700 blocks of Brighton Way; 100 - 400 blocks of
N. Canon Drive; 9300 to 9700 blocks of Dayton Way; and 200 - 400 blocks of N. Rodeo Drive. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord.
94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 04-O-2448, eff. 6-4-2004)
4-3-603: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person, whether as a principal, agent, or employee, either for itself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall place,
affix, erect, construct, or maintain a newsrack upon any public right of way unless and until a newsrack permit has been obtained from the department of
capital assets. (Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
4-3-604: APPLICATION:
A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this article shall file with the department of capital assets a written application on forms supplied by the
city. The application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
B. The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant's
newsrack;
C. The number of newsracks and the exact proposed location of each; and
D. The names of the newspapers or periodicals to be contained in each newsrack. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222,
eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 138/797
4-3-605: APPLICATION PROCEDURE; FEE:
A. The applicant shall provide a nonrefundable permit application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.
B. Unless a time extension is granted in writing by the deputy city manager of capital assets, within five (5) days of approval of the permit, the permittee
must file with the deputy city manager of capital assets an insurance certificate establishing that the applicant has in force public liability and property
damage insurance from a carrier admitted to do business in the state of California with a Best's insurance rating of A:VII or better in an amount to be
determined by resolution of the city council to indemnify the city against any personal injury, death, loss or damage resulting from the permittee's
activities. The city and its officers shall be named as additional insureds. The policy must include a statement by the insurance carrier that thirty (30)
days' written notice will be given to the city before any cancellation or modification of coverage. The permittee must maintain such insurance for as long
as the permittee maintains a newsrack in the public right of way. The permittee shall also execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city
prior to the issuance of any permit.
C. Upon a showing that the fees and/or insurance requirements are so financially burdensome that they would constitute an unreasonable burden on first
amendment rights by virtue of the financial circumstances of the applicant, the deputy city manager of capital assets may waive or decrease the fees
as necessary. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 00-O-2343, eff. 2-4-2000; Ord. 13-O-2647,
eff. 10-11-2013; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
4-3-606: CRITERIA FOR DENIAL:
The department of capital assets shall issue a permit unless one or more of the following findings is made:
A. The following criteria for denial shall apply to applications for placement of a newsrack outside of the urban design program area:
1. The newsrack fails to comply with the provisions of this article.
2. The proposed location of the newsrack creates a substantial obstruction or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3. The proposed location of the newsrack would violate subsection 4-3-609A3 of this chapter. In such event the applicant, upon request, may be placed
on a waiting list. When the proposed location becomes available due to a reduction in the number of newsracks, the applicant will be notified
according to its placement on the waiting list and a new application may be submitted at that time.
B. The following criteria for denial shall apply to applications for placement of a newsrack within the urban design program area:
1. The newsrack fails to comply with the provisions of this article.
2. The proposed location of the newsrack is on the 200 - 400 blocks of N. Rodeo Drive.
3. The proposed location of the newsrack is a newsrack enclosure in which no newsrack space is available due to the issuance of newsrack permits to
other persons pursuant to section 4-3-618 of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord.
04-O-2448, eff. 6-4-2004; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
4-3-607: DENIAL:
If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific basis of such denial by the department of capital assets. (1962 Code §§ 4-
3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
4-3-608: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any applicant who has been denied a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article may file an appeal with the city council. The applicant shall also have
the right to appeal the amount of fees and/or costs imposed pursuant to section 4-3-605 of this chapter, or a determination by the city that the applicant's
insurance policy does not comply with the requirements specified in section 4-3-605 of this chapter. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk
within fourteen (14) days of mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or other notice informing the applicant of the matter being appealed. The
notice of appeal shall specifically set forth the grounds for the appeal. The council shall hear the applicant or a designated representative, and receive any
relevant information and documents. The decision of the council shall be final. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff.
12-23-1994)
4-3-609: LOCATION; PLACEMENT:
A. The specific location of newsracks shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Where placement is next to a building, it shall be placed adjacent and parallel to and within six inches (6") of the wall of the building.
2. Where placement is next to a curb, it shall be situated parallel to and no less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than twenty four inches (24") from
the edge of the curb.
3. No more than eight (8) newsracks shall be located on any public right of way at an intersection. For the purposes of this section, a newsrack shall be
"at an intersection" if it is within ten feet (10') of a marked crosswalk at any of the corners comprising the intersection. In the event there are more
than eight (8) newsracks located on the public right of way at an intersection on the effective date of this article, all newsracks at such intersection
shall be permitted to remain provided that those newsracks obtain the permit required by this article and comply with all other requirements of this
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 139/797
article. No additional newsracks shall be approved at such intersection until such time when there are fewer than eight (8) newsracks at such
intersection. The applicant, upon request, may be placed on a waiting list for such location pursuant to section 4-3-606 of this chapter.
4. Newsracks located in the urban design program area shall be placed in a newsrack enclosure installed by the department of capital assets.
5. In the event that a location becomes available for the placement of new newsracks, not more than one permit will be issued per location for any
single newspaper or periodical; except that, if a newsrack location is available for more than three (3) months, more than one permit may be issued
to any newspaper or periodical at that location.
B. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within five feet (5') of any marked crosswalk.
2. Within fifteen feet (15') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
3. Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, traffic signal controller, streetlight controller, or other emergency facility.
4. Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
5. Within five feet (5') ahead of, and twenty five feet (25') to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.
6. Within six feet (6') of any bus bench.
7. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet (6').
8. On or within three feet (3') of any area improved with lawn, ground cover, flowers, shrubs or trees.
9. Within three feet (3') of any display window of any building, abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the
reasonable use of such window display purpose.
10. Facing another newsrack or newsstand divided only by the width of the sidewalk or pedestrian walk.
11. At any location where the newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes access to or the use or enjoyment of the abutting property.
12. Where the newsrack will endanger persons or property.
13. Where the newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the public right of way.
14. On the 200 - 400 blocks of N. Rodeo Drive. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 04-O-2448,
eff. 6-4-2004; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
4-3-610: NEWSRACK REQUIREMENTS:
Newsrack installation shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Newsrack shall be the standard "K-Jack" model, standard KJ-100 Mini View model or an equivalent model approved by the deputy city manager of
capital assets which shall be securely bolted to the sidewalk. Newsracks that are in place as of December 24, 1994, and not in compliance with this
subsection shall be replaced with conforming newsracks within twelve (12) months of December 24, 1994.
B. Newsracks which are required to conform to the requirements of this article shall carry no advertising, including rack cards, except that the name of the
newspaper or periodical being dispensed may be displayed on the bottom one-third (1/3) of the hood on the front access side of the newsrack.
Newsracks in place prior to December 24, 1994, may carry rack cards which exclusively advertise the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.
C. The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person or entity who may be contacted at any time concerning the newsrack shall be
displayed on the hood of the newsrack in such a manner as to be visible and readable to a prospective customer.
D. Newsracks shall at all times be maintained in good working order, and their exterior surface shall be maintained in a clean, untarnished and attractive
condition free of defects, physical damage, handbills, extraneous markings and graffiti. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-
2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
4-3-611: DISPLAY OF CERTAIN MATTER PROHIBITED:
Newspapers or periodicals offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on the public right of way shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner
which exposes to public view from the public right of way any of the following:
A. Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;
B. Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its
purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 140/797
C. Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or
affront.
"Explicit sexual act" as used in this section, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality,
sadism, masochism, or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed above or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act of sexual arousal, involving any physical contact with a person's
genital, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord.
04-O-2448, eff. 6-4-2004)
4-3-612: ABANDONMENT:
In the event any newsrack installed pursuant to this article does not contain the newspaper or periodical specified in the application within a period of thirty
(30) days after the release of the current issue, or if no newspaper or periodical is in the newsrack for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days,
the deputy city manager of capital assets may deem the newsrack abandoned and may remove the newsrack from the public right of way in accordance
with the procedures set out in sections 4-3-613 through 4-3-616 of this chapter.
In the event a permittee of a newsrack, owned by the permittee, desires voluntarily to abandon a newsrack location, such permittee shall notify the deputy
city manager of capital assets in writing of the date of the proposed removal thirty (30) days prior to the newsrack's removal and the permittee shall
completely remove the newsrack and mount on the date set forth in such notice. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
4-3-613: IMPOUNDMENT OF RACKS:
A. The deputy city manager of capital assets or his/her designee:
1. May immediately remove and impound any newsrack in violation of this article if the violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition. Notice
of such action and the right to request a hearing in accordance with this article shall be mailed to the permittee, or person, if known, maintaining such
newsrack within five (5) working days after such action;
2. May notify the permittee, or person, if known, maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this article, either in person, or by mail, or if the owner of
the newsrack is not known, by affixing a notice to the newsrack, that unless the violation is corrected or a hearing requested within ten (10) working
days after the date of the notice, the newsrack will be impounded; and
3. May impound any newsrack in accordance with the decision following a hearing requested pursuant to section 4-3-615 of this chapter.
B. If a hearing on the impounding of the newsrack is not timely requested or if the return of the newsrack is not requested by the permittee in accordance
with the provisions of this article, the deputy city manager of capital assets or the deputy city manager's designee may sell or otherwise dispose of the
newsrack, its contents and any monies contained in the newsrack, and deposit the proceeds, if any, in the city treasury. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-
2013)
4-3-614: RETURN OF IMPOUNDED NEWSRACKS:
A. Unless the newsrack and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the permittee, or if there is no known permittee, a claimant
who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded newsrack may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding, and if
a hearing pursuant to this article is held concerning the newsrack, may, at any time including the thirtieth day after the decision of such hearing
becomes final, obtain a return of the newsrack and its contents, upon paying an impound fee, to be established by resolution of the city council, plus
the reasonable additional cost, if any, of impounding the newsrack in excess of that fee.
B. The deputy city manager of capital assets or the deputy city manager's designee may, after a hearing in accordance with this article, order the newsrack
returned without payment of any impound fee; or, if an impound fee has previously been paid, may order return of any such impound fee if no violation
of this article is found.
C. A court before whom criminal charges concerning an impounded newsrack are pending, may, upon dismissal of the charges or finding of acquittal, in its
discretion order an impounded newsrack returned without payment of an impound fee or the return of the impound fee paid. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et
seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
4-3-615: HEARINGS ON VIOLATIONS:
A. Request For Hearing: Any permittee or person maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this article may request in writing a hearing before the
deputy city manager of capital assets according to the time limitations contained in subsection 4-3-613A2 of this chapter.
B. Stay Pending Decision: A timely request for a hearing made prior to any impounding shall operate to stay any impounding until five (5) working days
after a final decision is rendered unless the violation is creating a dangerous or hazardous condition.
C. Conduct Of Hearing: A hearing shall be held before the deputy city manager of capital assets, unless continued by agreement, within five (5) working
days of the request for a hearing. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack was in violation of this
article or whether the newsrack should be returned without payment of an impound fee.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 141/797
D. Decision: A decision shall be rendered within five (5) working days after the close of the hearing. The deputy city manager of capital assets shall take
any one of the following actions:
1. Determine there is no violation of this article;
2. Determine there is a violation of this article and order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable period of time and if not, order the removal
or impound of the newsrack found in violation of this article;
3. Determine there was a violation of this article and order it removed. If the newsrack which is found in violation of this article is not removed, it shall
be impounded.
E. Notice Of Decision: The deputy city manager of capital assets may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing and shall send notice of
the decision by mail. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
4-3-616: APPEAL AFTER HEARING:
A. Appeal: Any person who requested a hearing may, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the decision therein, given pursuant to this article, appeal
such decision to the city council pursuant to the appeals procedure contained in section 4-3-608 of this chapter.
B. Action By City Council: Upon consideration of the appeal, the city council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision being appealed. (1962 Code §§ 4-
3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-3-617: FEES:
The city council may adopt, by resolution, a newsrack permit fee schedule setting forth annual newsrack fees, impound fees, and any other fees necessary
for the implementation of this article. (1962 Code §§ 4-3.601 et seq., 6-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 94-O-2222, eff. 12-23-1994)
4-3-618: URBAN DESIGN PROGRAM AREA:
A. This section shall govern the placement of newsracks within the urban design program area. Except when in direct conflict with this section, in which
case the provisions of this section shall control, the other provisions of this article also shall apply to newsracks within the urban design program area.
B. The deputy city manager of capital assets shall install newsrack enclosures within the urban design program area. The design, materials and location of
the enclosures shall be determined by the deputy city manager of capital assets subject to approval of the city council. A minimum of twenty nine (29)
newsrack enclosures shall be installed, and each newsrack enclosure shall accommodate three (3) newsracks. The location of the newsrack
enclosures shall be fixed prior to the acceptance of newsrack permit applications for newsrack spaces within the urban design program area. If there is
no newsrack permit application for space within a particular newsrack enclosure, then that enclosure need not be installed until such an application is
received.
C. Newsrack permits for newsrack spaces within the urban design program area shall be issued by lottery. For each newsrack enclosure location, the
deputy city manager of capital assets shall conduct an initial lottery that is limited to preexisting papers and, if necessary, a secondary lottery that is
limited to other applicants. A secondary lottery shall be necessary only to fill newsracks spaces for which a newsrack permit is not awarded to a
preexisting paper. No newspaper or periodical shall be eligible for: 1) more than one newsrack permit at an intersection where there are two (2)
newsrack enclosure locations; or 2) more than two (2) newsrack permits at an intersection where there are three (3) or four (4) newsrack enclosure
locations. The deputy city manager of capital assets shall conduct the lottery by placing into a container the names of all eligible permit applicants and
drawing names from the container until the number of available spaces at a location reaches zero. The deputy city manager of capital assets shall give
permit applicants advance written notice of the time and place of the lottery, and shall allow members of the public to witness the lottery.
D. Newsrack permits for newsrack spaces within the urban design program area shall have a three (3) year term. At the expiration of each term, the
deputy city manager of capital assets shall reallocate the permits by conducting an area wide reallocation lottery if a written reallocation request has
been submitted in the period between forty five (45) days and thirty five (35) days prior to the term expiration by either an existing permittee or a new
permit applicant. If no such request is filed within this period, then the deputy city manager of capital assets may renew the permits without conducting
an area wide reallocation lottery. In such event, existing permittees may file applications for renewal of their permits, along with a nonrefundable
renewal application fee, commencing thirty (30) days prior to the term expiration. The deputy city manager of capital assets shall renew the permit,
within ten (10) city business days of accepting the application, if the subject newsrack remains in compliance with this article.
E. If a newsrack is abandoned during the permit term, then the newsrack permit for that newsrack space shall be awarded for the unexpired portion of the
three (3) year term by a site specific reallocation lottery. If an area wide reallocation lottery is not conducted at the term expiration and a newsrack
permit is not renewed by the existing permittee, then that permit shall be awarded by a site specific reallocation lottery. The permittee who abandoned
the newsrack or who failed to renew the newsrack permit shall not be eligible to participate in the site specific reallocation lottery.
F. Reallocation lotteries shall be conducted in accordance with the lottery process of subsection C of this section except that there shall be a single lottery
and no preference shall be afforded preexisting papers.
G. Notwithstanding section 4-3-608 of this chapter, the denial of a newsrack permit for a newsrack space within the urban design program area may not be
appealed to the city council if the denial is because the proposed location is on the 200 - 400 blocks of N. Rodeo Drive or is based on the lottery.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 142/797
H. Newsracks within the urban design program area shall be the National Newsvend model M-30 or an equivalent approved by the deputy city manager of
capital assets and shall be white aluminum RAL #9006 in color.
I. The Deputy City Manager of Capital Assets may promulgate policies necessary or convenient for the administration of the lottery. (Ord. 04-O-2448, eff.
6-4-2004; amd. Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
Article 7. Moving Buildings On Public Streets
4-3-701: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building or structure, or portion thereof, on or over any street or other public property without first
obtaining a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. Each separate section or portion of a building or structure shall require a
separate permit. (1962 Code § 9-3.101 et seq.)
4-3-702: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be based on the criteria of section 4-1-103 of this title, excluding subsection 4-1-103A1 of this title; and with the
following additional criteria which require denial of the permit if:
A. The size of the building or structure would cause undue interference with public utilities, or other fixtures located in the public right-of-way.
B. The size or weight of the building or structure would cause damage to the street or other public right-of-way.
C. The size of the building or structure would cause damage to trees or necessitate excessive trimming of trees. (1962 Code § 9-3.101 et seq.)
4-3-703: TERM OF PERMIT:
Permits issued under this article for moving of buildings or structures shall designate the specific times within which such building or structure may be
moved; provided further, that the time may be extended upon a showing of good cause by the permittee. (1962 Code § 9-3.101 et seq.)
4-3-704: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
The movement of buildings and structures governed by the provisions of this article shall be subject to the following requirements, restrictions and
prohibitions:
A. Every wheel of the equipment used for moving the building or structure shall be equipped with a pneumatic tire.
B. Movement is permitted only between the hours from twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day.
C. The structure or building shall have attached thereto red lights which are affixed not more than six feet (6') above the surface of the roadway, with a
minimum of one such light at each corner of such building or structure and at a minimum interval of five feet (5') along all sides of such building or
structure; and such lights shall be activated at all times the building or structure is being moved. (1962 Code § 9-3.101 et seq.)
4-3-705: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
Upon issuance of the permit under this article, and at all times the permit is in effect, the permittee shall provide and maintain insurance covering
permittee's operations in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The insurance shall comply with title 3, chapter 4 of this Code. (1962
Code § 9-3.101 et seq.)
Article 8. Charitable Solicitations
4-3-801: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in or carry on any solicitation or event for contributions for any charitable purpose without a permit issued under the provisions of
chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-802: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the provisions of this article shall not apply to an organization which solicits contributions from among
the members of such organization, to solicitations or collections made upon premises which are owned or occupied by such organization, or to
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 143/797
organizations that are formed by the City and whose accounts are managed and maintained by the City.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to a retail business that represents that any portion of the proceeds from the sale of merchandise will be
used for a charitable purpose. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-803: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
CHARITABLE: Patriotic, philanthropic, social services, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization recognized as a 501(c)(3) organization by the Internal Revenue Service, i.e., eligible to receive taxdeductible
contributions.
CONTRIBUTIONS: Food, clothing, money, subscriptions, property or donations given or solicited either directly or under the guise of a loan.
EVENT: A single solicitation activity.
EVENT PLANNER: A person who is hired by a charitable organization to coordinate the planning or execution of a charitable event or solicitation.
HOTEL: As defined in section 10-3-100 of this Code.
HOTEL EVENT COORDINATOR: A person who is hired by a hotel to accommodate the planning and execution of charitable events and solicitations held
at that hotel and executes the contract for this purpose.
MONETARY DRIVE: Multiple solicitation activities by a single organization for a single purpose in a twelve (12) month period, including membership drives
or solicitations by mail or telephone, but not including events such as dinners, carnivals, fairs or dances.
SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION: The direct or indirect request for money, pledges, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value either by way
of donation or as consideration for services, or the sale of merchandise when representation is made that any portion thereof will be used for a charitable
purpose. A solicitation shall be deemed completed when such a request has been made. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-804: APPLICATIONS:
A. Applications for a charitable solicitation permit shall be filed with the City a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the date the proposed solicitation is to
commence. Each application shall indicate whether the proposed solicitation is an event or a monetary drive.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a financial statement of the applicant for the previous such solicitation, if conducted within Beverly Hills by the
applicant, setting forth the funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, and stating the amount raised through solicitations, together with
the cost of raising such amount and the final distribution thereof; and an authorization for City inspection of the applicant's financial records and files.
C. Renewal applications shall be filed ten (10) days prior to expiration of the existing permit.
D. No fee shall be charged for a solicitation permit required by the provisions of this article. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-805: REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS BY CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS COMMISSION:
After filing of the application, the application shall be submitted to the Charitable Solicitations Commission for review and recommendation. The
commission shall review the application, and shall also review any information furnished by the Police Department, based on their investigation of the
applicant; and the commission shall then make a recommendation to the official empowered by the City to grant or deny the permit. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff.
11-3-2017)
4-3-806: COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION:
The City official empowered to grant or deny the application may consider the recommendation of the commission prior to acting on the permit request,
provided further, the official is not bound by the recommendation, and shall grant or deny the permit based solely on the criteria set forth in section 4-3-807
of this article. If the commission fails to make a recommendation within ten (10) days after filing of the application, the City official empowered to act on the
application may grant or deny the permit without a recommendation from the commission. The City official empowered to act on the application shall grant
or deny the permit within fourteen (14) days after filing of the application, and shall grant or deny the renewal of an existing permit prior to the expiration of
such permit. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-807: GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
A. In lieu of the criteria for issuance or denial of a permit under provisions of section 4-1-103 of this title the following criteria shall apply to issuance or
denial of a solicitation permit under this article. The permit will be issued by the official designated by the City to act on the application unless there is a
finding that:
1. The information contained in the application is incomplete, false, or intentionally misleading.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 144/797
2. The kind, character, and method of the solicitation, the time when it will take place or its duration are such that the solicitation will be inimical to the
safety, convenience, or welfare of the inhabitants of the City.
3. If the application is for a renewal or subsequent permit, that the applicant has violated provisions of the previous permit, or the ordinances or
regulations of the City in the conduct of previous solicitations.
B. Notwithstanding the presence of one or more grounds for denial listed above, the City official empowered to act on the application may approve the
permit if the applicant agrees to abide by such conditions as imposed by the official to negate any circumstances that would otherwise justify denial.
(Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-808: TERM OF PERMIT:
A solicitation permit issued for an event pursuant to this article shall be valid until one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issue, or until the
completion of the event, whichever comes first. A solicitation permit issued for a monetary drive pursuant to this article shall be valid until twelve (12)
months from the date of issue, or the completion of the monetary drive, whichever comes first. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-809: PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any permit issued for solicitation under provisions of this article is non-transferable notwithstanding section 4-1-112 of this title. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-
2017)
4-3-810: NONDISCRIMINATION:
The official designated by the City to act on permit applications shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in
granting or denying permits and shall not deny any permit based upon political or religious grounds or reasons. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-811: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Any solicitation regulated by this article shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Solicitation upon private residential premises is prohibited at premises that contain a conspicuously posted sign stating "no solicitation" or "do not
disturb", unless the solicitor has been invited to the premises by the owner or occupant thereof.
B. Solicitation by means of a box or other receptacle shall be prohibited in, upon or adjacent to any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place; or in
or upon any place of business or other place open and accessible to the public; unless the permit specifically authorizes this type of solicitation.
C. Solicitation of funds for a purpose other than designated in the permit shall be prohibited.
D. Solicitors shall not misrepresent their physical or mental health, or make other false or misleading representations.
E. Solicitors shall not touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person of any member of the public, without first receiving express
permission therefor from such member of the public.
F. Solicitors shall not persistently and importunately solicit any member of the public after such member of the public expresses a desire not to be solicited.
G. Solicitors shall not solicit from persons who are standing in lines, seated in public areas, waiting at bus stops or similarly stationary for a specific
purpose that would not allow evasion of the solicitation.
H. Solicitors shall not intentionally or deliberately obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk, or other place, or in any
place open to the public generally.
I. All solicitations made by mail shall include a copy of the solicitation permit.
J. Charitable events involving solicitations of funds shall have a copy of the permit prominently displayed on the premises.
K. Solicitors shall have in their possession at all times, when engaged in the activity regulated by this article, a copy of the solicitation permit, and shall
display said copy upon request of any person being solicited. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-812: WRITTEN RECEIPTS REQUIRED FOR DONATIONS:
Any solicitation regulated by the provisions of this article which results in a contribution of one dollar ($1.00) or more in value shall require the solicitor to
furnish a written receipt to the person making the contribution upon request of such person. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 145/797
4-3-813: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A. The permittee shall compile and retain for a period of not less than three (3) years detailed records and a financial statement showing the amount of
funds raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions, and
expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation, and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation.
B. Within sixty (60) days of the expiration of the permit, the permittee shall file a complete and detailed report of the information required by subsection A
of this section with the City. Such report shall be a public record and be available for public inspection. Failure to provide the report to the City in
accordance with the provisions of this paragraph is a violation of this Code and shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 3,
article 3 of this Code, including, without limitation, the payment of administrative fines imposed pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code. (Ord.
17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-814: HOTEL REGULATIONS:
Prior to executing the lease or rental agreement, any hotel that leases or rents facilities to a charitable organization for a charitable event or solicitation
shall provide the prospective lessee or renter with a City issued charitable solicitations packet or website address that describes the requirements of this
article. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
4-3-815: CHARITABLE SOLICITATION REPORTING:
Any event planner or hotel event coordinator that executes a contract to assist a charitable organization with a charitable event or solicitation shall notify
the commission of the charitable event or solicitation. The notification shall be contained in a report submitted to the commission twice a month that
includes the following information:
A. Name of the organization.
B. Date of the event.
C. Location of the event.
D. Solicitor/organization contact information. (Ord. 17-O-2738, eff. 11-3-2017)
Chapter 4
OTHER REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF BUSINESSES AND ACTIVITIES
Article 1. Alarm Systems And False Alarms
4-4-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating alarm systems and discouraging false alarms. (Ord. 10-
O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-102: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-103: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this article:
ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following: selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing on any building, place or premises any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS: Any person who is engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, monitoring, moving, or installing
any alarm system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, monitored, moved or installed an alarm system in or on any
building, place or premises.
ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST: A notification to police or fire personnel that an alarm system has been activated.
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices designed for the detection of smoke, fire, or an unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting
others of the commission of an unlawful act, which device, when actuated, emits a sound beyond the business premises or residential unit or dwelling
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 146/797
protected by such device or transmits a signal or message to another location. "Alarm system" includes, without limitation, the following: audible alarms;
automatic dialing systems; commercial alarms; intrusion alarm systems; fire alarm systems; manual holdup alarm systems; and robbery alarm systems.
AUDIBLE ALARM: An alarm system that, when activated, emits an audible sound designed to be heard at or about the site where the alarm system is
installed.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM: An alarm system that automatically sends over telephone lines a message or signal indicating the existence of an
emergency situation.
CENTRAL STATION: A facility to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the circuits on a continuous basis, and where there is a
subsequent relaying of messages by a live voice to the police or fire department.
COMMERCIAL ALARM: An alarm system installed on nonresidential premises.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm dispatch request as to which responding police or fire personnel find no evidence of a fire, criminal offense or attempted criminal
offense after completing an investigation of alarm site. A false alarm does not include the activation of an alarm system due to tornadoes, earthquakes, or
other violent, uncontrollable acts of nature.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The city of Beverly Hills fire department.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an
observer of the attack.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The city of Beverly Hills police department.
ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery or other crime in progress, which involves potentially serious
bodily injury or death. For purposes of this definition, a robbery alarm system includes duress, panic, holdup and robbery in progress alarms.
SUBSCRIBER: Any person that owns, leases, rents, uses an alarm system or makes available for use by his agents, employees, representative or family,
an alarm system. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-104: ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS:
A. Audible alarms shall automatically turn off within fifteen (15) minutes of activation.
B. Each subscriber having an audible alarm affixed to real property shall post a notice containing the name and telephone number of the person to be
notified to render repairs or turn off the alarm when the alarm system is activated. Such notice shall be conspicuously posted near the alarm system in
such a position as to be legible from the ground adjacent to the building.
C. It shall be the duty of the alarm subscriber to properly use the alarm system and to maintain it mechanically and technically to ensure it is in proper
working order at all times.
D. The alarm business or subscriber shall provide to the police and fire departments or their city authorized designee the name and address of the
subscriber including the telephone number at which the subscriber may be reached at any time of the day or night or any other emergency contact
information. Changes occurring in any names, addresses or telephone numbers provided shall be immediately communicated in writing to the police
and fire departments or their city authorized designee.
E. The alarm business and/or subscriber shall be responsible for deactivating any alarm system within one hour after notification or after reasonable efforts
have been made to notify such alarm business and/or subscriber that such alarm system has been activated and is ringing.
F. No person shall install, maintain or use an audible alarm that emits a sound similar to an emergency vehicle siren.
G. No person shall install, maintain or use an audible alarm that automatically resets the bell or other audible device.
H. No person shall install, maintain or use any alarm system that automatically dials the Beverly Hills police or Beverly Hills fire department when
activated. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-105: REQUEST FOR RESPONSE AT ALARM SITE:
At the time a request for police or fire response to an alarm site is made, the alarm business, central station or other answering service shall provide all
information required by the police or fire department dispatcher including, but not limited to, the time, date and location of the alarm; the name, address
and telephone number of the alarm subscriber or his or her designee; and the cause of the alarm. (Ord. 16-O-2703, eff. 6-17-2016)
4-4-106: ALARM ACTIVATION NOTIFICATION:
Each alarm subscriber or alarm business shall notify the police and/or fire department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration
or installation that might activate a false alarm. For the purposes of this article, any alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not
constitute a false alarm. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 147/797
4-4-107: BACKUP POWER SUPPLY:
Alarm systems shall be served by an uninterruptible backup power supply that prevents activation of the alarm system due to failure or interruption of
normal electric utility service. Such backup power supply shall be capable of operating for at least four (4) hours. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-108: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A. It is declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in the city to cause, or
to permit, an alarm system on such property to be activated, other than by commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act or detection of
smoke or fire which the alarm system is designed to detect. Any response from the police or fire department with respect to such a false alarm shall
constitute summary abatement of such a nuisance.
B. Any audible alarm shall be deactivated within fifteen (15) minutes of activation; provided further, failure to deactivate within a period of one hour shall be
considered a public nuisance and such alarm noise may be summarily abated. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-109: FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGE:
A false alarm service charge shall be billed to and paid by each subscriber for the false alarms issued by the subscriber's alarm system within a calendar
year. Should any service charge remain unpaid in excess of thirty (30) days, a late fee shall be assessed and paid by the subscriber. The service charge
and the late fee shall be established by city council resolution. The service charge shall be paid within thirty (30) calendar days following service of notice
by mail by the city that the alarm system sustained a false alarm, unless the subscriber files a request for an administrative review pursuant to section 4-4-
110 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-110: CONTESTING A FALSE ALARM SERVICE CHARGE; APPEAL:
A. A subscriber may contest the imposition of a false alarm service charge by submitting a request for an administrative review in writing to the chief
financial officer within thirty (30) calendar days of the notice imposing the service charge. The assessment of the false alarm service charge is stayed
during the pendency of an administrative review, which is properly and timely filed pursuant to this section. The subscriber shall specify the grounds for
contesting the service charge and such request shall be accompanied by a fee, if any, in the amount established by city council resolution. Upon
receipt, the city shall do all of the following: investigate with its own records and staff the circumstances of the service charge with respect to the
contestant's written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the service charge. If, based on the results of the investigation, the city is
satisfied that the violation did not occur or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set forth in this article warrant a dismissal, the
city shall dismiss the service charge and make an adequate record of the reason or reasons for canceling the service charge. The city shall deliver the
results of the investigation to the contestant within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the subscriber's request for an administrative review.
B. If the subscriber is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for herein, the subscriber may, within twenty one (21) calendar days of the
delivery of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the service charge and the appeal as set by city council resolution or provide
proof of an inability to deposit the service charge, and request an appeal. An appeal shall be held within ninety (90) calendar days following the receipt
of a request for an appeal. If the subscriber prevails at the appeal, then the full amount of the service charge deposited shall be refunded.
C. The appeal hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or his designee. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the
appeal notice shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal. Failure of any person to file a timely appeal shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the
right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the notice imposing the false alarm service charge.
D. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the
city either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the
appellant at the address shown on the appeal. The decision of the city manager or his designee shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact and
a determination of the issues presented.
E. The notice of decision shall inform the appellant that the decision is a final decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code
Of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. Copies of the decision shall be delivered to the parties personally or sent by certified mail to the address shown on
the appeal. The decision shall be final when signed by the city manager or his designee and served as provided in this section.
F. If the false alarm service charge is upheld, the service charge and any administrative costs shall be paid within thirty (30) days following service of the
notice of decision. Administrative costs include any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with enforcement of this article against the
subscriber, including, but not limited to, investigation costs, staffing costs for preparing and conducting the administrative hearing and legal fees. (Ord.
10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-111: INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARMS; PENALTIES:
No person shall intentionally initiate a false alarm except for purpose of testing an alarm system and then only after having given the police and/or fire
department prior notice thereof. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-112: POSSESSION OF STATE PERMIT REQUIRED:
Every alarm agent, and every person engaged in the business of making, repairing, servicing, altering, replacing, removing or installing an alarm system
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 148/797
shall carry on their person at all times while so engaged a valid alarm agent permit as issued by the state and shall display such permit to any police
department or fire department personnel upon request. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
4-4-113: NONLIABILITY:
Nothing in this article shall create or be construed to create a duty upon the police and/or fire departments or city to respond to any alarm system whether
or not the alarm was false. An alarm, like any other request for service from the police and/or fire departments, may be responded to within the resources
of the police and fire departments at the time of the alarm. (Ord. 10-O-2591, eff. 1-1-2011)
Article 2. Vehicle Parking Facilities
4-4-201: DEFINITIONS:
ANCILLARY PARKING FACILITY: An off street parking facility that accommodates the parking of motor vehicles by the occupants, customers, clientele
and employees of an on site or adjacent structure where the primary use of that structure is for office, retail or hotel purposes.
ATTENDANT PARKING FACILITY: An off street parking facility in which one or more attendants or valets assist motorists with the parking of vehicles.
PARKING STRUCTURE: An off street parking facility with a ramp type garage or other enclosed parking facility. A parking structure may be either a
vehicle parking facility or an ancillary parking facility.
VEHICLE PARKING FACILITY: An off street parking facility, where the primary use of the property is to accommodate the parking of motor vehicles by
members of the public. The term "vehicle parking facility" does not include "ancillary parking facilities". (1962 Code § 6-16.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 01-O-
2375, eff. 6-1-2001; Ord. 02-O-2420, eff. 1-17-2003)
4-4-202: PARKING FEES:
A. Vehicle Parking Facilities: At each vehicle entrance to a vehicle parking facility, the operator of the facility shall prominently display in a manner
satisfactory to the city and in a manner readily ascertainable and clearly visible to a motorist driving on the adjacent street, a sign or signs setting forth
the following information:
1. A schedule of the rates charged;
2. A statement of the maximum fee charged or, if there is no maximum, a statement to such effect;
3. A statement of the closing hour of the facility.
This information shall also be posted at one additional location at the vehicle parking facility that is satisfactory to the city and designed to notify
patrons of parking rates before they exit their vehicle.
B. Ancillary Parking Facilities With Attendant Parking: Patrons of ancillary parking facilities with attendant parking shall be notified of parking rates through
one of the following means:
1. One moveable ground sign, placed at or near the location where parking attendants accept vehicles. Such ground sign shall be in a location
satisfactory to the director of transportation. The ground sign shall comply with the size limitations set forth in sections 10-4-655 and 10-4-656 of this
code, as applicable.
2. One wall sign placed at the station for the parking cashier or in a location visible to motorists at the time that a parking attendant accepts the vehicle.
Such sign shall not be visible from the public right of way and shall be at least one hundred twenty five (125) square inches.
3. A ticket handed to a motorist at the time that a parking attendant accepts a vehicle. The applicable parking rate or a parking rate schedule shall be
printed in bold and in a minimum 8-point type. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the inclusion of other information on the ticket.
C. Ancillary Parking Facilities Without Attendant Parking: Patrons of ancillary parking facilities without attendant parking shall be notified of parking rates
through one of the following means:
1. One or more signs shall be placed within the parking facility in a location satisfactory to the director of transportation and designed to provide notice
of parking rates to motorists before they exit their vehicle. Such signs shall comply with the requirements of section 10-4-655 of this code and shall
not be visible from the public right of way.
2. Upon approval by the director of planning, one sign shall be posted at each vehicular entrance which would be plainly visible to motorists traveling
on the adjacent right of way. The director of planning may disapprove any such sign if the sign is not consistent with the aesthetic character of the
surrounding neighborhood or does not provide the information required by this article.
All signs and notices required by subsections B and C of this section shall include the following information: rates to be charged, a statement of the
maximum fee, and if there is no maximum, then a statement to that effect, and the closing hour of the parking facility, if applicable. (1962 Code § 6-
16.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 02-O-2420, eff. 1-17-2003)
4-4-203: SIGNS REQUIRED WHEN LOT FULL OR ENTRANCE BLOCKED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 149/797
A. Whenever a vehicle parking facility is filled to capacity, or where any entrance from any public street or alley to such facility is occupied or otherwise
obstructed in a manner which prevents an automobile from entering completely upon the premises of such facility, there shall be placed at such
entrance a sign complying with the following requirements:
1. The sign shall not be less than three and one-half (3.5) square feet in size, and
2. In clearly visible letters, not less than six inches (6") in height and one inch (1") in stroke, shall state either "Lot Full" or "Entrance Closed"; and in
clearly visible letters, not less than three inches (3") in height and three-eighths inch (3/8") in stroke, shall state either "Waiting Prohibited by Law" or
"Blocking of Entrance Prohibited by Law".
B. The permittee and each attendant at such facility shall have the duty and responsibility to comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section.
(1962 Code § 3-6.1017)
4-4-204: LOCKING UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
Each attendant parking facility shall comply with the following:
A. At each closing time of such facility, each unlocked vehicle remaining in or upon such facility shall be securely locked if a key therefor is available, and
such key shall be deposited with a responsible person at a safe and convenient place approved in advance by the transportation official, to be
delivered to the person who parked the vehicle upon the surrender of the parking receipt or ticket therefor.
B. Whenever a vehicle is found in or upon any such facility unlocked and with its key available in or about the vehicle and there is no attendant in or upon
such facility, it shall be presumed that the facility is closed and that the vehicle was unlocked and remaining in or upon the facility with its key available
at closing time. (1962 Code § 6-16.01 et seq.)
4-4-205: LOCKING PARKING STRUCTURES:
A. At all times after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. of each day and before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of each day, every entrance to and exit from each parking
structure in the commercial and industrial zones shall be closed and locked by a gate, chain, or door, except during such times as there is on duty at
such structure a parking attendant.
B. The transportation official may authorize, in writing, an exemption to subsection A of this section where special circumstances exist which ensure
adequate security to such parking structure. (1962 Code § 6-16.01 et seq.)
4-4-206: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the responsibility of each attendant at each attendant parking facility to comply with each of the requirements of this article during the time
working at such facility, and it shall be the responsibility of each operator of each vehicle parking facility to ensure that each of the requirements of this
article is complied with. (1962 Code § 6-16.01 et seq.)
Article 3. Apartment And Hotel Caretakers
4-4-301: CARETAKER REQUIRED ON PREMISES OF APARTMENTS AND HOTELS:
Any person owning or operating a hotel or apartment building shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Every hotel containing twelve (12) or more guest rooms and every apartment building containing sixteen (16) or more apartment units shall have a
manager, caretaker, agent or other responsible person residing upon the premises.
B. Every apartment building in which the owner does not reside on the premises and which contains more than four (4), but less than sixteen (16) units,
shall have conspicuously posted on the premises the name and address of the owner or person in charge of such apartment building. (1962 Code § 9-
3.1101)
Article 4. Restricted Hours Of Operation Of Certain Theaters
4-4-401: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article shall apply only to theaters which have a seating capacity in excess of two hundred (200) seats, and which have either a
ticket booth or a public entrance within three hundred feet (300') of any residential structure. (1962 Code § 4-13.02 et seq.)
4-4-402: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 150/797
A. No person operating or managing any theater regulated by this article shall:
1. Commence the showing of any motion picture or the holding of any performance or the sale of any ticket before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon; or
2. Commence the showing of any motion picture or the holding of any performance or selling of tickets after the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
B. For the purposes of this section, the terms "sale of any ticket" and "sell tickets" shall not apply to the sale of reserved tickets for showings or
performances on other days than the day of the sale.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the showing of a motion picture or the holding of a performance in a theater, which show or performance
is attended principally by persons who purchased an admission ticket on a day other than on a day of the showing or performance. (1962 Code § 4-
13.02 et seq.)
Article 5. Garage Sales
4-4-501: DEFINITION OF GARAGE SALE:
For the purposes of this article, "garage sale" shall mean a sale of personal household property held on the premises of a private single-family or multiplefamily
residence by the owner, owners, tenants or occupants thereof. "Garage sale" shall include lawn sales, yard sales, attic sales, rummage sales,
moving sales, patio sales and estate sales that meet the definition set forth in this section. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-502: GARAGE SALE; PERMIT REQUIRED:
A garage sale may be conducted pursuant to a permit issued by the director of building and safety. No person shall conduct a garage sale without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the director of building and safety. The fee for such permit shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) or as otherwise specified by
a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-503: APPLICATION REQUIREMENT:
The director of building and safety may grant a permit to conduct a garage sale upon the submittal of a complete application to the department of building
and safety in a form satisfactory to the director. Each application shall contain the following information:
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The applicant's address (sale location).
C. The area within the property where the sale is to be held.
D. The date(s) and hours of the sale.
E. A general description of the type of merchandise to be sold.
F. A signed declaration that the applicant resides at the property where the sale is to be held and that the applicant is the owner of all of the property to be
offered for sale. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-504: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
Within ten (10) days after submittal of a complete application, the director of building and safety shall issue a garage sale permit unless the director
determines that the applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application or the director determines that the garage sale, as proposed, will
violate the provisions of this article, or will violate the provisions of any other local, state or federal regulation. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-505: CONDITIONS:
The director of building and safety may impose conditions upon the approval of a garage sale permit for the purpose of ensuring that the garage sale
complies with the regulations set forth in this article and all other local, state and federal regulations. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-506: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The director of building and safety or the chief of police may immediately suspend a garage sale permit for any of the following reasons:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 151/797
A. The director or chief determines that the applicant has made a materially false statement on the application.
B. The director or chief determines that the garage sale is not being conducted as approved or as conditioned.
C. The director or chief determines that the garage sale is being conducted in violation of this article or any other local, state or federal regulation.
D. The director or chief determines that the garage sale is being conducted in a fraudulent or disorderly manner, or in a manner that endangers the public
health, safety or welfare.
Upon suspension of a garage sale permit, the permittee shall immediately end the sale and remove all signage relating to the sale from public view. In
addition, all property for sale shall be removed from the authorized sale area. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-507: SUSPENSION NOTICE:
At the time of suspension, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension. The notice shall also inform the permittee that the
permittee may request a hearing concerning the suspension by filing a written request for hearing with the city manager's office within ten (10) days after
the suspension. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-508: SUSPENSION HEARING:
If the permittee files a written request for a hearing with the city manager's office within ten (10) days after the suspension, the city manager, or the city
manager's designee, will hold a hearing on the suspension. The hearing will be held within thirty (30) days after such request is filed and will be conducted
pursuant to the rules and regulations promulgated under section 4-1-110 of this title. If the hearing officer determines that the permit was improperly
suspended, then the hearing officer shall direct the director of building and safety to reissue the permit for a new date or dates. If the hearing officer
determines that the permit was properly suspended, then the hearing officer shall declare the permit revoked. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-509: FAILURE TO REQUEST HEARING:
If the permittee fails to request a hearing pursuant to section 4-4-508 of this article, then a suspended permit shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 92-O-2160,
eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-510: FREQUENCY AND DURATION:
No garage sale shall be conducted by any person or at any location more frequently than once every six (6) months. Furthermore, garage sales shall be
limited to a period of two (2) consecutive days. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-511: HOURS OF SALE:
No garage sale shall begin before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., nor continue beyond six o'clock (6:00) P.M. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-512: PERMITTED LOCATIONS:
Garage sale items shall be displayed or stored only within a permanent structure or in a side yard or rear yard other than a street side yard. No area in a
front yard or otherwise between a primary residential structure and an adjacent street shall be used to display or store any goods, products or
merchandise. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-513: OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY:
Merchandise sold at a garage sale shall be limited to property owned exclusively by the person conducting the garage sale. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-
1993)
4-4-514: INSPECTION:
All merchandise offered for sale at a garage sale shall be made available for inspection by the Beverly Hills police department. If requested by the police
department, the person conducting the sale shall produce evidence of title or ownership to the merchandise offered for sale. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-
1993)
4-4-515: ADVERTISING:
Upon approval of a garage sale permit, the director of building and safety shall issue a sign or signs that may be used to advertise the garage sale. No
other sign or signs shall be used to advertise the garage sale. Placement of the sign or signs shall comply with the following criteria:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 152/797
A. Location: No sign or other form of advertisement of a proposed garage sale shall be placed upon any public property within the city or upon any other
property within the city, except upon the premises where a sale is legally permitted.
B. Vehicle Signs: No sign or other form of advertisement for a garage sale shall be placed or posted on any vehicle.
C. Size: No more than one sign, not to exceed three (3) square feet in size, may be placed in the front yard of the premises where the sale is conducted.
However, if the sale is to be conducted on a corner lot, one additional sign not to exceed three (3) square feet in area may be displayed in the street
side yard.
D. Flags: Except as otherwise permitted by this article, no flag or any other device intended to attract attention to the garage sale shall be displayed. (Ord.
92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
4-4-516: PROPERTY NOT USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to religious institutions, schools, charitable organizations or other conditionally permitted uses on residentially
zoned property if the property is not being used for residential purposes. (Ord. 92-O-2160, eff. 1-8-1993)
Article 6. Firearm Dealers
4-4-601: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, conduct, or carry on any firearm dealership without a permit issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord.
98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-602: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply:
AMMUNITION: Any cartridge or encasement containing a bullet or projectile, propellant or explosive charge, and a primer which is used in the operation of
a firearm.
EMPLOYEE: Any officer, employee or agent of a firearm dealership.
FIREARM: Shall include, without limitation, any revolver, pistol, rifle or any other device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a
weapon, that expels a projectile by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion.
FIREARM DEALERSHIP: Any business that sells, leases or otherwise transfers firearms or ammunition to members of the public. (Ord. 95-O-2240, eff. 7-
7-1995; amd. Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998; Ord. 02-O-2407, eff. 10-4-2002)
4-4-603: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In addition to the requirements of section 4-1-103 of this title, the permit shall be denied for any of the following reasons:
A. The applicant does not have each of the following: 1) a valid federal firearms license; 2) a valid seller's permit issued by the state of California board of
equalization; and 3) a valid certificate of eligibility issued by the California department of justice.
B. The applicant has not provided evidence of a possessory interest (e.g., owner or lessee) in the property at which the business is proposed to be
conducted.
C. The business is proposed to be conducted on residentially zoned property.
D. The applicant has not provided evidence of an insurance policy that complies with subsection 4-4-604C of this article. (Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-604: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
Firearm dealerships shall be subject to the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. The permittee shall maintain at all times public liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such insurance policy
shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
B. No person under eighteen (18) years of age, who is unaccompanied by a parent or legally responsible adult, shall be permitted to enter or remain on
the premises of any firearm dealership at which the principal business is firearm sales activity.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 153/797
C. It shall be a condition of each permit issued pursuant to this article that the permittee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, and its
council and each member thereof, and every officer and employee of the city, from any and all liability or financial loss resulting from any suits, claims,
losses or actions brought by any person and from all costs and expenses of litigation brought against the city, and its council and each member thereof,
and any officer and employee of the city, by reason of injury to any person, including, but not limited to, officers and employees of the permittee, or
damage, destruction, or loss of property of any kind whatsoever and to whomsoever it may belong, including, but not limited to, that of the permittee,
resulting directly or indirectly from any or all activities and operations of the permittee, or any person employed by the permittee, performed under or
pursuant to such permit or any and all activities, operations, and conditions in any manner connected therewith or pertaining thereto. Such indemnity
shall include, but not be limited to, any and all liabilities, demands, claim, damages, losses, costs, and expenses caused, or alleged to have been
caused by any negligent or other act of any such permittee. (Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998; amd. Ord. 02-O-2407, eff. 10-4-2002)
4-4-605: IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED:
A. Every employee shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of chapter 1, article 2 of this title, and shall have such identification card
in his or her possession at all times while on the premises of the firearm dealership.
B. In addition to the grounds for denial set forth in section 4-1-203 of this title, an identification card shall be denied if the applicant falls into one or more of
the following categories:
1. Less than twenty one (21) years of age.
2. Has had a firearm dealer license revoked or denied within one year prior to the date of application.
3. Is prohibited by law from owning possessing or having custody or control of any firearm.
4. Has been convicted of any firearm related offense within five (5) years prior to the date of application. (Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-606: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
A. The permittee shall maintain accurate records of all firearm and ammunition sales and transfers. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the
records shall contain the right thumbprint of the purchaser or transferee and shall indicate:
1. The date that the purchaser or transferee acquired the firearm(s) and/or ammunition;
2. The name, address and date of birth of the purchaser or transferee;
3. The driver's license number, or other identification number, of the purchaser or transferee and the issuing state;
4. The make, brand, model and type of firearm(s) purchased or transferred;
5. The brand, type and amount of ammunition purchased or transferred; and
6. The signature of the purchaser or transferee.
B. The information required by this section shall be recorded at the time of purchase and shall be maintained in a log book in a form substantially as
follows:
Ammunition/Firearm Sales Records Log
Store:
Date
Name
Address
Date of
Birth
Driver's License/I.D. No. and
State
Firearm Make/Brand/
Model/Type
Ammunition Brand and Amount
Purchased
Purchaser's
Signature
C. The records required by this section shall be maintained on the premises of the business for a period of not less than three (3) years from the date of
the recorded transaction.
D. Nothing in this section shall require the recordation of transaction information pertaining to the following classes of persons:
1. Any person described in California Penal Code section 12302 or 12322.
2. Any off duty peace officer who displays proper agency identification that indicates such person is an active peace officer.
3. Any person who has been issued a permit to carry a concealed weapon under the authority of California Penal Code section 12050.
4. Any security guard licensed under the authority of California Penal Code section 12033.
5. Any person that has been issued all of the following: a) a valid federal firearms license; b) a valid seller's permit issued by the state of California
board of equalization; c) a valid certificate of eligibility issued by the California department of justice; and d) a permit to operate a firearm dealership
in the city. (Ord. 95-O-2240, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 98-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-607: INVENTORY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 154/797
The permittee shall maintain on the business premises a complete inventory of all firearms in stock, by classification and serial number, for a period of not
less than three (3) years. (Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-608: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
The records required to be maintained by this article shall be open to inspection at the request of the city or the Los Angeles County sheriff's department.
(Ord. 95-O-2240, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-609: ANNUAL REVENUE REPORT:
On or before February 1 of each year, the permittee shall file an annual report of the gross revenue received from sale of firearms and ammunition during
the previous year. Such report shall be filed with the Beverly Hills police department and shall indicate the quantity and classification of firearms and
ammunition sold. (Ord. 95-O-2240, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
4-4-610: FEES:
The city council by resolution may establish a fee to recover the cost of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article. (Ord. 95-O-2240, eff. 7-7-
1995; amd. Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
Article 7. Auto Dealerships, Auto Repair Shops And Auto Service Stations
4-4-701: TEST DRIVE ROUTES:
Unless previously authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit, new and used auto dealerships, auto repair shops and auto service stations shall not
conduct, allow or permit test drives in the city other than on the following streets, or on such other streets as are approved by the city pursuant to an
approved test drive route plan in order to get from such auto dealership, auto repair shop or auto service station to the following streets:
Alden Drive between Foothill Road and Maple Drive
Bedford Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (north)
Benedict Canyon Drive
Beverly Boulevard
Beverly Drive
Brighton Way between Canon Drive and Wilshire Boulevard
Burton Way
Camden Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (north)
Canon Drive between Wilshire Boulevard north and Benedict Canyon Drive
Civic Center Drive between Burton Way and Santa Monica Boulevard (south)
Coldwater Canyon Drive
Crescent Drive between Santa Monica Boulevard (south) and Santa Monica Boulevard (north)
Dayton Way between Canon Drive and Wilshire Boulevard
Doheny Drive
Foothill Road between Burton Way and Santa Monica Boulevard (south)
La Cienega Boulevard
Linden Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (south)
Maple Drive between Alden Drive and Civic Center Drive
Olympic Boulevard
Rexford Drive between Santa Monica Boulevard (north) and Burton Way
Robertson Boulevard
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 155/797
Rodeo Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (north)
Roxbury Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (north)
San Vicente Boulevard
Santa Monica Boulevard (north and south roadways)
Sunset Boulevard
Wilshire Boulevard. (Ord. 15-O-2690, eff. 10-11-2015)
4-4-702: WRITTEN ROUTE PLAN:
All new and used car dealerships, auto repair shops and auto service stations shall, within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof, submit a written
route plan for conducting vehicle test drives to the director of community development for approval to confirm satisfaction of the requirements of this
article. All new and used car dealerships, auto repair shops and auto service stations operators shall have an affirmative obligation to inform all its
personnel of the approved test drive route and to ensure compliance with it. (Ord. 15-O-2690, eff. 10-11-2015)
Chapter 5
RENT STABILIZATION, PART I
Article 1. Application
4-5-101: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dwelling units in the city designed for rental use or actually rented at any time on or after May 31, 1978,
except as set forth in this article. (1962 Code § 11-1.01; amd. 1988 Code)
4-5-102: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4-5-101 of this chapter, the following dwelling units shall not be subject to any provision of this chapter:
A. Single-family residences;
B. Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, and rooming houses which are rented primarily to transient guests for a period of thirty (30)
consecutive days or less, except that this chapter shall apply to any unit which has been occupied by the same tenant for more than thirty (30)
consecutive days;
C. Condominiums existing as of March 27, 1979, and condominiums created thereafter by apartment unit conversion or redevelopment (including the
demolition of an old building and the construction of a new one), provided the provisions of sections 4-5-511 and 4-5-513 of this chapter have been
complied with;
D. Dwelling units in nonprofit cooperatives owned and controlled by a majority of the residents;
E. Dwelling units which a government unit, agency, or authority owns, operates, or manages or which are specifically exempted from municipal rent
regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation;
F. Dwelling units located in a structure completed after September 20, 1978, other than those described in subsection C of this section;
G. Dwelling units for which validly existing apartment rental agreements provide for rents in excess of six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month; provided
however, this subsection exemption shall not be applicable to any dwelling unit that was at any time subject to the provisions of this chapter or any prior
law of the city relating to rent stabilization, and the amount of rent validly imposed exceeds six hundred dollars ($600.00) per month only because of
rental increases validly imposed pursuant to the provisions of articles 3 and 4 of this chapter or any similar prior law of the city;
H. Dwelling units that are not occupied by the tenant as the tenant's primary residence. (1962 Code § 11-1.02; amd. Ord. 89-O-2068, eff. 8-8-1989; Ord.
01-O-2371, eff. 3-30-2001; Ord. 17-O-2728, eff. 2-21-2017; Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-5-103: WAIVER OF PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER; PROHIBITED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 156/797
A. Any provision of an apartment rental agreement or lease, or any other agreement between a landlord and a tenant, which waives any provision of this
chapter for the benefit of a tenant, including, without limitation, any provision relating to the amount of rent to be paid for an apartment unit, shall be
deemed to be against public policy and shall be void, unless expressly authorized by state law.
B. This amended section is applicable to any apartment rental agreement, lease, amendment or extension, that is subject to the provisions of this chapter
and that is executed on or after December 29, 2000. This section, as it existed on December 29, 2000, shall continue to govern any apartment rental
agreement, lease, amendment or extension, that is subject to the provisions of this chapter, and that was executed prior to December 29, 2000. (1962
Code § 11-1.03; amd. Ord. 01-O-2371, eff. 3-30-2001)
4-5-104: CIVIL CODE OBLIGATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be deemed, to affect or relate to obligations of the landlord and tenant pursuant to sections 1941 and 1942,
relating to tenantability of residential rental premises, of the Civil Code of the state. (1962 Code § 11-1.04)
Article 2. Definitions
4-5-201: SCOPE:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases shall be defined as set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is
intended.
B. Words and phrases used in this chapter which are not specifically defined shall be construed according to their context and the customary usage of the
language. (1962 Code § 11-2.01)
4-5-202: WORDS DEFINED:
APARTMENT RENTAL AGREEMENT: An agreement, verbal, written, or implied, between a landlord and tenant for the use or occupancy of an apartment
unit and for housing services.
APARTMENT UNIT: Any dwelling unit in the city of Beverly Hills rented or offered for rent for human habitation, together with the land and accessory
structures appurtenant thereto, and all housing services supplied in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, which is not exempted under section 4-
5-102 of this chapter.
BUILDING MANAGER: A person who has been retained by a landlord as the landlord's agent or employee for the purpose of directing, controlling, or
performing activities relating to a multiple-family residential building and who is entitled to monetary compensation or a reduction in the rent for an
apartment unit in such building equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of the fair market rental value of such unit as all or a part of his or her compensation for
such work or a person who has been retained by a landlord as a caretaker to comply with chapter 4, article 3 of this title. "Building manager" shall include
any other person who occupies an apartment unit with the person who was retained as the agent or employee.
DISABLED PERSON: Any person who is receiving benefits from a federal, state, or local government, or from a private entity on account of a permanent
disability that prevents the person from engaging in regular, full time employment.
HOUSING SERVICES: All services connected with the use or occupancy of an apartment unit, including, but not limited to, repairs, replacement,
maintenance, painting, light, heat, water, elevator service, laundry facilities and privileges, janitor service, refuse removal, furnishings, telephone, off street
parking, and any other benefits, privileges, or facilities.
LANDLORD: An owner, lessor, sublessor, or any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity entitled to receive rent for the use of any apartment
unit or the agent, representative, or successor of any of the foregoing.
MINOR: Any person younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
PRIMARY RESIDENCE: Any unit that is occupied by a tenant for at least nine (9) months out of every calendar year.
RENT: The consideration, including any bonus, benefits, or gratuity demanded or received, for or in connection with the use or occupancy of an apartment
unit or the transfer of a lease for such a unit, including, but not limited to, monies demanded or paid for parking, for furnishings, for housing services of any
kind, or for subletting.
SENIOR: Any person sixty two (62) years of age or older.
TENANT: A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person entitled to the use or occupancy of any apartment unit.
VACANCY: The departure from an apartment unit of all of the tenants. For purposes of this definition, the term "tenant" shall not include persons who took
possession of an apartment unit as sublessees or assignees after January 1, 1999, if the rental agreement restricts or prohibits subletting or assignment,
and the restriction has not been satisfied or the prohibition has not been waived.
VOLUNTARILY VACATED: The vacancy of an apartment unit by all of the tenants. "Voluntarily vacated" does not include a vacancy: a) that is the result of
a constructive eviction of the tenant, which was caused by the landlord; b) when the previous tenancy was terminated by the landlord by notice pursuant to
Civil Code section 1946; or c) when the previous tenancy was terminated due to a change in the terms of the tenancy noticed pursuant to Civil Code
section 827, except a change permitted by law in the amount of rent or fees. (1962 Code §§ 11-2.02, 11-2.03, 11-2.04, 11-2.05, 11-2.06, 11-2.07, 11-2.08,
11-2.09; amd. Ord. 89-O-2068, eff. 8-8-1989; Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004; Ord. 17-O-2725, eff. 1-24-2017; Ord. 17-O-2728, eff. 2-21-2017; Ord. 17-O-
2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 157/797
Article 3. Rent Levels
4-5-301: EXCESS RENTS UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for a landlord to charge, demand, extract, accept, receive, or retain any rent in excess of the maximum amount which may be validly
charged as computed in accordance with the provisions of this article and article 4 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 11-3.01)
4-5-302: BASE RENT:
A landlord may charge for an apartment unit a "base rent" equal to that validly charged on May 31, 1978, or on any later date when the tenancy by a
tenant begins of an apartment unit which has been voluntarily vacated. Such base rent may be recomputed annually after a full year has elapsed from May
31, 1978, the date of the commencement of the tenancy, or the date of the last recomputation, whichever is later, so as to increase it in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 11-3.02; amd. 1988 Code)
4-5-303: ANNUAL INCREASES:
A. For annual increases effective on any date between May 31, 1979, and May 30, 1980, inclusive, no such increase shall exceed an amount computed in
accordance with the latest published figure reflecting the increase for a twelve (12) month period in the Urban All Items Consumer Price Index (CPI) for
Los Angeles (or any successor equivalent), as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The proper method for
computing such an increase in the CPI shall be as follows: The latest published CPI figure shall be added along with such figures for the preceding
eleven (11) individual months, and, from the sum reached, there shall be deducted the sum of such figures for the twelve (12) months further preceding
the last such twelve (12) months. That remainder shall then be divided by the lower of the two (2) sums heretofore mentioned, and the resulting figure
shall indicate the permissible maximum percentage by which the base rent may be increased by virtue of the rise in the CPI.
B. For annual increases effective on any date between May 31, 1980, and December 14, 1981, inclusive, no such increase shall exceed a maximum of
eight percent (8%).
C. For annual increases effective on or after December 15, 1981, no such increase shall exceed eight percent (8%) or the CPI as of the date of the notice
of increase, computed pursuant to subsection A of this section, whichever is less.
D. Any security deposit lawfully imposed by the landlord on a tenant may be increased by the same percentage as the base rent may be increased, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, at such time as the base rent is recomputed.
E. A landlord who is not in substantial compliance with any of the provisions of section 4-5-801 of this chapter shall not demand, accept or retain the
annual rent increase otherwise permitted by this section. (1962 Code § 11-3.03; amd. 1988 Code; Ord. 17-O-2745, eff. 1-19-2018)
4-5-304: CAPITAL EXPENDITURE SURCHARGE:
A. At the time of the recomputation of the base rent, the landlord may further add to the apartment unit rent a surcharge for capital expenditures for which
the landlord incurred expense after the date of the last preceding rent increase in accordance with the following criteria:
1. If the capital expenditures benefited the entire building, they shall be prorated among all the tenants' rents on a square footage basis of the
apartment units but annualized in accordance with the straight line depreciation schedules allowed under the Federal Income Tax laws.
2. If the capital expenditures inure solely to the benefit of one or more of the apartment units but to less than all, the surcharge shall be so annualized
but shall be applied and/or prorated only with respect to the one or more units actually so benefited.
3. No capital expenditure surcharge shall be allowed which exceeds four percent (4%) of the amount of the base rent level which validly existed prior to
the latest allowable recomputation of the rent. For the purposes of such computation, the base rent level for any time period shall not include any
capital expenditure surcharge but may include amounts expended for major remodeling permitted pursuant to this chapter.
4. Except where capital expenditures are required by law, any capital expenditure to the interior of any apartment unit shall only be performed with the
written consent of the tenant, or the landlord shall not be entitled to add a surcharge for such expenditure. The tenant shall not unreasonably
withhold such consent.
5. Upon a request by a tenant, the landlord shall provide such tenant with copies of documents utilized by the landlord in determining the amount of the
capital expenditure surcharge to be paid by such tenant, and such surcharge shall be abated until such time as the landlord deposits in the mail such
documentation addressed to the tenant with adequate postage.
B. No landlord shall be entitled to any rental increase based upon any capital expenditure, the computation or representation of which has been arrived at
collusively between the landlord and a contractor or other person.
C. For the purposes of this section, "capital expenditure" shall mean a permanent improvement or renovation, being an allowable capital expenditure for
internal revenue service purposes, and other than ordinary repairs or maintenance, the use of which will continue for at least five (5) years after the
date of the completion of such capital expenditure. Painting or texturing the exterior of a building shall also be a capital expenditure for the purposes of
this section. (1962 Code § 11-3.04)
4-5-305: EXPENDITURES MANDATED BY LAW:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 158/797
In addition to any capital expenditure surcharge permitted by section 4-5-304 of this article, the landlord may pass through to the tenant of an apartment
unit the cost of any improvement mandated by any government statute, rule, or regulation enacted after March 24, 1981, including interest or the value of
capital up to eighteen percent (18%) per annum, allocated among all the dwelling units of the building in proportion to their size, determined in square feet,
and annualized in accordance with the straight line depreciation schedules allowed under the federal income tax laws. (1962 Code § 11-3.05; amd. 1988
Code)
4-5-306: UTILITY EXPENSE SURCHARGE:
A. When the base rent of an apartment unit includes one or more of the basic and essential utility services (for example, electricity, gas, or water, but not
including such services as telephone or television cable service), at the time of the recomputation of the base rent the landlord may further add to such
apartment unit rent a surcharge for the increased cost of any such utility service provided in accordance with the following criteria:
1. For recomputations done after March 1, 1980, but before February 28, 1981, such surcharge shall be computed by comparing the cost of each such
utility incurred in the year March 1, 1979, to February 29, 1980, with the cost of such utility in the year March 1, 1980, to February 28, 1981. Any
amount of the latter which is more than eight percent (8%) above the former may be passed through to the tenant, prorated among all the units
whose base rent includes such utility service on a square footage basis, and payable one-twelfth (1/12) per month.
2. For recomputations done after February 28, 1981, such surcharge shall be computed by comparing the utility costs for the year beginning March 1,
and ending on the last day of February just ended, with those costs for the year preceding that year. If the utility costs have increased by a
percentage which is greater than the annual rent increase percentage which was last allowed by section 4-5-303 of this article, any amount of such
utility costs which is in excess of that amount which would have been arrived at had the utility costs increased only by the same percentage as the
annual rental increase may be passed through to the tenants in accordance with the provisions of subsection A1 of this section.
B. Any notice of surcharge imposed pursuant to this section shall include an explanation of how such surcharge was calculated, including the base utility
cost, the increased cost, and the proration calculation. Upon a request of the tenant, the actual utility billing shall be shown to the tenant, and the
increase shall be abated pending such showing. (1962 Code § 11-3.06; amd. 1988 Code)
4-5-307: SURCHARGE FOR ADDITIONAL TENANTS:
If an apartment rental agreement specifies the maximum number of occupants in an apartment unit but does not contain any provision stating a specific
dollar amount for an additional tenant occupying such apartment unit after the inception of the agreement, the landlord may exercise his or her rights under
state laws or may raise the rent on such apartment unit a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the base rent for each additional tenant. If such additional
tenant subsequently vacates the apartment unit, the rent shall be reduced by the amount that was imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section. This
section shall apply only when there is a partial change in the occupancy of an apartment unit and one or more of the occupants of the apartment unit,
pursuant to the rental agreement, still remains in lawful possession of the apartment unit. (1962 Code § 11-3.07; amd. Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-308: WATER SERVICE PENALTY SURCHARGE:
A. In addition to the rent otherwise permitted by this chapter, the landlord may pass through to the tenant of an apartment unit ninety percent (90%) of the
cost of any water service penalties and/or surcharges imposed by the city pursuant to the water rate schedule established by resolution of the city
council provided that the landlord installs water conservation plumbing fixtures in such unit in accordance with the requirements of title 9, chapter 4,
article 1 of this code or voluntarily installs, at the landlord's expense, low flow toilets or such other water saving toilets approved by the director of public
works, showerhead restrictors and faucet aerators in such unit. If the landlord does not install such water conservation plumbing fixtures, the landlord
shall be liable for and pay without any pass through to the tenant all penalties and/or surcharges imposed by the city on the landlord's apartment units.
B. In order to qualify for the pass through authorized by subsection A of this section, the landlord shall:
1. Notify all tenants, in a form required by the rent stabilization office, by registered or certified mail, of the provisions of this section and any other
information required to be given by the rent stabilization office; and
2. Provide all affected tenants with copies of the water bill for the applicable billing period and the basis for the calculation of the pass through. (Ord.
91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991)
4-5-309: REFUSE FEE SURCHARGE:
A. In addition to the rent otherwise permitted by this chapter, the landlord may pass through to the tenant of an apartment unit the cost of any refuse fee
imposed by the city pursuant to a resolution or ordinance of the city council.
B. In order to qualify for the pass through authorized by subsection A of this section, the landlord shall:
1. Provide written notice, by registered or certified mail, to all tenants thirty (30) days in advance of the imposition of the pass through, of the provisions
of this section, that the pass through is not part of the base rent, that the refuse fee may be increased by the city, and any other information required
to be given by the rent stabilization office.
2. Provide all tenants with a copy of the landlord's utility bill which sets forth the appropriate refuse fee and the basis for the calculation of the pass
through. (Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-5-310: APARTMENT UNITS SUBJECT TO LEASES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 159/797
A. If an apartment unit has been subject to a written apartment rental agreement for a time period longer than one year, and such agreement expires, and
the annual rent increases during the period of the agreement have not at least equaled the total annual increases which would have been allowed
pursuant to section 4-5-303 of this article, then, upon the expiration of such agreement, the landlord, at his or her option, may adjust the base rent of
the apartment unit upward to a level not exceeding that which could have been imposed during the period of the agreement but for the existence of the
agreement; provided, however, such period shall not be greater than three (3) years. Notice of the landlord's election to exercise such option shall be
given to the tenant not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such agreement.
B. If an apartment unit has been subject to a written apartment rental agreement for a time period longer than one year, and the landlord has made capital
expenditures during the term of the agreement, then, upon the expiration of such agreement, the landlord, at his or her option, may add to the rent for
such apartment unit a capital expenditure surcharge in an amount which could have been imposed pursuant to the provisions of section 4-5-304 of this
article but for the existence of such agreement for capital expenditures incurred by the landlord during the period of the agreement; provided, however,
such period shall not be greater than three (3) years. Notice of the landlord's election to exercise such option shall be given to the tenant not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such agreement.
C. If an apartment unit has been subject to a written apartment rental agreement for a time period longer than one year, and the rent of such apartment
unit included one or more of the basic and essential utility services, as defined in section 4-5-306 of this article, then, upon the expiration of such
agreement, the landlord, at his option, may add to the rent for such apartment unit a surcharge for utility expense calculated pursuant to the provisions
of said section 4-5-306 of this article by comparing the utility billings available for the year immediately prior to the expiration of such agreement, such
year to end with the month which contains the latest utility billings available at the time of the computation, with the next year immediately preceding
such year. If the utility costs have increased by a percentage which is greater than the percentage of increase provided in the lease for the year just
ended compared to the year immediately preceding, any amount of such utility costs which is in excess of that amount which would have been arrived
at had the utility costs increased only by the same percentage as the annual rental increase may be passed through to the tenant, prorated among all
the units whose base rent includes such utility service on a square footage basis, and payable one-twelfth (1/12) per month. Notice of the landlord's
election to exercise such option shall be given to the tenant not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of such agreement. (1962 Code § 11-
3.09; amd. Ord. 91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991; Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-5-311: NOTICES:
A. A landlord shall not be authorized to place into effect any apartment unit rent increase unless the landlord has given to the tenant(s) involved advance
written notice of the proposed rent increase in accordance with the requirements of state law. The notice shall state the basis justifying the rent
increase and shall advise the tenant that records and documentation verifying the increase will be made available for inspection by the tenant or the
tenant's representative upon request.
B. Any rent increase notice which specifies a future rent level higher than that permitted by the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed void by
reason of that fact alone, but shall be effective as a notice of rent increase to the permissible level, and the tenant may refuse to pay that portion of the
increase which is in excess of the permissible level.
C. No rent increase otherwise allowable under the provisions of this chapter shall be imposed unless the landlord has conspicuously posted and
maintained in the lobby, hallway, or other similarly public location in the apartment building the name, address, and telephone number of either the
owner of the building, or the owner's authorized agent, and has provided each tenant with a written statement of such information so that tenants can
communicate readily with such owner or agent. (1962 Code § 11-3.09; amd. Ord. 91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991; Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992; Ord. 04-O-
2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-312: RERENTING AFTER VOLUNTARY VACANCIES:
A. Whenever an apartment unit is voluntarily vacated by all the tenants occupying such apartment unit, the provisions of this chapter shall be of no force or
effect with respect to the rerental of the apartment unit; provided, however, such unit shall again become subject to the provisions of this chapter upon
rerental unless such unit is exempted by section 4-5-102 of this chapter. So long as such unit continues to be rented to one or more of those persons
who rented such unit when it was subject to the provisions of this chapter or any prior law of the city relating to rent stabilization, such rent shall not
exceed that allowable under the provisions of this chapter, nor shall the level of housing services be reduced.
B. Notwithstanding any provision of subsection A of this section to the contrary, if an apartment unit has been vacated following a notice of eviction for the
purpose of demolishing or moving the apartment building, converting the apartment unit to condominium use, or remodeling the apartment unit, and the
apartment unit is subsequently rerented, such apartment unit shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter until such time as such subsequent
tenant has occupied the apartment unit for at least one year. If such subsequent tenant voluntarily vacates the apartment unit after the one year period,
the provisions of subsection A of this section shall apply. (1962 Code § 11-3.10; amd. Ord. 91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991; Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-5-313: BASE RENT AFTER THE CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT AS BUILDING MANAGER:
If a building manager ceases to perform services as a building manager and, with the agreement of the landlord, remains in the apartment unit he or she
occupied while a building manager, the landlord, at his or her option, may adjust the base rent of the apartment unit upward to a level not exceeding that
which could have been imposed during the period when such tenant was acting as building manager but for the fact of such tenant's status as building
manager. The landlord may also impose any capital expenditure surcharge and utility expense surcharge in amounts equal to those which have been
validly imposed upon an apartment building which were not imposed on such tenant because of such tenant's status as building manager. (1962 Code
§ 11-3.11; amd. Ord. 91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991; Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-5-314: ROUNDING OFF:
Any base rent and any rental increase permitted by any provision of this chapter may be rounded off by increasing the amount to the nearest whole dollar
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 160/797
if it is fifty cents ($0.50) or more or by decreasing the amount to the nearest whole dollar if it is forty nine cents ($0.49) or less. (1962 Code § 11-3.12; amd.
Ord. 91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991; Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
Article 4. Functions And Duties Of The Hearing Officer Designated By The City
Manager With Respect To Certain Rent Adjustment Issues
4-5-401: DUTIES OF THE HEARING OFFICERS DESIGNATED BY THE CITY MANAGER:
A. A hearing officer designated by the city manager ("hearing officer") shall have the power and authority to receive applications from landlords for special
increases above those permitted by article 3 of this chapter based on hardship. To hear such matters (subject to the applicable rules and requirements
of due process), and to render binding decisions in such matters, subject to the rights of appeal by aggrieved parties who have direct interests in
particular decisions pursuant to the procedures prescribed by title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The hearing officer may grant any such application when
the hearing officer determines that such relief is necessary in order to:
1. Implement the purposes of this chapter and to protect the public health and welfare, with particular reference to protecting the occupants of
apartment units from unreasonable rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the landlord's need to have the rent be sufficient to cover
maintenance and the costs of operation of the building, and encouraging capital improvements; or
2. Prevent the strict application of this chapter from imposing an undue economic hardship upon a landlord in a particular case of special
circumstances; or
3. Prevent the provisions of this chapter from operating in an unreasonable or illegal manner in the particular circumstances of an applicant.
B. The hearing officer shall also have jurisdiction to hear and decide the following matters:
1. Should a dispute or disagreement arise from or concerning the status of any tenant as a building manager, the tenant or the landlord may apply to
the hearing officer for the resolution of the dispute or disagreement, and the hearing officer shall have jurisdiction to decide the question. Any ruling
of the hearing officer thereon shall be final insofar as administrative processes are concerned.
2. Should a dispute or disagreement arise concerning the validity or amount of any capital expenditure surcharge collected or proposed to be charged
by the landlord pursuant to section 4-5-304 or 4-5-308 of this chapter, the tenant or the landlord may apply to the hearing officer for the resolution of
the dispute or disagreement, and the hearing officer shall have jurisdiction to decide the question. Any ruling of the hearing officer thereon shall be
final insofar as administrative processes are concerned. If the amount of the capital expenditure appears to be excessive, the hearing officer shall
reduce the surcharge to a reasonable amount.
3. Should a dispute arise concerning the validity and/or amount of any utility surcharge collected or proposed to be charged by a landlord pursuant to
section 4-5-306 or 4-5-308 of this chapter, the tenant or the landlord may apply to the hearing officer for the resolution of the dispute, and the hearing
officer shall have jurisdiction to decide the question. Any ruling of the hearing officer thereon shall be final insofar as administrative processes are
concerned.
4. If a tenant refuses to consent to a proposal by a landlord to make capital expenditures to the interior of such tenant's apartment unit, and the landlord
believes such refusal is unreasonable, the landlord may apply to the hearing officer for permission to add a capital expenditure surcharge for such
work, regardless of the tenant's refusal, and the hearing officer shall have jurisdiction to decide the issue. Any ruling of the hearing officer thereon
shall be final insofar as administrative processes are concerned.
5. If a landlord, tenant, and/or other claimant has been unable to agree to the distribution of a relocation fee deposited into escrow pursuant to section
4-5-604 of this chapter, and more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice of deposit was given has passed, the division and distribution of the
relocation fee shall be determined by the hearing officer following a hearing on the matter. The landlord and each person who received notice of the
deposit shall be notified of the time and place of such hearing not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing. The hearing officer's decision in such
matter shall be final, subject to an appeal to the council pursuant to the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
C. Any decision of the hearing officer referred to in subsections B1, B2, B3 and B4 of this section, which cannot be appealed to the city council, may be
reconsidered by the hearing officer if the decision was based on incorrect information or erroneous data provided to the hearing officer at the hearing
on the matter. In order for the hearing officer to reconsider a decision pursuant to this subsection C:
1. A written request for reconsideration must be filed with the department of building and safety within one year after the date of adoption of the hearing
officer's resolution regarding the particular case; and
2. After reviewing the reconsideration request, the city's file concerning the matter, and any other relevant information, the department of building and
safety concurs that the hearing officer's decision was based on incorrect information or erroneous data and recommends that the hearing officer
modify his or her prior decision. Only that portion of the hearing officer's decision which was based upon the incorrect information or erroneous data
may be reconsidered by the hearing officer pursuant to this subsection.
D. Any decision of the hearing officer referred to in subsections B1, B2, B3 and B4 of this section, which cannot be appealed to the city council or
reconsidered by the hearing officer pursuant to subsection C of this section, is a final decision that is subject to judicial review pursuant to California
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 and must be filed in accordance with the time periods specified therein. (1962 Code § 11-4.02; amd. Ord. 94-O-
2200, eff. 7-8-1994; Ord. 98-O-2299, eff. 6-5-1998; Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-402: ADJUSTMENTS FOR TAX INCREASES:
A. If a landlord seeks a special hardship rent increase because of an increase in the amount of property taxes assessed against an apartment building, a
hearing officer designated by the city manager ("hearing officer") may grant such an increase in accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection 4-5-
401A1 of this article and the following criteria:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 161/797
1. A determination will be made of each apartment unit's share of the increased property tax by comparing the square footage of the apartment unit to
all dwelling units in the building.
2. A maximum of five percent (5%) of the base rent of an apartment unit may be added to the rent of such apartment unit, divided into twelve (12) equal
monthly payments per year. In determining the amount of increase to impose under this section, the hearing officer shall consider the apartment
unit's share of the increased property tax and the rent levels of all dwelling units in the building.
B. The hearing officer shall determine the period of time when any special hardship rent increase granted pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be
valid; provided, however, such period shall not exceed three (3) years. At the end of such time, a landlord may apply to the hearing officer for a
continuation of the increase. The hearing officer may grant such continuation if it meets the criteria set forth in subsection A of this section.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, if any ownership interest in an apartment building is transferred, any special hardship
rent increase granted pursuant to this section shall become null and void as of the date of such transfer. A new owner may apply for a special hardship
rent increase pursuant to the provisions of this article.
D. Any decision of the hearing officer referred to in subsection A of this section is a final decision that is subject to judicial review pursuant to California
Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 and must be filed in accordance with the time periods specified therein. (1962 Code § 11-4.03; amd. Ord. 98-O-
2299, eff. 6-5-1998; Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-403: FEES:
The council shall establish by ordinance or resolution the charges and fees to be paid by any applicant to defray the expenses of the city in processing any
application made pursuant to any provision of this chapter. (1962 Code § 11-4.04; amd. Ord. 98-O-2299, eff. 6-5-1998)
Article 5. Evictions
4-5-501: EVICTIONS:
It is unlawful for a landlord to bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit except upon a ground specified in this article. (1962 Code
§ 11-5.01)
4-5-502: FAILURE TO PAY RENT:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has failed to pay the rent to which the landlord is entitled or any
surcharge which has been lawfully imposed. (1962 Code § 11-5.02; amd. Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-5-503: VIOLATIONS OF OBLIGATIONS:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has violated an obligation or covenant of the tenancy, including,
but not limited to, any obligation in a written apartment rental agreement, other than the obligation to render possession upon proper notice, and has failed
to cure such violation after having received written notice thereof from the landlord. (1962 Code § 11-5.03)
4-5-504: MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCES:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant is committing or permitting to exist a nuisance in, or is causing
damage to, the apartment unit or to the appurtenances thereof, or to the common areas of the complex containing the apartment unit, or is creating an
unreasonable interference with the comfort, safety, or enjoyment of any of the other residents of the same or any adjacent building. (1962 Code § 11-5.04)
4-5-505: ILLEGAL USES:
A. A landlord may bring any action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant is using or permitting an apartment unit to be used for an
illegal purpose.
B. For the purposes of this section, "illegal purpose" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the occupancy of the apartment unit by a number of
persons in excess of the following numbers:
Bachelor/single 3 persons
1 bedroom of 1,200 square feet or less 4 persons
1 bedroom in excess of 1,200 square feet 5 persons
2 bedrooms of 1,500 square feet or less 5 persons
2 bedrooms in excess of 1,500 square feet 6 persons
3 bedrooms of 2,100 square feet or less 7 persons
3 or more bedrooms in excess of 2,100 square feet 8 persons
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 162/797
(1962 Code § 11-5.05)
4-5-506: REFUSAL TO EXECUTE LEASES:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit following the expiration of a written apartment rental agreement, or any
written renewal or extension thereof, if a tenant who had such an agreement has refused to execute a written renewal or extension thereof provided all of
the following conditions are met:
A. The landlord made a written request or demand for such renewal or extension at least thirty (30) days prior to the date such agreement expired;
B. The proposed renewal or extension was for a term of the same duration as the agreement which expired; and
C. The proposed renewal or extension contained the same terms and conditions as the agreement which expired provided the rent level in such proposed
renewal or extension has been determined in accordance with the requirements of article 3 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 11-5.06)
4-5-507: REFUSAL TO PROVIDE ACCESS:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has refused the landlord reasonable access to the unit for the
purpose of making repairs or improvements, or for the purpose of inspection as permitted or required by an apartment rental agreement or by law, or for
the purpose of showing the apartment unit to any prospective purchaser or mortgagee. (1962 Code § 11-5.07)
4-5-508: UNAPPROVED SUBTENANTS:
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the person in possession of the apartment unit at the end of the term of
any apartment rental agreement is a subtenant who was not approved by the landlord. This section shall not be deemed to invalidate any provision in any
written apartment rental agreement pertaining to the assignment or subleasing of an apartment unit. (1962 Code § 11-5.08)
4-5-509: USE BY LANDLORDS:
A. A landlord may recover the possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover such possession for use and occupancy by the
landlord or the landlord's spouse, children, or parents provided all of the following conditions are met:
1. The landlord has provided not less than ninety (90) days' written notice of tenancy termination to the tenant, which notice specifies the name and
then current address of the proposed occupant, and has filed a copy of such notice with the city clerk prior to serving such notice upon the tenant;
2. The tenant is paid a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of this chapter; and
3. At no time during the ninety (90) day notice period is there a vacant apartment unit in the building comparable to the one sought by the landlord; and
4. The unit to be recovered by the landlord is occupied by the most recent tenant(s) to occupy a unit comparable to the type of unit sought by the
landlord or relative described in subsection A of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no senior citizen or handicapped tenant shall be evicted
unless there is no other unit on the parcel of land comparable to the type of unit sought by the landlord or relative. If there are one or more
comparable units in such case, the landlord shall recover the comparable unit occupied by the most recent tenant who is not a senior citizen or
handicapped person. For the purposes of this section, "senior citizen" shall mean a person sixty five (65) years of age or older. Whether a unit is
comparable to the type of unit sought by the landlord or relative shall be determined by the city.
B. A landlord may recover the possession of only one apartment unit located on the same parcel of land for the purposes set forth in this section,
regardless of the number of buildings on such parcel.
C. If the landlord or the landlord's relative, as defined in subsection A of this section, occupies an apartment unit obtained pursuant to the provisions of this
section for at least one year, such apartment unit shall be deemed to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, if such
apartment unit is subsequently rerented to a person who is not the landlord or such relative of the landlord for a rental amount less than that set forth in
subsection 4-5-102G of this chapter, such apartment unit shall again be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. For the purposes of this section only, "landlord" shall mean only such natural persons as have the largest ownership interest in the building or in the
entity owning the building.
E. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the landlord has not acted in good faith if the owner or relative for whom the tenant was evicted does not
move into the apartment unit within thirty (30) days and occupy said unit for a minimum of twelve (12) continuous months thereafter. In situations when
the apartment unit is being remodeled pursuant to a building permit issued by the city, the thirty (30) day period shall commence when the final
inspection of the remodeling work is performed and approved by the city's department of building and safety. (1962 Code § 11-5.09; amd. Ord. 04-O-
2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-510: CHANGE OF BUILDING MANAGERS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 163/797
A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover the possession of an apartment
unit then occupied by an apartment building manager whose employment as such has been, or is to be, terminated, and such possession is needed for
the sole purpose of occupancy by a new manager. (1962 Code § 11-5.10)
4-5-511: DEMOLITION OR CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession so as to demolish or
move the building or to convert apartment units into condominiums, stock cooperatives, or community apartments provided there is compliance with all of
the following conditions:
A. The landlord has given the tenant not less than ninety (90) days' written notice, which has been approved by the city's rent stabilization office, that such
tenancy shall terminate on a date after April 1, 1979. The notice shall state the specific reason for giving such notice and shall be deemed to include a
representation and agreement by the landlord that the recovery of possession of the apartment unit is solely for a reason within the scope of this
section and for no other reason. If payment of the relocation fees required by article 6 of this chapter does not accompany such notice, such notice
shall also specify the amount of the relocation fees so required and that the tenant may collect such fees at the time the tenant vacates the unit. Such
notice shall not be required if:
1. The demolition of the building has been mandated by law to be performed at an earlier date; or
2. Such notice has been given to a tenant who has vacated the apartment unit, the apartment unit has been rerented to a new tenant, and the new
tenant has been advised by the landlord in writing that the notice of termination of tenancy had been given to the prior tenant. This exemption shall
apply only if a copy of the written notice provided to such new tenant is filed with the city clerk within one week after such new tenant begins the
occupancy of the apartment unit; or
3. A prior written notice which specified less than one year's notice has been given, and the tenant has been notified in writing, within thirty (30) days
after August 21, 1979, that the prior written notice shall be considered an effective one year notice under this section.
B. The notice required by subsection A of this section shall not be given or served until such time as the landlord has:
1. Filed all necessary applications for the proposed project or development including, but not limited to, application for a demolition permit, moving
permit or tentative map and paid all of the fees required by the city in connection with such applications;
2. Notified the city's rent stabilization department that an application to convert apartment units to condominiums or to move or demolish the building
has been filed with any other department of the city so that notice of such filing may be given to the tenants at the property; and
3. That all permits or approvals necessary to commence demolition, removal or conversion have been issued.
C. No notice of tenancy termination given pursuant to this section after February 24, 1981, shall be effective unless all the applicable provisions of this
chapter have been complied with, and a copy of such notice has been placed on file with the city clerk prior to such notice being served on the tenant.
A minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each building for which notices of tenancy termination are to be filed with the city clerk shall be
paid to the city for processing the notices prior to the filing of a notice with the city clerk. Where there are more than ten (10) apartment units in a
building which are subject to this provision of this chapter, and for which notices of tenancy termination have been given, an additional fee of ten dollars
($10.00) shall be paid to the city for each unit in excess of ten (10) units for which a notice of tenancy termination is given.
D. A relocation fee shall have been paid or deposited into escrow in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of this chapter. If an apartment unit vacated
pursuant to this section has been rerented, the new tenant shall not be entitled to any relocation fee or other relocation benefit if he or she received the
notices required by subsections A2 and E of this section.
E. Any apartment unit vacated pursuant to this section, if rerented, shall remain subject to the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be the responsibility of
the landlord to notify any new tenant in writing of the controlled rents and the duration of the notice of termination. A copy of such notice shall be filed
with the city clerk within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the apartment unit.
F. No writ or judgment restoring possession to the landlord shall be issued or entered unless and until the complaint for such writ or judgment filed by the
landlord contains the landlord's declaration under penalty of perjury of the giving of notice to the tenant as required by this section, the expiration of any
required notice period, the payment or deposit into escrow of the relocation fee specified in article 6 of this chapter, and that demolition or moving or the
work of conversion into condominiums will commence within sixty (60) days after the filing of such complaint.
G. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a building manager who is entitled to the occupancy of an apartment unit solely because of his or her
position as building manager. (1962 Code § 11-5.11; amd. Ord. 89-O-2068, eff. 8-8-1989)
4-5-512: MAJOR REMODELING:
A. A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession so as to do alteration
work on the building for the purposes of major remodeling provided that there is compliance with all of the following conditions:
1. The landlord has given the tenant not less than one year's written notice that such tenancy shall terminate. The notice shall state the specific reason
for giving such notice and shall be deemed to include a representation and agreement by the landlord that the recovery of possession of the
apartment unit is solely for a reason within the scope of this section and for no other reason. Such notice shall contain a statement of the rights of the
tenants pursuant to this section and article 6 of this chapter and shall be approved by the city. Such notice shall not be required if:
a. Major remodeling of the building has been mandated by law to be performed at an earlier date; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 164/797
b. Such notice has been given to a tenant who has vacated the apartment unit, the apartment unit has been rerented to a new tenant, and the new
tenant has been advised by the landlord in writing that the notice of termination of tenancy had been given to the prior tenant. This exemption shall
apply only if a copy of the written notice provided to such new tenant is filed with the city clerk within one week after such new tenant begins the
occupancy of the apartment unit.
2. The notice required by subsection A1 of this section shall not be given or served until such time as the landlord has received approval for the giving
of such notice by the hearing officer. Such approval shall be given upon a showing by the landlord that written notice was received from the building
official that the landlord has complied with all requirements, except for approval of final plans, for the issuance of a building permit for the purpose of
major remodeling. The landlord shall file with the application for giving notice a copy of the final plans and specifications for the proposed remodeling.
The hearing officer designated by the city manager ("hearing officer") shall establish the estimated new rent for the remodeled unit which shall not
exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the previous base rent. The notice required by subsection A1 of this section shall include such estimated
new rent.
3. No notice of tenancy termination given pursuant to this section after February 11, 1986, shall be effective unless all the applicable provisions of this
chapter have been complied with and a copy of such notice has been placed on file with the city clerk prior to such notice being served on the tenant.
A minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each building for which notices of tenancy termination are to be filed with the city clerk shall be
paid to the city for processing the notices prior to the filing of a notice with the city clerk. Where there are more than ten (10) apartment units in a
building which are subject to this provision of this chapter, and for which notices of tenancy termination have been given, an additional minimum fee
of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the city for each unit in excess of ten (10) units for which a notice of tenancy termination is given.
4. A relocation fee shall have been paid or deposited into escrow in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of this chapter. If an apartment unit
vacated pursuant to this section has been rerented the new tenant shall not be entitled to any relocation fee or other relocation benefit if he or she
received the notices required by subsections A1a, A1b and A2 of this section.
B. Any apartment unit vacated pursuant to this section if rerented after eviction but prior to remodeling, shall remain subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and it shall be the responsibility of the landlord to notify any new tenant in writing of the controlled rents and the duration of the notice of
termination. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the city clerk within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the apartment unit.
C. Any provision of this chapter notwithstanding, in lieu of receiving a relocation fee or being relocated to a comparable unit, a tenant, within sixty (60) days
after the service of the one year notice of tenancy termination required by subsection A of this section, may elect to relocate to a comparable unit in the
building to be remodeled. The comparability of the replacement unit shall be determined by the city. For the purposes of this subsection, "comparability"
shall mean a unit with the same number of bedrooms as the unit vacated, and which is in a clean, functional, and secure state.
D. Should a tenant elect to be relocated to a comparable unit in the building to be remodeled, he or she shall serve written notice of such election on the
landlord and file a copy thereof with the city clerk. Such notice shall be served and filed within sixty (60) days after service of the one year notice of
tenancy termination required by subsection A of this section. Upon the service and filing of the required notice of election within the time set forth
herein, the notice of tenancy termination shall become null and void as to that tenant for the purposes of eviction. Upon the receipt of multiple notices
required hereby, the landlord shall make an application to the hearing officer for a determination of the order of relocation. The hearing officer shall
determine the order of relocation, taking into consideration the relative hardships relocation will place on the tenants electing to relocate hereunder.
E. Upon the approval of the order of relocation as provided for in subsection D of this section, or if only one notice of election is received by the landlord,
the landlord shall serve upon the tenant(s) and shall file a copy thereof with the city clerk notice of availability of the replacement unit. The tenant shall
have thirty (30) days after the service and filing of the notice of availability to relocate to the replacement unit. The landlord shall pay the reasonable
cost of such relocation. Any disagreement between the landlord and tenant regarding the reasonableness of the cost of relocation shall be submitted to
the hearing officer for resolution. Should a tenant fail to relocate to the replacement unit within said thirty (30) days, the tenant shall vacate the unit
within ninety (90) days after the date the notice of availability of the replacement unit was served and filed, and the landlord shall be relieved of the
obligation of paying any further fees or costs provided for in this chapter.
F. Upon the completion of the remodeling, the landlord shall serve upon tenant(s) and shall file a copy thereof with the city clerk notice of availability of the
remodeled unit. The tenant shall have thirty (30) days after the service and filing of the notice of availability of the remodeled unit to relocate. The
landlord shall pay the reasonable cost of such relocation. Any disagreement between the landlord and tenant regarding the reasonableness of the cost
of relocation shall be submitted to the hearing officer for resolution. Should a tenant fail to relocate to the remodeled unit within said thirty (30) days, the
tenant shall vacate the replacement unit within ninety (90) days after the date the notice of availability of the remodeled unit was served and filed, and
the landlord shall be relieved of the obligation of paying any further fees or costs provided for in this chapter; provided, however, the landlord shall not
be relieved of the obligation of paying fees or costs provided for in this chapter if the new base rent is in excess of the estimated base rent.
G. If an apartment unit has been vacated for major remodeling, upon the completion of such remodeling the new allowable base rent for the apartment unit
shall not exceed an amount equal to the previous base rent increased by the actual amount expended on such remodeling, including such items as
interest or the value of capital up to eighteen percent (18%) per annum, and any fees or costs required to be paid to or on behalf of tenants pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, amortized in accordance with the straight line depreciation schedules allowed under the federal income tax law, but in no
case less than five (5) years. The tenant evicted for the purpose of such remodeling shall have a right of first refusal to rent the remodeled apartment
unit provided such right is exercised within thirty (30) days after the landlord notifies the tenant when the apartment unit will be ready to be rented. If
such tenant rerents the remodeled apartment unit, the landlord may increase the actual rent chargeable to such tenant at the time he or she actually
occupies the unit to the new base rent allowed by this subsection or twenty percent (20%) above the estimated rent, whichever is less; provided,
however, if a tenant elects to relocate as provided for in subsection C of this section, the new base rent shall not be applicable until one year after the
notice of eviction required by subsection A of this section. The new base rent shall be established by the hearing officer within ninety (90) days after the
tenant has reoccupied the unit or, if the tenant decides not to reoccupy the unit, within ninety (90) days after the unit is ready for occupancy, and the
tenant has requested to be notified of the new base rent. The hearing officer shall be provided copies of documents by the landlord to be used to
establish the new allowable base rent. If a tenant who was evicted pursuant to this section rerents the remodeled apartment unit, such tenant shall
return the relocation fee to the landlord, less actual direct moving expenses and the amount by which such tenant's rent during the period when the
tenant was out of the apartment exceeded the tenant's rent prior to such move, but not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month.
H. No writ or judgment restoring possession to the landlord shall be issued or entered unless and until the complaint for such writ or judgment filed by the
landlord contains the landlord's declaration under penalty of perjury of the giving of notice to the tenant as required by this section, the expiration of the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 165/797
one year notice period, the payment or deposit into escrow of the relocation fee specified in article 6 of this chapter, and that the major remodeling work
will commence within sixty (60) days after the filing of such complaint.
I. The landlord shall file true copies of rental agreements for the rerented apartment units after major remodeling has been completed with the city clerk
within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the apartment unit.
J. The city manager or his designee shall issue guidelines for the implementation of the foregoing requirements, and all applicants for major remodeling
pursuant to this section shall comply therewith.
K. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a building manager who is entitled to occupancy of an apartment unit solely because of his or her
position as building manager.
L. For the purposes of this section, "major remodeling" shall mean the remodeling or reconstruction of more than one apartment unit subject to the
provisions of this chapter in an existing building and a minimum amount per remodeled unit is expended on such work as follows:
Bachelor/single $ 7,000.00
1 bedroom 10,000.00
2 bedrooms 15,000.00
3 or more bedrooms or 2 bedrooms and den 20,000.00
M. The landlord shall obtain the building permit to perform the major remodeling within ninety (90) days after the date when the affected unit becomes
vacant. The major remodeling shall be completed within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit. However, the building and safety
department may extend the one year completion period upon a showing by the landlord of good cause for the failure to complete the repairs within the
one year period and diligent efforts to complete the work timely. If the major remodeling work is not completed within the time period established by this
subsection, including any extensions thereof approved by the city, the landlord shall be liable in a civil action, if commenced within two (2) years of the
displacement, to any tenant who is evicted from an apartment unit as a result of a notice issued pursuant to subsection A1 of this section for the actual
damages that were the proximate result of the displacement. (1962 Code § 11-5.12; amd. Ord. 98-O-2299, eff. 6-5-1998; Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-
2004)
4-5-513: WITHDRAWAL OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL STRUCTURE FROM THE RENTAL MARKET:
A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the landlord intends to withdraw all apartment units in a building or structure
on a parcel of land from the rental market, subject to the following conditions and requirements:
A. This section shall only apply to and shall only be exercised for the concurrent withdrawal of all apartment units in all buildings or structures on a parcel
of land from the rental market, except where there is more than one building on a parcel and all buildings contain four (4) or more apartment units, in
which case the landlord may withdraw all of the units in one or more of the buildings.
B. Not less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the landlord intends to withdraw the apartment units in a building or structure from the rental
market, the landlord shall:
1. Provide written notice under penalty of perjury to the city of such intent, which notice shall contain the following information: address and legal
description of the subject property, number of rental units being removed, the names of all tenants residing in the units being removed, the year the
tenant(s) moved into the unit, the base rent for the unit and the current lawful rent applicable to each such unit.
2. Record with the Los Angeles County registrar-recorder a written notice prepared by and containing such information as is prescribed by the city
summarizing the landlord's notice of intent and certifying that evictions have been commenced or will commence in accordance with applicable law.
3. Provide to the city's rent stabilization office copies of the notice recorded with the county and the notice(s) which were provided to the affected
tenants.
4. If the tenant or lessee is at least sixty two (62) years of age or is disabled, and has lived in his or her apartment unit for at least one year prior to the
date of delivery to the city of the notice required by subsection B1 of this section, then the date of withdrawal of that apartment unit shall be extended
to one year from the date of delivery of the notice to the city, provided that the tenant or lessee has given the landlord written notice of his or her
entitlement to the extension within sixty (60) days of delivery to the public entity of the notice of intent to withdraw the apartment unit from the rental
market. In this situation, the following provisions shall apply:
a. The tenancy shall be continued on the same terms and conditions as existed on the date of delivery to the city of the notice of intent to withdraw,
subject to any adjustments otherwise available under this title;
b. No party shall be relieved of the duty to perform any obligation under the lease or rental agreement;
c. The landlord may elect to extend the date of withdrawal on any other accommodation within the same building up to one year after the date of
delivery to the city of the notice of intent to withdraw, subject to subsections B4a and B4b of this section;
d. Within thirty (30) days of the notification by the tenant or lessee to the landlord of his or her entitlement to an extension, the landlord shall give
written notice to the city of the claim that the tenant or lessee is entitled to stay in his or her apartment unit for one year after the date of delivery to
the city of the notice of intent to withdraw;
e. Within ninety (90) days of the date of delivery to the city of the notice of intent to withdraw, the landlord shall give written notice to the city and the
affected tenant(s) or lessee(s) of the landlord's election to extend the date of withdrawal and the new date of withdrawal under subsection B4c of
this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 166/797
C. The landlord shall provide written notice of termination of tenancy to all affected tenants at least thirty (30) days prior to the service of and recordation of
the notices in subsection B of this section which has been approved by the city's rent stabilization office and filed with the city clerk's office and which
notice shall contain the following information:
1. That the landlord is evicting the tenant pursuant to this section and will provide the city with written notice required in subsection B of this section;
2. A summary of the specific information to be provided to the city in that notice regarding the tenant's unit;
3. That within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice to terminate, the tenant may notify the landlord in writing that the tenant would be interested in
rerenting the unit if it is reoffered for rent at a future time and advising the tenant to notify the landlord and rent stabilization office of all future address
changes;
4. A description of the tenant's rights as set forth in subsections E, F and G of this section;
5. That the landlord will provide a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of this chapter and that such fee may not be waived by
the tenant, except as specifically provided in section 4-5-607 of this chapter; and
6. That if the tenant or lessee is at least sixty two (62) years of age or is disabled, and has lived in his or her apartment unit for at least one year prior to
the date of delivery to the city of the notice required by subsection B1 of this section, then the tenancy shall be extended to one year after the
delivery of the notice to the city, provided that the tenant gives written notice of his or her entitlement to the extension to the landlord within sixty (60)
days of the date of delivery to the city of the notice of intent to withdraw. The notice shall further state that if these circumstances exist, the extended
tenancy shall be continued on the same terms and conditions that existed on the date of delivery of the notice of withdrawal to the city, subject to any
rent increases that are allowed by this chapter, and that no party shall be relieved of the duty to perform any obligation under the lease or rental
agreement during the extended tenancy.
D. At the time when the tenant(s) vacate the unit, the landlord shall pay a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of article 6 of this chapter.
E. In the event the withdrawn units are reoffered for rent by the landlord within two (2) years from the effective date of withdrawal, the landlord shall:
1. Provide written notice of such action to the city not less than thirty (30) days prior to rerenting the units;
2. Offer the units at the same rent level as of the date of withdrawal plus any annual rent increases permitted by this chapter that would have applied
had the units not been withdrawn;
3. Provide those tenants who provided a notice of interest in rerenting pursuant to subsection C3 of this section the right of first refusal to rerent the unit
by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, to the last address provided by the tenant, in which case the tenant shall have no less than thirty (30)
days within which to accept the offer, by personal service or certified or registered mail. Copies of these notices and the mail receipts shall be filed
with the city's rent stabilization office within one week of mailing;
4. Be liable in a civil action if commenced within three (3) years of displacement to any tenant evicted due to withdrawal of a unit pursuant to this
section for actual damages which were the proximate result of the displacement, in accordance with the principles enunciated in sections 7262 and
7264 of the California Government Code, and punitive damages;
5. Be liable in a civil action if commenced within three (3) years of displacement to the City for exemplary damages for displacement of tenants or
lessees.
F. In the event the withdrawn units are reoffered for rent by the landlord within five (5) years after any notice of intent to withdraw the apartment unit is filed
with the City, or within five (5) years after the effective date of the withdrawal of the apartment unit, whichever is later, the landlord shall provide not less
than thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such action to the City prior to rerenting the units and shall offer the units at the same rent level as of the
date of withdrawal, plus annual rent increases permitted by this chapter that would have applied had the units not been withdrawn.
G. Moreover, if the units are reoffered for rent within ten (10) years from the effective date of removal, the landlord shall provide those tenants who
provided notice of interest in rerenting pursuant to subsection C3 of this section the right of first refusal to rerent the unit, by certified or registered mail,
postage prepaid, to the last address provided by the tenant, in which case the tenant shall have no less than thirty (30) days within which to accept the
offer by personal service or certified or registered mail. Copies of these notices and the mail receipts shall be filed with the City's Rent Stabilization
Office within one week of mailing. Failure of the landlord to provide the tenant with this right of first refusal shall render the landlord liable in a civil
action to the tenant in punitive damages in an amount not to exceed six (6) months' rent.
H. This section shall in no respect relieve a landlord from complying with the requirements of any applicable State law or of any lease or rental agreement.
I. The remedies provided for in this section shall not be exclusive and shall not preclude a tenant from pursuing any alternative remedy available under
law. Failure by any landlord to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a defense in any unlawful detainer action brought to evict a
tenant under this section.
J. For the purpose of this section, the term "landlord" shall be interpreted to include any and all successors in interest of any landlord, and the term
"disabled" shall mean a person with a disability, as defined in section 12955.3 of the California Government Code.
K. The notice to the City provided for in this section shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council.
L. This section is intended to implement the requirements of sections 7060 through 7060.7 of the California Government Code, and shall be interpreted so
as to provide the City with the broadest range of authority permitted under these provisions and to intrude the least into the City's authority in all other
applications of its power.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 167/797
M. This section shall apply to any apartment units that are being removed from the rental market, if the notice of termination of tenancy required by State
law or by a lease agreement has not been given at the time of adoption hereof or if such notice has been given, the notice period has not expired at the
time of adoption hereof. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-514: DISRUPTIVE TENANT:
A. A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if: 1) the tenant repeatedly or continually disturbs the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of one or more tenants who occupy other rental units in the apartment building where the tenant resides or 2) antagonizes, intimidates or
bullies one or more tenants who reside at that apartment building ("disruptive tenant") and the disruptive tenant does not cease the behavior when
requested to do so by the other tenant(s) or by the property owner or manager of the premises.
B. The landlord or the landlord's representative may, at the sole option of the landlord, file an application with the City and request that a subcommittee of
the City Council make a determination that a tenant is a disruptive tenant, as defined in subsection A of this section. If the subcommittee determines
that the tenant is a disruptive tenant, then the landlord or the landlord's representative may serve the tenant with a written notice to terminate the
tenancy in accordance with State law.
1. The subcommittee of the City Council shall be composed of two (2) members of the City Council. Council members shall be appointed by the Mayor
and serve on the subcommittee for a two (2) month term. At the end of the term the Mayor may reappoint one or both Council members or may
appoint new Council members to the subcommittee.
2. If a landlord or the landlord's representative files an application with the City's rent stabilization program for the subcommittee to make a
determination whether a tenant is a disruptive tenant whose tenancy can be terminated with notice, the landlord first shall have given the disruptive
tenant at least one written notice describing the disruptive conduct and requiring the tenant to discontinue the conduct. The landlord either shall
deliver the notice to the tenant personally, send it by certified mail, or shall post it on the door of the tenant's unit. Prior to filing the application with
the City's rent stabilization program, the landlord also shall have served the tenant with a copy of the application either by personally delivering the
application to the tenant or by posting the application on the door of the tenant's unit. Proof of service of the application on the tenant shall be filed
with the City concurrently with the application. The application shall be submitted either on a form supplied by the City or shall substantially comply
with the requirements of the City's form.
3. The application shall set forth the name, address and unit number of the tenant and shall describe specifically the tenant's conduct that the landlord
contends is disruptive, the dates when the conduct described in the application occurred, and the dates when the landlord requested that the tenant
cease the disruptive conduct, including the written notice described in subsection B2 of this section. The application also may include the names of
any individuals who observed the tenant's conduct and may include written statements by the witnesses describing the conduct.
4. The City shall schedule a hearing (but need not hold the hearing) within ten (10) days of the filing of a complete application with the City. If one or
both members of the subcommittee is/are not available to attend a hearing on an application filed pursuant to this section, the rent stabilization
program shall contact other members of the City Council to determine if another Council member is available to attend the hearing. The rent
stabilization program shall send written notice of the hearing to the landlord and the affected tenant by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of the hearing.
5. The subcommittee shall control the conduct of the hearing and rule on procedural requests. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner deemed
by the subcommittee to be most suitable to secure the information and documentation that is necessary to render an informed decision, and to result
in a fair decision without unnecessary delay.
a. At the hearing, the parties may offer any documents, testimony, written declarations, or other evidence that is relevant to the application. Formal
rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such proceedings.
b. There shall be no oral communication outside the hearing between the members of the subcommittee and any party or witness, or the substance
of such communication shall be disclosed at the beginning of the hearing. All discussion during the hearing shall be recorded.
c. The hearing shall ordinarily proceed in the following manner, unless the subcommittee determines that some other order of proceedings would
better facilitate the hearing:
(1) A brief presentation by or on behalf of landlord, including testimony by any other affected parties and witnesses in support of the application.
(2) A brief presentation by or on behalf of the tenant, including testimony by any other affected parties and witnesses in opposition to the
application.
(3) A brief rebuttal by the landlord.
d. The subcommittee shall establish equitable time limits for presentations at a hearing, with a minimum length of ten (10) minutes each for the
landlord and the tenant, subject to adjustments for translation and reasonable accommodation.
e. City staff shall maintain an official hearing record, which shall constitute the exclusive record of the decision.
f. All parties to a hearing shall have the right to seek assistance in developing their positions, preparing their statements, and presenting evidence
from an attorney, tenant organization representative, landlord association representative, translator, or any other person. If the representative will
be speaking on behalf of the party at the hearing, the party shall so advise the subcommittee.
g. To prevail on the application, the landlord must carry the burden of demonstrating that the tenant has been a disruptive tenant, as defined in
subsection A of this section.
h. Two (2) votes are required to approve an application. The vote shall be taken after the conclusion of the presentations by the landlord and the
tenant and any deliberations by the members of the subcommittee. If two (2) votes are not cast in favor of approving the application, the
application is deemed to be denied.
i. Within five (5) business days after the hearing record is closed, the subcommittee shall reconvene and issue a written determination setting forth its
decision approving or denying the application, with written findings in support thereof.
6. A written notice of the decision shall be mailed by the City to the applicant and the affected tenant within two (2) days of the issuance of the decision
by the subcommittee. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the hearing decision.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 168/797
7. If the subcommittee determines that the tenant is a disruptive tenant, the landlord may serve the tenant with written notice provided in accordance
with State law to terminate the tenancy. The landlord is not required to pay relocation fees to the tenant. When the disruptive tenant vacates the unit
in response to the notice, the landlord may not increase the rent that will be charged for the unit above the amount that was being charged to the
disruptive tenant, other than any adjustments otherwise available under this chapter.
8. Any final decision of the subcommittee is subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 and must be filed in
accordance with the time periods specified therein. (Ord. 18-O-2766, eff. 12-21-2018)
Article 6. Relocation Fees
4-5-601: FEES REQUIRED:
Any landlord who serves a notice of eviction on a tenant pursuant to section 4-5-509 or 4-5-511 of this chapter shall pay to such tenant a relocation fee in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Such fee shall be due and payable to such tenant whether or not such landlord actually utilizes the apartment
unit for the purposes stated in the notice of eviction, unless such landlord notifies such tenant in writing of the withdrawal of the notice of eviction prior to
such time as the tenant has given the landlord notice of his or her last date of occupancy, or has vacated if such notice of the last date of occupancy is not
given by the tenant, and files a copy of such notice with the City Clerk within one week after serving such notice on the tenant. (1962 Code § 11-6.01)
4-5-602: TIME OF PAYMENT:
The relocation fee or pro rata share thereof shall be paid to any tenant who vacates the apartment unit at the time he or she vacates it. If the landlord
cannot in good faith determine if such tenant is entitled to receive the relocation fee, it shall be deposited in escrow in accordance with section 4-5-604 of
this article. (1962 Code § 11-6.02)
4-5-603: PAYMENT TO EACH TENANT:
The entire fee shall be paid to a tenant who is the only such tenant in an apartment unit. Where an apartment unit is occupied by two (2) or more tenants,
payment may be prorated among such tenants, or payment may be made to one tenant, provided all the adult occupants of the apartment unit have
signed a stipulation to judgment as described in subsection 4-5-604A of this chapter. In no event shall a landlord be liable to pay a total amount more than
the fee required by section 4-5-605 of this chapter for one apartment unit to all the tenants in any one apartment unit. (1962 Code § 11-6.03)
4-5-604: DEPOSIT INTO ESCROW:
A. Where the apartment unit has not been vacated, the relocation fee shall be deposited in escrow if the tenant has furnished the landlord with the tenant's
notarized stipulation to judgment in favor of the landlord for the repossession of the apartment unit by the landlord within sixty (60) days after the
payment of the relocation fee to such tenant. The fee shall be released from escrow to the tenant on the day the tenant vacates the apartment unit.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require any tenant to vacate any apartment unit before the expiration of the full notice time to which such
tenant is entitled.
B. If the landlord in good faith is unable to determine who are the persons entitled to receive the relocation fee, the landlord shall deposit the relocation fee
into escrow. The landlord shall give written notice of such deposit to each person, including the tenant and any occupant other than the tenant, who in
the landlord's good faith judgment may be entitled to receive the relocation fee. Upon agreement by all persons so notified, the escrow holder may
distribute the relocation fee in the manner agreed upon. If such parties cannot reach agreement within thirty (30) days after the date the notice of
deposit is given, the division and distribution of the relocation fee shall be determined by the hearing officer following a hearing on the matter. No
distribution from an escrow may occur until the tenant who is to receive the relocation fee has signed a notarized stipulation to judgment pursuant to
subsection A of this section if the tenant still occupies the apartment unit.
C. All the costs of an escrow opened pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be borne by the landlord. (1962 Code § 11-6.04; amd. Ord. 04-O-2449,
eff. 6-18-2004)
4-5-605: AMOUNT OF RELOCATION FEES:
The amount of the relocation fee payable to a tenant entitled to such fee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be determined as follows:
Apartment Size Relocation Fee
Studio $ 6,193.00
1 bedroom 9,148.00
2 or more bedrooms 12,394.00
Provided further, those households that include a senior, disabled person, or a minor shall be entitled to an additional relocation fee in the amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Any tenant whose occupancy of the apartment unit began after the date when the required notice of termination was given shall not be entitled to any
relocation fee.
Commencing July 1, 2018, and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the amounts of the relocation fees set forth above shall be increased annually by a
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 169/797
percentage equal to the percentage increase, if any, of the consumer price index for the Los Angeles/Riverside/Orange County area, as published by the
United States department of labor, bureau of labor statistics between May 1 of the then current year, and May 1 of the immediately preceding year. (Ord.
17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-5-606: PHYSICAL RELOCATION IN LIEU OF FEE:
In lieu of the relocation fee required by section 4-5-605 of this article, the landlord, at his option, may relocate the tenant into a comparable replacement
apartment unit satisfactory to the tenant, in which event the landlord shall be liable only for the actual costs of relocating the tenant, up to the maximum as
set forth in section 4-5-605 of this article per apartment unit. A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold the approval of a replacement apartment unit offered
by the landlord. For the purposes of this section only, comparability shall be determined from the following factors: size, price, location, proximity to
medical and recreational facilities, parks, community centers, shops, transportation, schools, churches, and synagogues, amenities, and, if the tenant
desires, the location of the apartment unit in the city. (1962 Code § 11-6.06)
4-5-607: WAIVER OF RELOCATION RIGHTS:
A. If a tenant who has received a thirty (30) day notice to vacate premises does not vacate the apartment unit within such time, and the landlord thereafter
files a complaint for writ or judgment restoring possession which meets all the requirements of this chapter, and the court orders such tenant to vacate
the apartment unit, such tenant shall be deemed to have waived all rights to any relocation benefit to which he or she is otherwise entitled pursuant to
this chapter and shall return to the landlord any relocation fee or other benefit so received, plus interest at the rate allowed by law.
B. After the required notice period has passed, if a tenant has signed a stipulation for judgment and received a relocation fee, whether directly or as the
result of the distribution of a deposit, and does not vacate the apartment unit within sixty (60) days after such receipt, such tenant shall be deemed to
have waived all rights to any relocation benefits to which he or she is otherwise entitled pursuant to this chapter, and such tenant shall be obligated to
return to the landlord any relocation fee or other benefit so received, plus interest at the rate allowed by law. (1962 Code § 11-6.07; amd. Ord. 89-O-
2068, eff. 8-8-1989)
Article 7. Remedies
4-5-701: ILLEGAL RENT OR WITHHOLDING OF RELOCATION FEES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any landlord wilfully to demand, accept, receive, or retain any payment of rent in excess of the maximum lawful rent permitted for
an apartment unit by this chapter after receiving written notice from the City that such payment does or will exceed such allowable maximum.
B. It shall be unlawful for any landlord wilfully to fail to provide any tenant with any relocation benefit to which such tenant is entitled after receiving written
notice from the City that such relocation benefit is due and owing to such tenant.
C. A tenant shall not pay otherwise allowable rent increases under section 4-5-303 of this chapter, if the landlord has failed to substantially comply with the
registration requirements of section 4-5-801 of this chapter. The nonpayment of rent increases in good faith pursuant to this paragraph shall be a
defense to any action brought to recover possession of a rental unit for nonpayment of rent. (1962 Code § 11-7.01; amd. Ord. 17-O-2745, eff. 1-19-
2018)
4-5-702: REDUCTION OF HOUSING SERVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any landlord to reduce housing services with the intent, or for the purpose, of circumventing substantially the requirements and/or
provisions or spirit of this chapter. A violation of this section shall be deemed an increase in rent to the extent of the monetary advantage achieved thereby
for the landlord or to the extent necessary for the tenant to incur expenses to gain equivalent housing services by other means, whichever is greater. Any
such violation shall accordingly be subject to the tenants' remedies prescribed in sections 4-5-704 and/or 4-5-705 of this article. (1962 Code § 11-7.02)
4-5-703: UNLAWFUL EVICTIONS:
A. A landlord shall not issue or cause to be issued a notice of termination of tenancy in order to circumvent the application of this chapter. For the purposes
of this section, a notice of termination of tenancy shall include any notice, oral or written, given to a tenant for the purpose of having the tenant vacate
an apartment unit. The failure of a landlord to withdraw any such notice of termination of tenancy after the landlord has been given written notice by the
city manager or his designee or by the city attorney that such notice of termination of tenancy is in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the intent of the landlord to circumvent the application of this chapter and shall be unlawful.
B. It shall be unlawful for a landlord to evict, or to attempt to evict, a tenant or to regain, or attempt to regain, the possession of an apartment unit upon a
pretext that the landlord desires occupancy for himself or herself or some relative in order to circumvent the application of this chapter. A tenant in such
circumstances may refuse to deliver possession of the apartment unit and may establish the landlord's subterfuge as a defense in any action brought
by the landlord to recover the possession of the apartment unit. Additionally, in the event a violation of this section is discovered by the tenant after the
possession of an apartment unit has been regained by the landlord, such landlord shall be liable to the dispossessed tenant in a civil action for treble
the amount of the rent which would have been payable by the tenant had the tenant not been dispossessed, and for the entire period of the
dispossession, not exceeding six (6) months; and in any such action the tenant shall also be entitled to payment by the landlord of the tenant's
reasonable attorney fees and costs as determined by the court. (1962 Code § 11-7.03)
4-5-704: REFUSAL TO COMPLY WITH ILLEGAL REQUESTS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 170/797
A. A tenant may refuse to pay any increase in rent which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and such violation shall be a defense in any action
brought to recover the possession of an apartment unit or to collect rent.
B. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection A of this section, in any action brought to recover the possession of an apartment unit, the court may
consider as grounds for denial any violation of any provision of this chapter. In addition, a court determination that the action was brought in retaliation
for the exercise of any right conferred by this chapter shall also be grounds for denial. (1962 Code § 11-7.04)
4-5-705: CIVIL REMEDIES:
Whenever it is necessary for any tenant to file a court action to recover the payment of rent which was in excess of the maximum lawful rent allowed by the
provisions of this chapter, or to collect any relocation fee provided for in this chapter, or whenever it is necessary for the tenant to defend against any
wrongful action filed in court against the tenant by the landlord to recover the possession of the tenant's apartment unit, the landlord shall be liable to the
tenant for damages in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or not more than three (3) times the amount by which the payment or payments
demanded, accepted, received, or retained exceed the lawful amount of rent or relocation fees due to the tenant, whichever is greater. The prevailing party
in any such suit shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and costs as determined by the court. (1962 Code § 11-7.05)
4-5-706: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions, or failing to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties and
punishment of title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. (1962 Code § 11-7.06)
4-5-707: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES:
No building, demolition, or moving permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor has complied with all the provisions of this chapter applicable to the
apartment unit or units on which the proposed work is to be done. No final map shall be approved unless it is found that the subdivider has complied with
all the provisions of this chapter or any prior law of the City relating to rent stabilization applicable to the subdivision at the time the tentative map was
approved. (1962 Code § 11-7.07)
Article 8. Registration
4-5-801: REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS:
A. Initial Registration: A landlord must register every rental unit that is subject to the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice
from the City that registration is required, unless the rental unit is specifically exempt under this chapter. Registration is complete only when all required
information has been provided to the City and all outstanding fees and penalties have been paid.
B. After Terminated Exemption: When a rental unit that was exempt from this chapter becomes governed by this chapter for the first time, the landlord
must register the unit with the City within thirty (30) days after the exemption ends.
C. Reregistration: When a rental unit is rerented after a vacancy, the landlord must reregister the unit with the City within thirty (30) days after the rerental.
D. Registration Amendment; Landlord Required To Notify City Of Changed Registration Information: A landlord must file a registration amendment with the
City within thirty (30) days of a change in a rental unit's ownership or management, or a change in the owner's or manager's contact information. (Ord.
17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
Chapter 6
RENT STABILIZATION, PART II
4-6-0: DEFINITIONS:
A. Context: For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases shall be defined as set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning is intended.
B. Words Not Defined: Words and phrases used in this chapter which are not specifically defined shall be construed according to their context and the
customary usage of the language.
C. Words Defined:
APARTMENT RENTAL AGREEMENT: An agreement, oral, written, or implied, between a landlord and tenant for the use or occupancy of an apartment
unit and for housing services.
APARTMENT UNIT: Any dwelling unit in the City of Beverly Hills rented or offered for rent for human habitation, together with the land and accessory
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 171/797
structures appurtenant thereto, and all housing services supplied in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, which is not exempted under section
4-6-1 of this chapter.
DISABLED PERSON: Any person who is receiving benefits from a Federal, State, or local government, or from a private entity on account of a
permanent disability that prevents the person from engaging in regular, full time employment.
HOUSING SERVICES: All services connected with the use or occupancy of an apartment unit, including, but not limited to, repairs, replacement,
maintenance, painting, light, heat, water, elevator service, laundry facilities and privileges, janitor service, refuse removal, furnishings, telephone, off
street parking, and any other benefits, privileges, or facilities.
LANDLORD: An owner, lessor, sublessor, or any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity entitled to receive rent for the use of any
apartment unit or the agent, representative, or successor of any of the foregoing.
MINOR: Any person younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
RENT: The consideration, including any bonus, benefits, or gratuity demanded or received, for or in connection with the use or occupancy of an
apartment unit, including, but not limited to, monies demanded or paid for parking, for furnishings, for housing services of any kind, or for subletting.
TENANT: A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person entitled to the use or occupancy of any apartment unit.
VACANCY: The departure from an apartment unit of all of the tenants. For purposes of this definition, the term "tenant" shall not include persons who
took possession of an apartment unit as sublessees or assignees after January 1, 1999, if the rental agreement restricts or prohibits subletting or
assignment, and the restriction has not been satisfied or the prohibition has not been waived.
VOLUNTARILY VACATED: The vacancy of an apartment unit by all of the tenants. "Voluntarily vacated" does not include a vacancy: 1) that is the result
of a constructive eviction of the tenant, which was caused by the landlord; 2) when the previous tenancy was terminated by the landlord by notice
pursuant to Civil Code section 1946; or 3) when the previous tenancy was terminated due to a change in the terms of the tenancy noticed pursuant to
Civil Code section 827, except a change permitted by law in the amount of rent or fees. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-6-1: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all multiple residential dwellings consisting of two (2) or more units with the exception of those units that are
subject to the existing rent stabilization provisions of chapter 5 of this title; those units excluded under subsections 4-5-102A through E of this title; and
units in a building that has a certificate of occupancy issued after February 1, 1995. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-6-2: BASE RENT:
Except as provided in sections 4-6-4 and 4-6-5 of this chapter, the maximum rent which an apartment owner may charge for any dwelling unit regulated by
this chapter is the monthly rental charged for such unit on April 30, 1986, plus any rental increases permitted by section 4-6-3 of this chapter. (1962 Code
§ 12-1.02; amd. 1988 Code)
4-6-3: RENTAL INCREASES:
An increase in rental above the base rental specified in section 4-6-2 of this chapter is permissible for any dwelling unit regulated by this chapter, subject to
each of the following limitations:
A. Only one increase shall be permissible within any twelve (12) month period; provided, further, that a twelve (12) month period shall have elapsed since
the last increase.
B. Such increases shall not exceed the greater of: 1) three percent (3%) of the rental rate then in effect, or 2) the percentage equal to the percentage
increase, if any, of the Consumer Price Index for the Los Angeles/Riverside/Orange County Area, as published by the United States Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics between May 1 of the then current year and May 1 of the immediately preceding year.
C. The tenant shall be given written notice of any such increase in accordance with the requirements of State law and the terms of any written lease or
rental agreement applicable to the tenancy prior to the effective date of such increase.
D. A landlord who is not in substantial compliance with any of the provisions of section 4-6-10 of this chapter shall not demand, accept or retain the annual
rent increase otherwise permitted by this section. (1962 Code § 12-1.03; amd. Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004; Ord. 17-O-2725, eff. 1-24-2017; Ord.
17-O-2728, eff. 2-21-2017; Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017; Ord. 17-O-2745, eff. 1-19-2018)
4-6-4: WAIVER OF PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER PROHIBITED:
A. Any provision of an apartment rental agreement or lease, or any other agreement between a landlord and a tenant, which waives any provision of this
chapter relating to the maximum amount of rent to be paid for an apartment unit, shall be deemed to be against public policy and shall be void, unless
expressly authorized by State law.
B. This amended section is applicable to any apartment rental agreement, lease, amendment or extension, that is subject to the provisions of this chapter
and that is executed on or after December 29, 2000. This section, as it existed on December 29, 2000, shall continue to govern any apartment rental
agreement, lease, amendment or extension, that is subject to the provisions of this chapter, and that was executed prior to December 29, 2000. (1962
Code § 12-1.04; amd. Ord. 01-O-2371, eff. 3-30-2001)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 172/797
4-6-5: VACANCIES:
A. Any dwelling unit regulated by this chapter that is: 1) "voluntarily vacated" by all tenants of that unit, as defined in section 4-6-0 of this chapter, or 2)
vacated because the tenants are evicted for the reasons specified under subsection 4-6-6A, B, C, D, F, or G of this chapter, may be subsequently
rented at any amount mutually agreed upon by the landlord and the new tenant. The monthly amount agreed upon for the commencement of the
tenancy shall be the base rental, and any subsequent rental increases shall be subject to the provisions of section 4-6-3 of this chapter.
B. At least twenty four (24) hours prior to the execution of a lease or rental agreement by a tenant, the landlord shall provide written notice to the
prospective tenant, in the form and languages required by the City: 1) of the provisions of this chapter, including the amount of the annual rent increase
that is allowed by this chapter; 2) of any parking restrictions in the area adjacent to the apartment building; 3) that at the termination of the lease
agreement, unless the lease is extended or a new lease is entered into, a month to month tenancy will be created if the tenant holds over and the
landlord accepts rent from the tenant; 4) that the month to month tenancy can be terminated at any time, if the landlord provides written notice to the
tenant in accordance with the requirements of all applicable laws; 5) of the City's home occupation requirements; and 6) of State laws that establish
certain rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants. The landlord shall provide notice in a manner so that the prospective tenant receives the
notice at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the execution of the lease or rental agreement. When the landlord provides the notice required by this
subsection to the prospective tenant, the landlord shall have the prospective tenant acknowledge in writing that the tenant received the written notice,
as required by this subsection. The landlord shall retain written documentation of compliance with this provision for the duration of the tenancy. There
shall be a rebuttable presumption that the landlord did not provide the written notice to the tenant that is required by this section, if the landlord fails to
produce said written documentation upon request.
C. In addition to any other remedy for a violation of this Code, if a landlord fails to provide the written notice required by subsection B of this section to the
tenant, the landlord shall be subject to an administrative penalty pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code in the amount of five hundred
dollars ($500.00). The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to a lease or rental agreement that is entered into within six (6) months of
the effective date hereof, or December 18, 2004. (1962 Code § 12-1.05; amd. Ord. 01-O-2371, eff. 3-30-2001; Ord. 04-O-2449, eff. 6-18-2004; Ord. 18-
O-2766, eff. 12-21-2018)
4-6-6: EVICTIONS:
It is unlawful for a landlord to bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit except upon a ground specified in this section.
A. Failure To Pay Rent: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has failed to pay the rent to which the
landlord is entitled or any surcharge which has been lawfully imposed.
B. Violations Of Obligations: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has violated an obligation or
covenant of the tenancy, including, but not limited to, any obligation in a written apartment rental agreement, other than the obligation to render
possession upon proper notice, and has failed to cure such violation after having received written notice thereof from the landlord.
C. Maintenance Of Nuisances: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant is committing or permitting to
exist a nuisance in, or is causing damage to, the apartment unit or to the appurtenances thereof, or to the common areas of the complex containing the
apartment unit, or is creating an unreasonable interference with the comfort, safety, or enjoyment of any of the other residents of the same or any
adjacent building.
D. Illegal Uses:
1. A landlord may bring any action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant is using or permitting an apartment unit to be used for an
illegal purpose.
2. For the purposes of this section, "illegal purpose" shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the occupancy of the apartment unit by a number of
persons in excess of the following numbers:
Bachelor/single 3 persons
1 bedroom of 1,200 square feet or less 4 persons
1 bedroom in excess of 1,200 square feet 5 persons
2 bedrooms of 1,500 square feet or less 5 persons
2 bedrooms in excess of 1,500 square feet 6 persons
3 bedrooms of 2,100 square feet or less 7 persons
3 or more bedrooms in excess of 2,100 square feet 8 persons
E. Refusal To Execute Leases: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit following the expiration of a written
apartment rental agreement, or any written renewal or extension thereof, if a tenant who had such an agreement has refused to execute a written
renewal or extension thereof provided all of the following conditions are met:
1. The landlord made a written request or demand for such renewal or extension at least thirty (30) days prior to the date such agreement expired;
2. The proposed renewal or extension was for a term of the same duration as the agreement which expired; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 173/797
3. The proposed renewal or extension contained the same terms and conditions as the agreement which expired provided the rent level in such
proposed renewal or extension has been determined in accordance with the requirements of section 4-6-3 of this chapter.
F. Refusal To Provide Access: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the tenant has refused the landlord
reasonable access to the unit for the purpose of making repairs or improvements, or for the purpose of inspection as permitted or required by an
apartment rental agreement or by law, or for the purpose of showing the apartment unit to any prospective purchaser or mortgagee.
G. Unapproved Subtenants: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the person in possession of the apartment
unit at the end of the term of any apartment rental agreement is a subtenant who was not approved by the landlord. This section shall not be deemed
to invalidate any provision in any written apartment rental agreement pertaining to the assignment or subleasing of an apartment unit.
H. Use By Landlords:
1. A landlord may recover the possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover such possession for use and occupancy by
the landlord or the landlord's spouse, children, or parents provided all of the following conditions are met:
a. The landlord has provided not less than ninety (90) days' written notice of tenancy termination to the tenant, which notice specifies the name and
then current address of the proposed occupant, and has filed a copy of such notice with the City's rent stabilization program prior to serving such
notice upon the tenant;
b. The tenant is paid a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-9 of this chapter; and
c. At no time during the ninety (90) day notice period is there a vacant apartment unit in the building comparable to the one sought by the landlord;
and
d. The unit to be recovered by the landlord is occupied by the most recent tenant(s) to occupy a unit comparable to the type of unit sought by the
landlord or relative described in this subsection H1. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no senior citizen or handicapped tenant shall be evicted unless
there is no other unit on the parcel of land comparable to the type of unit sought by the landlord or relative. If there are one or more comparable
units in such case, the landlord shall recover the comparable unit occupied by the most recent tenant who is not a senior citizen or handicapped
person. For the purposes of this section, "senior citizen" shall mean a person sixty five (65) years of age or older. Whether a unit is comparable to
the type of unit sought by the landlord or relative shall be determined by the City.
2. A landlord may recover the possession of only one apartment unit located on the same parcel of land for the purposes set forth in this section,
regardless of the number of buildings on such parcel.
3. If the landlord or the landlord's relative, as defined in subsection H1 of this section, occupies an apartment unit obtained pursuant to the provisions of
this section for at least one year, such apartment unit shall be deemed to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, if such
apartment unit is subsequently re-rented to a person who is not the landlord or such relative of the landlord, such apartment unit shall again be
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
4. For the purposes of this section only, "landlord" shall mean only such natural persons as have the largest ownership interest in the building or in the
entity owning the building.
5. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the landlord has not acted in good faith if the owner or relative for whom the tenant was evicted does
not move into the apartment unit within thirty (30) days and occupy said unit for a minimum of twelve (12) continuous months thereafter. In situations
when the apartment unit is being remodeled pursuant to a building permit issued by the City, the thirty (30) day period shall commence when the final
inspection of the remodeling work is performed and approved by the City's Department of Building and Safety.
I. Change Of Building Managers: A landlord may bring an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to
recover the possession of an apartment unit then occupied by an apartment building manager whose employment as such has been, or is to be,
terminated, and such possession is needed for the sole purpose of occupancy by a new manager.
J. Demolition Or Condominium Conversions: A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith
to recover possession so as to demolish or move the building or to convert apartment units into condominiums, stock cooperatives, or community
apartments provided there is compliance with all of the following conditions:
1. The landlord has given the tenant not less than ninety (90) days' written notice, which has been approved by the City's rent stabilization program,
that such tenancy shall terminate on a date after October 18, 2018. The notice shall state the specific reason for giving such notice and shall be
deemed to include a representation and agreement by the landlord that the recovery of possession of the apartment unit is solely for a reason within
the scope of this section and for no other reason. If payment of the relocation fees required by section 4-6-9 of this chapter does not accompany
such notice, such notice shall also specify the amount of the relocation fees so required and that the tenant may collect such fees at the time the
tenant vacates the unit. Such notice shall not be required if:
a. The demolition of the building has been mandated by law to be performed at an earlier date; or
b. Such notice has been given to a tenant who has vacated the apartment unit, the apartment unit has been re-rented to a new tenant, and the new
tenant has been advised by the landlord in writing that the notice of termination of tenancy had been given to the prior tenant. This exemption shall
apply only if a copy of the written notice provided to such new tenant is filed with the City's rent stabilization program within one week after such
new tenant begins the occupancy of the apartment unit; or
c. A prior written notice which specified less than one year's notice has been given, and the tenant has been notified in writing, within thirty (30) days
after October 18, 2018, that prior written notice shall be considered an effective one year notice under this section.
2. The notice required by subsection J1 of this section shall not be given or served until such time as the landlord has:
a. Filed all necessary applications for the proposed project or development including, but not limited to, application for a demolition permit, moving
permit or tentative map and paid all of the fees required by the City in connection with such applications;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 174/797
b. Notified the City's rent stabilization program that an application to convert apartment units to condominiums or to move or demolish the building
has been filed with any other department of the City so that notice of such filing may be given to the tenants at the property; and
c. That all permits or approvals necessary to commence demolition, removal or conversion have been issued.
3. No notice of tenancy termination given pursuant to this section after October 18, 2018, shall be effective unless all the applicable provisions of this
chapter have been complied with, and a copy of such notice has been placed on file with the City's rent stabilization program prior to such notice
being served on the tenant. A minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each building for which notices of tenancy termination are to be filed
with the City's rent stabilization program shall be paid to the City for processing the notices prior to the filing of a notice with the rent stabilization
program. Where there are more than ten (10) apartment units in a building which are subject to this provision of this chapter, and for which notices of
tenancy termination have been given, an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the City for each unit in excess of ten (10) units for
which a notice of tenancy termination is given.
4. A relocation fee shall have been paid or deposited into escrow in accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-9 of this chapter. If an apartment unit
vacated pursuant to this section has been re-rented, the new tenant shall not be entitled to any relocation fee or other relocation benefit if he or she
received the notices required by subsections J1b and J5 of this section.
5. Any apartment unit vacated pursuant to this section, if re-rented, shall remain subject to the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be the
responsibility of the landlord to notify any new tenant in writing of the controlled rents and the duration of the notice of termination. A copy of such
notice shall be filed with the rent stabilization program within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the apartment unit.
6. No writ or judgment restoring possession to the landlord shall be issued or entered unless and until the complaint for such writ or judgment filed by
the landlord contains the landlord's declaration under penalty of perjury of the giving of notice to the tenant as required by this section, the expiration
of any required notice period, the payment or deposit into escrow of the relocation fee specified in section 4-6-9 of this chapter, and that demolition or
moving or the work of conversion into condominiums will commence within sixty (60) days after the filing of such complaint.
7. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a building manager who is entitled to the occupancy of an apartment unit solely because of his or her
position as building manager.
K. Major Remodeling:
1. A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the landlord seeks in good faith to recover possession so as to do
alteration work on the building for the purposes of major remodeling provided that there is compliance with all of the following conditions:
a. The landlord has given the tenant not less than one year's written notice that such tenancy shall terminate. The notice shall state the specific
reason for giving such notice and shall be deemed to include a representation and agreement by the landlord that the recovery of possession of
the apartment unit is solely for a reason within the scope of this section and for no other reason. Such notice shall contain a statement of the rights
of the tenants pursuant to this section and section 4-6-9 of this chapter and shall be approved by the City's rent stabilization program. Such notice
shall not be required if:
(1) Major remodeling of the building has been mandated by law to be performed at an earlier date; or
(2) Such notice has been given to a tenant who has vacated the apartment unit, the apartment unit has been re-rented to a new tenant, and the
new tenant has been advised by the landlord in writing that the notice of termination of tenancy had been given to the prior tenant. This
exemption shall apply only if a copy of the written notice provided to such new tenant is filed with the City rent stabilization program within one
week after such new tenant begins the occupancy of the apartment unit.
b. The notice required by subsection K1a of this section shall not be given or served until such time as the landlord has received approval for the
giving of such notice by the Hearing Officer. Such approval shall be given upon a showing by the landlord that written notice was received from the
building official that the landlord has complied with all requirements, except for approval of final plans, for the issuance of a building permit for the
purpose of major remodeling. The landlord shall file with the application for giving notice a copy of the final plans and specifications for the
proposed remodeling. A Hearing Officer designated by the City Manager ("Hearing Officer") shall establish the estimated new rent for the
remodeled unit which shall not exceed one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the previous base rent. The notice required by subsection K1a of this
section shall include such estimated new rent.
c. No notice of tenancy termination given pursuant to this section after October 18, 2018, shall be effective unless all the applicable provisions of this
chapter have been complied with and a copy of such notice has been placed on file with the rent stabilization program prior to such notice being
served on the tenant. A minimum fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each building for which notices of tenancy termination are to be filed
with the rent stabilization program shall be paid to the City for processing the notices prior to the filing of a notice with the rent stabilization
program. Where there are more than ten (10) apartment units in a building which are subject to this provision of this chapter, and for which notices
of tenancy termination have been given, an additional minimum fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the City for each unit in excess of ten
(10) units for which a notice of tenancy termination is given.
d. A relocation fee shall have been paid or deposited into escrow in accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-9 of this chapter. If an apartment
unit vacated pursuant to this section has been re-rented the new tenant shall not be entitled to any relocation fee or other relocation benefit if he or
she received the notices required by subsections K1a, and K1a(2) of this section.
2. Any apartment unit vacated pursuant to this section if re-rented after eviction but prior to remodeling, shall remain subject to the provisions of this
chapter, and it shall be the responsibility of the landlord to notify any new tenant in writing of the controlled rents and the duration of the notice of
termination. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the rent stabilization program within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the
apartment unit.
3. Any provision of this chapter notwithstanding, in lieu of receiving a relocation fee or being relocated to a comparable unit, a tenant, within sixty (60)
days after the service of the one year notice of tenancy termination required by subsection K1 of this section, may elect to relocate to a comparable
unit in the building to be remodeled. The comparability of the replacement unit shall be determined by the rent stabilization program. For the
purposes of this subsection, "comparability" shall mean a unit with the same number of bedrooms as the unit vacated, and which is in a clean,
functional, and secure state.
4. Should a tenant elect to be relocated to a comparable unit in the building to be remodeled, he or she shall serve written notice of such election on
the landlord and file a copy thereof with the rent stabilization program. Such notice shall be served and filed within sixty (60) days after service of the
one year notice of tenancy termination required by subsection K1 of this section. Upon the service and filing of the required notice of election within
the time set forth herein, the notice of tenancy termination shall become null and void as to that tenant for the purposes of eviction. Upon the receipt
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 175/797
of multiple notices required hereby, the landlord shall make an application to the Hearing Officer for a determination of the order of relocation. The
Hearing Officer shall determine the order of relocation, taking into consideration the relative hardships relocation will place on the tenants electing to
relocate hereunder.
5. Upon the approval of the order of relocation as provided for in subsection K4 of this section, or if only one notice of election is received by the
landlord, the landlord shall serve upon the tenant(s) and shall file a copy thereof with the rent stabilization program notice of availability of the
replacement unit. The tenant shall have thirty (30) days after the service and filing of the notice of availability to relocate to the replacement unit. The
landlord shall pay the reasonable cost of such relocation. Any disagreement between the landlord and tenant regarding the reasonableness of the
cost of relocation shall be submitted to the Hearing Officer for resolution. Should a tenant fail to relocate to the replacement unit within said thirty (30)
days, the tenant shall vacate the unit within ninety (90) days after the date the notice of availability of the replacement unit was served and filed, and
the landlord shall be relieved of the obligation of paying any further fees or costs provided for in this chapter.
6. Upon the completion of the remodeling, the landlord shall serve upon tenant(s) and shall file a copy thereof with the rent stabilization program notice
of availability of the remodeled unit. The tenant shall have thirty (30) days after the service and filing of the notice of availability of the remodeled unit
to relocate. The landlord shall pay the reasonable cost of such relocation. Any disagreement between the landlord and tenant regarding the
reasonableness of the cost of relocation shall be submitted to the Hearing Officer for resolution. Should a tenant fail to relocate to the remodeled unit
within said thirty (30) days, the tenant shall vacate the replacement unit within ninety (90) days after the date the notice of availability of the
remodeled unit was served and filed, and the landlord shall be relieved of the obligation of paying any further fees or costs provided for in this
chapter; provided, however, the landlord shall not be relieved of the obligation of paying fees or costs provided for in this chapter if the new base rent
is in excess of the estimated base rent.
7. If an apartment unit has been vacated for major remodeling, upon the completion of such remodeling the new allowable base rent for the apartment
unit shall not exceed an amount equal to the previous base rent increased by the actual amount expended on such remodeling, including such items
as interest or the value of capital up to eighteen percent (18%) per annum, and any fees or costs required to be paid to or on behalf of tenants
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, amortized in accordance with the straight line depreciation schedules allowed under the Federal Income
Tax Law, but in no case less than five (5) years. The tenant evicted for the purpose of such remodeling shall have a right of first refusal to rent the
remodeled apartment unit provided such right is exercised within thirty (30) days after the landlord notifies the tenant when the apartment unit will be
ready to be rented. If such tenant re-rents the remodeled apartment unit, the landlord may increase the actual rent chargeable to such tenant at the
time he or she actually occupies the unit to the new base rent allowed by this subsection or twenty percent (20%) above the estimated rent,
whichever is less; provided, however, if a tenant elects to relocate as provided for in subsection K3 of this section, the new base rent shall not be
applicable until one year after the notice of eviction required by subsection A of this section. The new base rent shall be established by the Hearing
Officer within ninety (90) days after the tenant has reoccupied the unit or, if the tenant decides not to reoccupy the unit, within ninety (90) days after
the unit is ready for occupancy, and the tenant has requested to be notified of the new base rent. The Hearing Officer shall be provided copies of
documents by the landlord to be used to establish the new allowable base rent. If a tenant who was evicted pursuant to this section re-rents the
remodeled apartment unit, such tenant shall return the relocation fee to the landlord, less actual direct moving expenses and the amount by which
such tenant's rent during the period when the tenant was out of the apartment exceeded the tenant's rent prior to such move, but not more than one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month.
8. No writ or judgment restoring possession to the landlord shall be issued or entered unless and until the complaint for such writ or judgment filed by
the landlord contains the landlord's declaration under penalty of perjury of the giving of notice to the tenant as required by this section, the expiration
of the one year notice period, the payment or deposit into escrow of the relocation fee specified in section 4-6-9 of this chapter, and that the major
remodeling work will commence within sixty (60) days after the filing of such complaint.
9. The landlord shall file true copies of rental agreements for the re-rented apartment units after major remodeling has been completed with the rent
stabilization program within one week after the new tenant begins occupancy of the apartment unit.
10. The City Manager or his designee shall issue guidelines for the implementation of the foregoing requirements, and all applicants for major
remodeling pursuant to this section shall comply therewith.
11. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a building manager who is entitled to occupancy of an apartment unit solely because of his or her
position as building manager.
12. For the purposes of this section, "major remodeling" shall mean the remodeling or reconstruction of more than one apartment unit subject to the
provisions of this chapter in an existing building and a minimum amount per remodeled unit is expended on such work as follows:
Bachelor/single $ 7,000.00
1 bedroom 10,000.00
2 bedrooms 15,000.00
3 or more bedrooms or 2 bedrooms and den 20,000.00
13. The landlord shall obtain the building permit to perform the major remodeling within ninety (90) days after the date when the affected unit becomes
vacant. The major remodeling shall be completed within one year of the date of issuance of the building permit. However, the Building and Safety
Department may extend the one year completion period upon a showing by the landlord of good cause for the failure to complete the repairs within
the one year period and diligent efforts to complete the work timely. If the major remodeling work is not completed within the time period established
by this subsection, including any extensions thereof approved by the City, the landlord shall be liable in a civil action, if commenced within two (2)
years of the displacement, to any tenant who is evicted from an apartment unit as a result of a notice issued pursuant to subsection K1a of this
section for the actual damages that were the proximate result of the displacement.
L. Withdrawal Of Residential Rental Structure From The Rental Market: A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if the
landlord intends to withdraw all apartment units in a building or structure on a parcel of land from the rental market, subject to the following conditions
and requirements:
1. This section shall only apply to and shall only be exercised for the concurrent withdrawal of all apartment units in all buildings or structures on a
parcel of land from the rental market, except where there is more than one building on a parcel and all buildings contain four (4) or more apartment
units, in which case the landlord may withdraw all of the units in one or more of the buildings.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 176/797
2. Not less than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date the landlord intends to withdraw the apartment units in a building or structure from the
rental market, the landlord shall:
a. Provide written notice under penalty of perjury to the City's rent stabilization program of such intent, which notice shall contain the following
information: address and legal description of the subject property, number of rental units being removed, the names of all tenants residing in the
units being removed, the year the tenant(s) moved into the unit, the base rent for the unit and the current lawful rent applicable to each such unit.
b. Record with the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder a written notice prepared by and containing such information as is prescribed by the City
summarizing the landlord's notice of intent and certifying that evictions have been commenced or will commence in accordance with applicable
law.
c. Provide to the City's rent stabilization program copies of the notice recorded with the County and the notice(s) which were provided to the affected
tenants.
d. If the tenant or lessee is at least sixty two (62) years of age or is disabled, and has lived in his or her apartment unit for at least one year prior to
the date of delivery to the City of the notice required by subsection L2a of this section, then the date of withdrawal of that apartment unit shall be
extended to one year from the date of delivery of the notice to the City, provided that the tenant or lessee has given the landlord written notice of
his or her entitlement to the extension within sixty (60) days of delivery to the public entity of the notice of intent to withdraw the apartment unit
from the rental market. In this situation, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) The tenancy shall be continued on the same terms and conditions as existed on the date of delivery to the City of the notice of intent to
withdraw, subject to any adjustments otherwise available under this title;
(2) No party shall be relieved of the duty to perform any obligation under the lease or rental agreement;
(3) The landlord may elect to extend the date of withdrawal on any other accommodation within the same building up to one year after the date of
delivery to the City of the notice of intent to withdraw, subject to subsections L2d(1) and L2d(2) of this section;
(4) Within thirty (30) days of the notification by the tenant or lessee to the landlord of his or her entitlement to an extension, the landlord shall give
written notice to the City's rent stabilization program of the claim that the tenant or lessee is entitled to stay in his or her apartment unit for one
year after the date of delivery to the City of the notice of intent to withdraw;
(5) Within ninety (90) days of the date of delivery to the City of the notice of intent to withdraw, the landlord shall give written notice to the City's
rent stabilization program and the affected tenant(s) or lessee(s) of the landlord's election to extend the date of withdrawal and the new date of
withdrawal under subsection L2d(3) of this section.
3. The landlord shall provide written notice of termination of tenancy to all affected tenants at least thirty (30) days prior to the service of and
recordation of the notices in subsection L2 of this section which has been approved by the City's rent stabilization program and filed therewith and
which notice shall contain the following information:
a. That the landlord is evicting the tenant pursuant to this section and will provide the City with written notice required in subsection L2 of this section;
b. A summary of the specific information to be provided to the City in that notice regarding the tenant's unit;
c. That within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice to terminate, the tenant may notify the landlord in writing that the tenant would be interested in rerenting
the unit if it is reoffered for rent at a future time and advising the tenant to notify the landlord and rent stabilization program of all future
address changes;
d. A description of the tenant's rights as set forth in subsections L5, L6 and L7 of this section;
e. That the landlord will provide a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-9 of this chapter and that such fee may not be
waived by the tenant, except as specifically provided in subsection 4-6-9G of this chapter; and
f. That if the tenant or lessee is at least sixty two (62) years of age or is disabled, and has lived in his or her apartment unit for at least one year prior
to the date of delivery to the City of the notice required by subsection L2a of this section, then the tenancy shall be extended to one year after the
delivery of the notice to the City, provided that the tenant gives written notice of his or her entitlement to the extension to the landlord within sixty
(60) days of the date of delivery to the City of the notice of intent to withdraw. The notice shall further state that if these circumstances exist, the
extended tenancy shall be continued on the same terms and conditions that existed on the date of delivery of the notice of withdrawal to the City,
subject to any rent increases that are allowed by this chapter, and that no party shall be relieved of the duty to perform any obligation under the
lease or rental agreement during the extended tenancy.
4. At the time when the tenant(s) vacate the unit, the landlord shall pay a relocation fee in accordance with the provisions of section 4-6-9 of this
chapter.
5. In the event the withdrawn units are reoffered for rent by the landlord within two (2) years from the effective date of withdrawal, the landlord shall:
a. Provide written notice of such action to the City's rent stabilization program not less than thirty (30) days prior to re-renting the units;
b. Offer the units at the same rent level as of the date of withdrawal plus any annual rent increases permitted by this chapter that would have applied
had the units not been withdrawn;
c. Provide those tenants who provided a notice of interest in re-renting pursuant to subsection L3c of this section the right of first refusal to re-rent the
unit by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid, to the last address provided by the tenant, in which case the tenant shall have no less than
thirty (30) days within which to accept the offer, by personal service or certified or registered mail. Copies of these notices and the mail receipts
shall be filed with the City's rent stabilization program within one week of mailing;
d. Be liable in a civil action if commenced within three (3) years of displacement to any tenant evicted due to withdrawal of a unit pursuant to this
section for actual damages which were the proximate result of the displacement, in accordance with the principles enunciated in sections 7262 and
7264 of the California Government Code, and punitive damages;
e. Be liable in a civil action if commenced within three (3) years of displacement to the City for exemplary damages for displacement of tenants or
lessees.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 177/797
6. In the event the withdrawn units are reoffered for rent by the landlord within five (5) years after any notice of intent to withdraw the apartment unit is
filed with the City, or within five (5) years after the effective date of the withdrawal of the apartment unit, whichever is later, the landlord shall provide
not less than thirty (30) days' prior written notice of such action to the City's rent stabilization program prior to re-renting the units and shall offer the
units at the same rent level as of the date of withdrawal, plus annual rent increases permitted by this chapter that would have applied had the units
not been withdrawn.
7. Moreover, if the units are reoffered for rent within ten (10) years from the effective date of removal, the landlord shall provide those tenants who
provided notice of interest in re-renting pursuant to subsection L3c of this section the right of first refusal to re-rent the unit, by certified or registered
mail, postage prepaid, to the last address provided by the tenant, in which case the tenant shall have no less than thirty (30) days within which to
accept the offer by personal service or certified or registered mail. Copies of these notices and the mail receipts shall be filed with the City's rent
stabilization program within one week of mailing. Failure of the landlord to provide the tenant with this right of first refusal shall render the landlord
liable in a civil action to the tenant in punitive damages in an amount not to exceed six (6) months' rent.
8. This section shall in no respect relieve a landlord from complying with the requirements of any applicable State law or of any lease or rental
agreement.
9. The remedies provided for in this section shall not be exclusive and shall not preclude a tenant from pursuing any alternative remedy available under
law. Failure by any landlord to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a defense in any unlawful detainer action brought to evict
a tenant under this section.
10. For the purpose of this section, the term "landlord" shall be interpreted to include any and all successors in interest of any landlord, and the term
"disabled" shall mean a person with a disability, as defined in section 12955.3 of the California Government Code.
11. The notice to the City provided for in this section shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City
Council.
12. This section is intended to implement the requirements of sections 7060 through 7060.7 of the California Government Code, and shall be
interpreted so as to provide the City with the broadest range of authority permitted under these provisions and to intrude the least into the City's
authority in all other applications of its power.
13. This section shall apply to any apartment units that are being removed from the rental market, if the notice of termination of tenancy required by
State law or by a lease agreement has not been given at the time of adoption hereof or if such notice has been given, the notice period has not
expired at the time of adoption hereof.
M. Disruptive Tenant:
1. A landlord may bring an action to recover possession of an apartment unit if: a) the tenant repeatedly or continually disturbs the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of one or more tenants who occupy other rental units in the apartment building where the tenant resides or b) antagonizes, intimidates or
bullies one or more tenants who reside at that apartment building ("disruptive tenant") and the disruptive tenant does not cease the behavior when
requested to do so by the other tenant(s) or by the property owner or manager of the premises.
2. The landlord or the landlord's representative may, at the sole option of the landlord, file an application with the City and request that a subcommittee
of the City Council make a determination that a tenant is a disruptive tenant, as defined in subsection M1 of this section. If the subcommittee
determines that the tenant is a disruptive tenant, then the landlord or the landlord's representative may serve the tenant with a written notice to
terminate the tenancy in accordance with State law.
a. The subcommittee of the City Council shall be composed of two (2) members of the City Council. Council members shall be appointed by the
Mayor and serve on the subcommittee for a two (2) month term. At the end of the term the Mayor may reappoint one or both Council members or
may appoint new Council members to the subcommittee.
b. If a landlord or the landlord's representative files an application with the City's rent stabilization program for the subcommittee to make a
determination whether a tenant is a disruptive tenant whose tenancy can be terminated with notice, the landlord first shall have given the disruptive
tenant at least one written notice describing the disruptive conduct and requiring the tenant to discontinue the conduct. The landlord either shall
deliver the notice to the tenant personally, send it by certified mail, or shall post it on the door of the tenant's unit. Prior to filing the application with
the City's rent stabilization program, the landlord also shall have served the tenant with a copy of the application either by personally delivering the
application to the tenant or by posting the application on the door of the tenant's unit. Proof of service of the application on the tenant shall be filed
with the City concurrently with the application. The application shall be submitted either on a form supplied by the City or shall substantially comply
with the requirements of the City's form.
c. The application shall set forth the name, address and unit number of the tenant and shall describe specifically the tenant's conduct that the
landlord contends is disruptive, the dates when the conduct described in the application occurred, and the dates when the landlord requested that
the tenant cease the disruptive conduct, including the written notice described in subsection M2b of this section. The application also may include
the names of any individuals who observed the tenant's conduct and may include written statements by the witnesses describing the conduct.
d. The City shall schedule a hearing (but need not hold the hearing) within ten (10) days of the filing of a complete application with the City. If one or
both members of the subcommittee is/are not available to attend a hearing on an application filed pursuant to this section, the City rent stabilization
program shall contact other members of the City Council to determine if another Council member is available to attend the hearing. The City rent
stabilization program shall send written notice of the hearing to the landlord and the affected tenant by certified mail at least fifteen (15) days prior
to the date of the hearing.
e. The subcommittee shall control the conduct of the hearing and rule on procedural requests. The hearing shall be conducted in the manner
deemed by the subcommittee to be most suitable to secure the information and documentation that is necessary to render an informed decision,
and to result in a fair decision without unnecessary delay.
(1) At the hearing, the parties may offer any documents, testimony, written declarations, or other evidence that is relevant to the application.
Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such proceedings.
(2) There shall be no oral communication outside the hearing between the members of the subcommittee and any party or witness, or the
substance of such communication shall be disclosed at the beginning of the hearing. All discussion during the hearing shall be recorded.
(3) The hearing shall ordinarily proceed in the following manner, unless the subcommittee determines that some other order of proceedings would
better facilitate the hearing:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 178/797
(A) A brief presentation by or on behalf of landlord, including testimony by any other affected parties and witnesses in support of the application.
(B) A brief presentation by or on behalf of the tenant, including testimony by any other affected parties and witnesses in opposition to the
application.
(C) A brief rebuttal by the landlord.
(4) The subcommittee shall establish equitable time limits for presentations at a hearing, with a minimum length of ten (10) minutes each for the
landlord and the tenant, subject to adjustments for translation and reasonable accommodation.
(5) City staff shall maintain an official hearing record, which shall constitute the exclusive record of the decision.
(6) All parties to a hearing shall have the right to seek assistance in developing their positions, preparing their statements, and presenting evidence
from an attorney, tenant organization representative, landlord association representative, translator, or any other person. If the representative will
be speaking on behalf of the party at the hearing, the party shall so advise the subcommittee.
(7) To prevail on the application, the landlord must carry the burden of demonstrating that the tenant has been a disruptive tenant, as defined in
subsection M1 of this section.
(8) Two (2) votes are required to approve an application. The vote shall be taken after the conclusion of the presentations by the landlord and the
tenant and any deliberations by the members of the subcommittee. If two (2) votes are not cast in favor of approving the application, the
application is deemed to be denied.
(9) Within five (5) business days after the hearing record is closed, the subcommittee shall reconvene and issue a written determination setting
forth its decision approving or denying the application, with written findings in support thereof.
f. A written notice of the decision shall be mailed by the City to the applicant and the affected tenant within two (2) days of the issuance of the
decision by the subcommittee. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the hearing decision.
g. If the subcommittee determines that the tenant is a disruptive tenant, the landlord may serve the tenant with written notice provided in accordance
with State law to terminate the tenancy. The landlord is not required to pay relocation fees to the tenant. When the disruptive tenant vacates the
unit in response to the notice, the landlord may not increase the rent that will be charged for the unit above the amount that was being charged to
the disruptive tenant, other than any adjustments otherwise available under this chapter.
h. Any final decision of the subcommittee is subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5 and must be filed
in accordance with the time periods specified therein. (Ord. 18-O-2766, eff. 12-21-2018)
4-6-7: WATER SERVICE PENALTY SURCHARGE:
A. In addition to the rent otherwise permitted by this chapter, the landlord may pass through to the tenant of an apartment unit regulated by this chapter
ninety percent (90%) of the cost of any water service penalties and/or surcharges imposed by the City pursuant to the water rate schedule established
by resolution of the City Council provided that the landlord installs water conservation plumbing fixtures in such unit in accordance with the
requirements of title 9, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code or voluntarily installs, at the landlord's expense, low flow toilets or such other water saving toilets
approved by the Director of Public Works, showerhead restrictors and faucet aerators in such unit. If the landlord does not install such water
conservation plumbing fixtures, the landlord shall be liable for and pay without any pass through to the tenant all penalties and/or surcharges imposed
by the City on the landlord's apartment units.
B. In order to qualify for the pass through authorized by subsection A of this section, the landlord shall:
1. Notify all tenants, in a form required by the rent stabilization office, by registered or certified mail, of the provisions of this section and any other
information required to be given by the Rent Stabilization Office; and
2. Provide all affected tenants with copies of the water bill for the applicable billing period and the basis for the calculation of the pass through. (Ord.
91-O-2118, eff. 5-24-1991)
4-6-8: REFUSE FEE SURCHARGE:
A. In addition to the rent otherwise permitted by this chapter, the landlord may pass through to the tenant of an apartment unit regulated by this chapter the
cost of any refuse fee imposed by the City pursuant to a resolution or ordinance of the City Council.
B. In order to qualify for the pass through authorized by subsection A of this section, the landlord shall:
1. Provide written notice, by registered or certified mail, to all tenants thirty (30) days in advance of the imposition of the pass through, of the provisions
of this section, that the pass through is not part of the base rent, that the refuse fee may be increased by the City, and any other information required
to be given by the Rent Stabilization Office.
2. Provide all tenants with a copy of the landlord's utility bill which sets forth the appropriate refuse fee and the basis for the calculation of the pass
through. (Ord. 91-O-2135, eff. 1-9-1992)
4-6-9: RELOCATION FEE:
A. When Fee Is Required: If a landlord brings an action to recover the possession of an apartment unit that is subject to the provisions of this chapter for
any of the reasons set forth in subsection 4-6-6A, B, C, D, F, G or M of this chapter, the landlord is not required to pay a relocation fee to the tenant
residing in the unit. However, if a landlord serves a notice of eviction on a tenant for any other reason, the landlord shall pay to such tenant a relocation
fee in accordance with the provisions of this section. The relocation fee shall be due and payable to the tenant, regardless of whether the landlord
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 179/797
actually utilizes the apartment unit for the purposes stated in the notice of eviction, unless the landlord notifies the tenant in writing of the withdrawal of
the notice of eviction prior to such time as the tenant has given the landlord notice of his or her last date of occupancy, or has vacated the unit, if a
notice of the last date of occupancy is not given by the tenant. The landlord also shall file a copy of the notice of eviction with the rent stabilization
program within one week after serving the notice on the tenant.
B. Payment Upon Vacation: The relocation fee or pro rata share thereof shall be paid to any tenant who vacates the apartment unit at the time he or she
vacates it. If the landlord cannot in good faith determine if the tenant is entitled to receive the relocation fee, it shall be deposited in escrow in
accordance with subsection D of this section.
C. To Whom Paid: The entire fee shall be paid to a tenant who is the only tenant in an apartment unit. Where an apartment unit is occupied by two (2) or
more tenants, payment may be prorated among the tenants, or payment may be made to one tenant, provided all the adult occupants of the apartment
unit concur with the allocation or have signed a stipulation to judgment as described in subsection D of this section. In no event shall a landlord be
liable to pay a total amount that exceeds the fee required by subsection E of this section.
D. Deposit Of Relocation Fee Into Escrow:
1. When the apartment unit has not been vacated, the relocation fee shall be deposited in escrow if the tenant has furnished the landlord with the
tenant's notarized stipulation to judgment in favor of the landlord for the repossession of the apartment unit by the landlord within sixty (60) days after
the payment of the relocation fee to such tenant. The fee shall be released from escrow to the tenant on the day the tenant vacates the apartment
unit. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require any tenant to vacate any apartment unit before the expiration of the full notice time to
which such tenant is entitled. The sixty (60) day period referred to in this subsection D1 shall not apply to any eviction where the eviction notice was
given by the landlord to the tenant on or before January 20, 2017.
2. If the landlord in good faith is unable to determine which persons are entitled to receive the relocation fee, the landlord shall deposit the relocation
fee into escrow. The landlord shall give written notice of such deposit to each person, including the tenant and any occupant other than the tenant,
who in the landlord's good faith judgment may be entitled to receive the relocation fee. Upon agreement by all persons so notified, the escrow holder
may distribute the relocation fee in the manner agreed upon. If such parties cannot reach agreement within thirty (30) days after the date the notice
of deposit is given, the division and distribution of the relocation fee shall be determined by the Hearing Officer following a hearing on the matter. No
distribution from an escrow may occur until the tenant who is to receive the relocation fee has signed a notarized stipulation to judgment pursuant to
subsection D1 of this section if the tenant still occupies the apartment unit.
3. All the costs of an escrow opened pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be borne by the landlord.
E. Amount Of Relocation Fees: The amount of the relocation fee payable to a tenant entitled to such fee pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
determined as follows:
Apartment Size Relocation Fee
Studio $ 6,193.00
1 bedroom 9,148.00
2 or more bedrooms 12,394.00
Provided further, those households that include a senior, disabled person, or a minor shall be entitled to an additional relocation fee in the amount of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Any tenant whose occupancy of the apartment unit began after the date when the required notice of termination was given shall not be entitled to any
relocation fee.
Commencing July 1, 2018, and on July 1 of each year thereafter, the amounts of the relocation fees set forth above shall be increased annually by a
percentage equal to the percentage increase, if any, of the Consumer Price Index for the Los Angeles/Riverside/Orange County area, as published
by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics between May 1 of the then current year and May 1 of the immediately
preceding year.
F. Relocation Of Tenant: In lieu of the relocation fee required by subsection E of this section, the landlord, at his or her option, may relocate the tenant into
a comparable replacement apartment unit satisfactory to the tenant, in which event the landlord shall be liable only for the actual costs of relocating the
tenant, up to the maximum as set forth in subsection E of this section per apartment unit. A tenant shall not unreasonably withhold the approval of a
replacement apartment unit offered by the landlord. For the purposes of this paragraph only, comparability shall be determined from the following
factors: size, price, location, proximity to medical and recreational facilities, parks, community centers, shops, transportation, schools, churches, and
synagogues, amenities, and, if the tenant desires, the location of the apartment unit in the City.
G. Waiver Of Relocation Fee:
1. If a tenant who has received a thirty (30) day notice to vacate premises does not vacate the apartment unit within such time, and the landlord
thereafter files a complaint for writ or judgment restoring possession, and the court orders such tenant to vacate the apartment unit, such tenant shall
be deemed to have waived all rights to any relocation benefit to which he or she is otherwise entitled pursuant to this section and shall return to the
landlord any relocation fee or other benefit so received, plus interest at the rate allowed by law.
2. After the required notice period has passed, if a tenant has signed a stipulation for judgment and received a relocation fee, whether directly or as the
result of the distribution of a deposit, and does not vacate the apartment unit within sixty (60) days after such receipt, the tenant shall be deemed to
have waived all rights to any relocation benefits to which he or she is otherwise entitled pursuant to this section, and the tenant shall be obligated to
return to the landlord any relocation fee or other benefit so received, plus interest at the rate allowed by law. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 18-O-2766, eff. 12-21-2018)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 180/797
4-6-10: REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS:
A. Initial Registration: A landlord must register every rental unit that is subject to the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice
from the City that registration is required, unless the rental unit is specifically exempt under this chapter. Registration is complete only when all required
information has been provided to the City and all outstanding fees and penalties have been paid.
B. After Terminated Exemption: When a rental unit that was exempt from this chapter becomes governed by this chapter for the first time, the landlord
must register the unit with the City within thirty (30) days after the exemption ends.
C. Reregistration: When a rental unit is rerented after a vacancy, the landlord must reregister the unit with the City within thirty (30) days after the rerental.
D. Registration Amendment: A landlord must file a registration amendment with the City within thirty (30) days of a change in a rental unit's ownership or
management, or a change in the owner's or manager's contact information. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-6-11: RENT ADJUSTMENTS UPON APPLICATION:
A. Basis For Application: A landlord may file a rent adjustment application with the City for all rental units in the landlord's rental complex to achieve a just
and reasonable return based on net operating income principles as set forth in subsection B of this section, or on any other ground authorized by this
chapter or by regulations adopted by the city council.
1. Application: An application for a rent adjustment pursuant to this chapter shall be filed upon a form prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied
by the payment of a fee as determined by resolution of the city council. If no fee has been established at the time of application, the applicant shall
pay a fee within thirty (30) days of the date the fee is established. The applicant shall produce at the request of the hearing officer any records,
receipts, reports or other documents in the applicant's possession, custody or control that the hearing officer may deem appropriate to make a
determination whether a rent adjustment should be approved. The application shall be made under penalty of perjury and supporting documents
shall be certified or verified as requested. Once the registration process is established by the city, no application from a landlord shall be accepted
unless the building in which the unit is located is registered and any registration fees have been paid. If a landlord is seeking an adjustment pursuant
to subsection B1g(2) of this section the application shall not be filed with or accepted by the city unless the landlord provides any and all documents
and information on which the landlord relies to establish that the base date rent was disproportionately low.
2. Incomplete Applications: The city shall determine whether said application is complete within ten (10) business days of filing of the application by the
landlord. If it is determined that an application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing as to what additional information is required. In
the event the applicant notifies the hearing officer that the requested information is unavailable, the hearing officer shall proceed with scheduling a
hearing as though the application is complete. Notice that an application has been filed shall be sent to the landlord and all affected tenants by the
hearing officer; said notice shall invite submittal of evidence from all concerned parties.
3. Hearing Date: The hearing officer shall hold a hearing on said application within sixty (60) days after the application is determined to be complete.
Notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant and the affected parties at least ten (10) business days prior to date
of the hearing. The notice of the hearing also shall be delivered to the affected parties by posting the notice at the property at least ten (10) business
days prior to date of the hearing. The notice to the affected parties shall include a brief summary of the stated justification for the rent increase
application and shall state that all submitted documents and materials as well as any report prepared by the hearing officer or staff will be available
for public review prior to the hearing.
4. Hearing Rules: At the hearing, the parties may offer any documents, testimony, written declarations, or other evidence that is relevant to the
requested rent adjustment. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to such proceedings.
5. Conduct Of Hearing: The hearing officer shall control the conduct of the hearing and rule on procedural requests. The hearing shall be conducted in
the manner deemed by the hearing officer to be most suitable to secure that information and documentation that is necessary to render an informed
decision, and to result in a fair decision without unnecessary delay.
6. Ex Parte Communications: There shall be no oral communication outside the hearing between the hearing officer and any party or witness. All
discussion during the hearing shall be recorded. All written communication from the hearing officer to a party after the hearing has commenced shall
be provided to all parties.
7. Order Of Proceedings: The hearing shall ordinarily proceed in the following manner, unless the hearing officer determines that some other order of
proceedings would better facilitate the hearing:
a. A brief presentation by or on behalf of landlord, if landlord desires to expand upon the information contained in or appended to the petition for rent
adjustment, including presentations of any other affected parties and witnesses in support of the application.
b. A brief presentation of the results of any investigations or staff reports by staff in relation to the petition.
c. A brief presentation by or on behalf of opponents to the petition, including presentations of any other affected parties and witnesses in opposition
to the application.
d. Rebuttal by landlord.
e. The hearing officer shall establish equitable time limits for presentations at a hearing, subject to adjustments for translation and reasonable
accommodation.
f. The hearing officer shall maintain an official hearing record, which shall constitute the exclusive record for decision.
8. Right Of Assistance: All parties to a hearing shall have the right to seek assistance in developing their positions, preparing their statements, and
presenting evidence from an attorney, tenant organization representative, landlord association representative, translator, or any other person
designated by said parties to a hearing.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 181/797
9. Reopening Of Hearing: The hearing officer may reopen the hearing record when he or she believes that further evidence should be considered to
resolve a material issue, when the hearing has been closed, and when a final decision has not been issued by the hearing officer. In such
circumstances, the parties may waive a further hearing by agreeing in writing to allow additional exhibits into evidence.
10. Hearing Decision: Within thirty (30) days after the hearing is closed, the hearing officer shall issue a decision, with written findings in support
thereof, approving, partially approving or disapproving a rent adjustment.
11. Notice Of Decision: A written notice of decision on a rent adjustment application shall be mailed to the applicant and all affected tenants within one
day of the issuance of the decision by the hearing officer. Such notice shall be accompanied by a copy of the hearing decision.
12. Decision Subject To Review: Any final decision of the hearing officer is subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code Of Civil Procedure
section 1094.5 and must be filed in accordance with the time periods specified therein.
B. Substantive Grounds For A Rent Increase Application: A rent adjustment shall be approved in order to provide a just and reasonable return and
maintain net operating income in accordance with the following criteria:
1. Fair Net Operating Income: Fair return applications shall be considered according to the following guidelines:
a. Net Operating Income: Net operating income equals gross income minus operating expenses.
b. Gross Income: Gross income equals the following:
(1) Gross rents, computed on the basis of one hundred percent (100%) occupancy, using current rent levels, including the current year annual
general adjustment. To the extent that the annual general rent adjustment was not fully implemented or received during the entire current year, it
shall be annualized to reflect the total annual gross rents to which the property owner is already entitled, plus
(2) Interest from security and cleaning deposits (except to the extent that said interest is payable to the tenants), plus
(3) Income from services, garage and parking fees, plus
(4) All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the use or occupancy of rental units and housing services,
minus
(5) Uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts, to the extent that the same are beyond the landlord's control. Uncollected rents in excess of
five percent (5%) of gross rents shall be presumed to be unreasonable and shall not be deducted from gross rents unless it is established that
they result from circumstances that are likely to continue to exist in future years.
c. Operating Expenses; Inclusions: Operating expenses shall include the following:
(1) Rent increase application filing fees (if the application is found to be meritorious);
(2) Annual registration fees to the extent that they cannot be passed through to tenants, pursuant to resolution of the city council;
(3) License fees, real property taxes, utility costs, insurance;
(4) Normal and reasonable repair and maintenance expenses for rental units and the building or complex of buildings of which the building is a
part, including common areas, which shall include, but not be limited to, painting, normal cleaning, fumigation, landscaping, repair and
replacement of all standard services, including electrical, plumbing, carpentry, furnished appliances, drapes, carpets and furniture. Owner
performed labor shall be counted at reasonable rates established by the cost of obtaining similar services in and around the city, provided the
applicant submits documentation showing the date, time, and nature of the work performed by the property owner;
(5) Allowable legal expenses, and management expenses (contracted or owner performed), including necessary and reasonable advertising,
accounting, other managerial expense. Management expenses are presumed to be six percent (6%) of gross income, unless established
otherwise. Management expenses in excess of eight percent (8%) of gross income are presumed to be unreasonable and shall not be allowed
unless it is established that such expenses do not exceed those ordinarily charged by commercial management firms for similar residential
properties;
(6) Attorney fees and costs incurred in connection with successful good faith attempts to recover rents owing and successful good faith unlawful
detainer actions not in violation of applicable law, to the extent the same are not recovered from tenants;
(7) Building improvements, the cost of any improvement mandated by any government statute, rule or regulation enacted after January 1, 2017,
major repairs, replacement and maintenance, except to the extent such costs are compensated by insurance proceeds, subject to the condition
that said improvements shall be amortized in years according to the schedule below, provided that the hearing officer may use seven (7) years
for unlisted items, or such other period of time as is determined by the hearing officer to be reasonable.
Air conditioner 10
Appliances, major (other than those specifically listed) 7
Cabinets 10
Dishwasher 7
Doors 10
Dryer 7
Drywall 10
Electric wiring 15
Improvement Years
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 182/797
Elevator 20
Fencing 10
Fire alarm system 10
Fire escape 10
Flooring 7
Garbage disposal 7
Gates 10
Gutters 10
Heating 10
Insulation 10
Locks 7
Paving 10
Plumbing 10
Pumps 10
Refrigerator 10
Roofing 10
Security system 10
Stove 10
Washing machine 7
Water heater 7
(8) Reasonable expenses, fees and other costs for professional services reasonably incurred in the course of successfully pursuing or defending
rights under or in relationship to this chapter.
d. Excluded From Operating Expenses: Operating expenses shall not include:
(1) Maintenance and repair work that resulted from the intentional deferral of other repairs or work, which deferral caused significant deterioration
of housing services, the building or individual units (if the time since the work was performed significantly exceeds the amortization periods
established in subsection B1c(7) of this section, it shall be presumed that it was intentionally deferred);
(2) Avoidable and unnecessary expense increases since the base year;
(3) Mortgage interest and principal payments; fees, other than fees expressly authorized by subsection B1c of this section;
(4) Penalties and interest awarded for violation of this or any other law; or legal fees, except as provided in this section;
(5) Depreciation;
(6) Any expenses for which the landlord has been reimbursed by any utility rebate or discount, security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for
damages, or settlement;
(7) Any expense that has been passed through lawfully to tenants pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
e. Base Year: Base year for the purpose of this chapter shall be 2016. Landlords are required to keep all financial records for 2016, which may be
necessary for making a net operating income determination. In the event that an owner for good cause cannot produce base year income and
expense information, the hearing officer may use a different base period or estimate base year income and expenses.
f. Presumption Of Fair Base Year Net Operating Income: Except as provided in subsection B1g of this section, it shall be presumed that the net
operating income produced by the property during the base year provided a fair return (fair net operating income). Landlords shall be entitled to
earn a just and reasonable return and to maintain and increase their base year net operating income in accordance with subsection B1h of this
section.
g. Rebutting The Presumption: It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a fair return, in which case, the base
year net operating income may be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such a determination, the hearing officer must make at least one of the
following findings:
(1) The landlord's operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such
instances, adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so that the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the
property over a reasonable period of time. In considering whether the base year net operating income yielded more or less than a fair net
operating income the hearing officer shall consider the following factors:
(A) The landlord made substantial capital improvements during the base year, which were not reflected in the base year rent levels;
(B) Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by uninsured disaster or vandalism;
Improvement Years
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 183/797
(C) Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards or resulted from the intentional deferral of other repairs or work, which deferral
caused significant deterioration of housing services, the building or individual units. If the time since the deferred work was performed
significantly exceeds the amortization periods established in subsection B1c(7) of this section, it shall be presumed that it was intentionally
deferred;
(D) Other expenses were unreasonably high or low, notwithstanding prudent business practice.
(2) The rent in the base year was disproportionately low due to the fact that it was not established in an arms length transaction or other peculiar
circumstances. To establish peculiar circumstances, the landlord must prove one or more of the following: there existed between the tenant and
the owner a family or close friend relationship; the rent had not been increased for three (3) years prior to the base year; the tenant performed
services for the owner; there was low maintenance of the property by the owner in exchange for low rent increases or no rent increases; or any
other special circumstances which affected the rent level outside of market factors.
h. Fair Net Operating Income: If the Hearing Officer adjusts the base year rents, then the Hearing Officer shall permit rent increases in the maximum
allowable rent such that the landlord's net operating income shall be increased by one hundred percent (100%) of the percentage increase in the
Consumer Price Index between the base year and the current year. Unless the Hearing Officer selects a base period other than the year 2016, the
base year CPI shall be 240.007. For the purposes of this chapter, the current CPI shall be the CPI last reported as of the date of the application. A
rent increase granted pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the increase requested in the application.
C. Savings Clause: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the grant of a rent adjustment upon application by a landlord when required to
permit a just and reasonable return to the landlord. This paragraph is a savings clause which provides a basis for a Hearing Officer to receive relevant
evidence demonstrating that a landlord is not receiving a just and reasonable return under the provisions of the net operating income formula, so that
the application of the net operating formula may be modified to provide a just and reasonable return to the landlord. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017)
4-6-12: REMEDIES:
A. Illegal Rent Or Withholding Of Relocation Fees:
1. It shall be unlawful for any landlord wilfully to demand, accept, receive, or retain any payment of rent in excess of the maximum lawful rent permitted
for an apartment unit by this chapter.
2. It shall be unlawful for any landlord wilfully to fail to provide any tenant with any relocation benefit to which such tenant is entitled.
3. A tenant shall not pay otherwise allowable rent increases under section 4-6-3 of this chapter, if the landlord has failed to substantially comply with the
registration requirements of section 4-6-10 of this chapter. The nonpayment of rent increases in good faith pursuant to this paragraph shall be a
defense to any action brought to recover possession of a rental unit for nonpayment of rent.
B. Reduction Of Housing Services: It shall be unlawful for any landlord to reduce housing services with the intent, or for the purpose, of circumventing
substantially the requirements and/or provisions or spirit of this chapter. A violation of this section shall be deemed an increase in rent to the extent of
the monetary advantage achieved thereby for the landlord or to the extent necessary for the tenant to incur expenses to gain equivalent housing
services by other means, whichever is greater. Any such violation shall accordingly be subject to the tenants' remedies prescribed in subsections C and
D of this section.
C. Refusal To Comply With Illegal Requests:
1. A tenant may refuse to pay any increase in rent which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and such violation shall be a defense in any
action brought to recover the possession of an apartment unit or to collect rent.
2. In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection C1 of this section, in any action brought to recover the possession of an apartment unit, the court
may consider as grounds for denial of the request for possession any violation of any provision of this chapter. In addition, a court determination that
the action was brought in retaliation for the exercise of any right conferred by this chapter shall also be grounds for denial of the request for
possession.
D. Civil Remedies: Whenever it is necessary for any tenant to file a court action to recover the payment of rent which was in excess of the maximum lawful
rent allowed by the provisions of this chapter, or to collect any relocation fee provided for in this chapter, or whenever it is necessary for the tenant to
defend against any wrongful action filed in court against the tenant by the landlord to recover the possession of the tenant's apartment unit, the landlord
shall be liable to the tenant for damages in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or not more than three (3) times the amount by which the
payment or payments demanded, accepted, received, or retained exceed the lawful amount of rent or relocation fees due to the tenant, whichever is
greater. The prevailing party in any such suit shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and costs as determined by the court.
E. Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions, or failing to comply with any of the requirements, of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
and punishment of title 1, chapter 3 of this Code. (Ord. 17-O-2729, eff. 5-5-2017; amd. Ord. 17-O-2745, eff. 1-19-2018)
Chapter 7
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Article 1. Purpose And Definitions
4-7-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent community wide adverse secondary effects that can be brought about by the unregulated operation of adult
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 184/797
entertainment businesses. These adverse secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values; increased vacancy rates in
residential and commercial areas; increased criminal activity; increased litter, noise, and vandalism; and interference with the enjoyment of residential
property in the vicinity of such businesses. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: "Adult entertainment business" shall mean any of the following:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct one or more still or motion
picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the
exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers for sale, rent, or viewing
either adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise or both.
Adult Cabaret: An establishment that serves food or beverages and that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of
conduct presents live performances that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or feature any seminude person.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to show
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an
emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specifiedanatomical areas.
Adult Theater: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct presents live performances that
are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or feature any seminude person.
Modeling Studio: An establishment that provides, for any form of consideration, seminude figure models or figure models who expose specified
anatomical areas for the purpose of observation, sketching, photography, painting, sculpting or other depiction by persons paying such consideration.
This definition shall not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education.
Any business that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services
or entertainment characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Any business in possession of a valid adult entertainment regulatory permit.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MATERIAL: Any audiotape, book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, videotape
recording, or other visual representation, characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANDISE: Adult entertainment implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos; auto sucks; vibrators;
edible underwear; benwa balls; inflatable orifices; anatomical balloons with orifices; simulated vaginas and similar adult entertainment devices that are
designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.
CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase.
DIRECTOR: The director of finance administration of the city of Beverly Hills or the designee thereof.
ENTERTAINER: A person who, for any form of consideration, performs at an adult entertainment business. Such persons shall constitute "entertainers"
regardless of their legal relationship (e.g., employee, owner or independent contractor) with the adult entertainment business.
HEARING OFFICER: The city manager of the city of Beverly Hills, or the designee thereof.
OWNER: A. The sole proprietor of an adult entertainment business;
B. Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult entertainment business;
C. The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation that owns and operates an adult entertainment business; and
D. The person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult entertainment business owned and operated by the
corporation.
PERFORM AT AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: To engage in or participate in, at an adult entertainment business, any live performance that is
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or features any seminude person.
PERMITTEE: A. For the purpose of article 2 of this chapter, any person who has been issued an adult entertainment regulatory permit;
B. For the purpose of article 3 of this chapter, any person who has been issued an adult entertainer permit; and
C. For the purpose of articles 4 through 6 of this chapter, any person who has been issued an adult entertainment regulatory permit or an adult
entertainer permit.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever
form or character.
REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL COURSE OF CONDUCT: Shall mean that any of the following conditions exist:
A. At least thirty percent (30%) of the stock-in-trade is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided,
however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 185/797
B. At least thirty percent (30%) of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided,
however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises.
C. The business presents or offers to present, on any four (4) or more separate days within any thirty (30) day period, live entertainment that is
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or features any seminude person.
D. The business presents or offers to present, on any four (4) or more separate days within any thirty (30) day period, nonlive entertainment that is
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
E. At least thirty percent (30%) of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services,
products, materials or entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical
areas.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing completely and opaquely covers the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and nipple of the female breast, but
does not completely and opaquely cover the female breast below the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and nipple of the female breast;
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;
C. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection A or B of this definition.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Shall mean the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
D. Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the other activities described in subsections A through C of this definition.
SUBSTANTIALLY ENLARGED: The increase in floor area occupied by an adult entertainment business by more than ten percent (10%) of its floor area as
it existed at the time an adult entertainment regulatory permit was issued for the business. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-
19-1999; Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001; Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
Article 2. Adult Entertainment Regulatory Permit
4-7-201: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment business unless the owner of such business first obtains
from the director, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult entertainment regulatory permit for such business. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-
1998)
4-7-202: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. The owner of a proposed adult entertainment business shall be the only person eligible to obtain an adult entertainment business regulatory permit for
such business. The owner shall not be eligible to obtain an adult entertainment business regulatory permit unless the owner is at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
B. The following shall be submitted to the director at the time of application for an adult entertainment business regulatory permit:
1. A completed application form signed by the applicant.
2. The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Beverly Hills police department. Any fees for the fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
3. Two (2) color photographs, taken within six (6) months prior to the date of the application, that clearly show the applicant's face. Any fees for the
photographs shall be paid by the applicant.
4. An operations description letter that describes in detail the proposed adult entertainment business and how it will satisfy the design and performance
standards of this article.
5. A site plan depicting the building and unit proposed for the adult entertainment business. The site plan shall include a dimensional interior floor plan
that depicts how the business will comply with the requirements of this chapter. The site plan shall also include a diagram of the off street parking
areas required by title 10, chapter 3, article 27 of this code.
6. A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that all of the information submitted in connection with the application is true
and correct.
7. A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). This fee shall not be increased.
C. If the director determines that the applicant has completedthe application improperly, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and,
upon request of the applicant, shall return the application. As a convenience to the applicant, upon request of the applicant, the director shall grant the
applicant an extension of time of ten (10) calendar days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying the requested
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. Unless the applicant requests an extension of time
pursuant to this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve the director of the duty to make a decision within the time limits set
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 186/797
forth in section 4-7-203 of this article. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999; Ord. 01-O-
2386, eff. 12-9-2001; Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-7-203: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The director shall, within thirty (30) city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the adult entertainment regulatory permit if a
complete application has been submitted and the requirements of this article have been met; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval
or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United
States postal service within three (3) city business days of the date of such decision. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a
statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon written consent of the applicant. Any
interested person may appeal the decision of the director to the hearing officer in accordance with article 5 of this chapter. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998;
amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999)
4-7-204: NONTRANSFERABLE:
A. No person shall operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of an adult entertainment regulatory permit at any place other than the
address of the adult entertainment business stated in the application for the permit.
B. No adult entertainment regulatory permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable.
C. Any attempt to transfer an adult entertainment regulatory permit is hereby declared invalid and the permit shall automatically become void effective the
date of such attempted transfer.
D. Nothing in this section shall prevent the director from approving a second adult entertainment regulatory permit for a single location provided that the
holder of the adultentertainment regulatory permit previously approved for such location consents in writing to the automatic expiration of such
previously approved permit upon the effective date of such second permit. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-205: LOCATION CRITERIA:
Adult entertainment businesses shall comply with the location criteria of title 10, chapter 3, article 27.7 of this code. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-206: DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. No adult entertainment business shall be located in any temporary or portable structure.
B. Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public.
C. No landscaping shall exceed thirty inches (30") in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet (6') above the ground.
D. All off street parking areas and premises entries of the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system that provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on parking surfaces and walkways. The lighting
shall be shown on the site plan required by subsection 4-7-202B5 of this article.
E. The premises within which the adult entertainment business is located shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside
the premises shall not be audible anywhere on adjacent property, public rights of way or within any separate unit within the same building.
F. All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at
all times.
G. All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:
Area Foot-Candles
Arcades 10
Bookstores 20
Modeling studios 20
Theaters and cabarets 5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)
H. The adult entertainment business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and
employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be
prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms
shall be free from adult entertainment material and adult entertainment merchandise. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 187/797
picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult entertainment
business that: 1) is not required to and does not provide restroom facilities to patrons or the general public; and 2) deals exclusively with sale or rental
of adult entertainment material or adult entertainment merchandise that is not used or consumed on the premises.
I. Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional requirements:
1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that from a manager's station there is an unobstructed view of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two (2) or more designated manager's
stations, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner that from at least one of the manager's stations there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The view required in this subsection I1 must be
direct line of sight from the designated manager's station.
2. At all times the view specified in subsection I1 of this section shall remain unobstructed by doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials.
3. The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times. The walls or partitions between viewing
rooms or booths shall not contain holes between any two (2) such rooms or booths such as would allow either: a) viewing from one room or booth
into another; or b) physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two (2) such rooms or booths.
4. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near viewing rooms and booths.
5. No alteration in the configuration of a manager's station shall be made without the written approval of the director.
J. Adult cabarets and adult theaters shall comply with the following additional requirements:
1. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that from a manager's station there is an unobstructed view of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two (2) or more designated manager's
stations, then the interior shall be configured in such a manner that from at least one of the manager's stations there is an unobstructed view of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The view required in this subsection J1 must be
direct line of sight from the designated manager's station.
2. At all times the view specified in subsection J1 of this section shall remain unobstructed by doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials.
3. No alteration in the configuration of a manager's station shall be made without the written approval of the director.
4. Separate dressing room facilities for entertainers, exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use, shall be provided.
5. Access between the stage and the entertainers' dressing room facilities, completely separated from the patrons, shall be provided. If such separate
access is not physically feasible, a minimum three foot (3') wide walk aisle between the entertainers' dressing room facilities and the stage shall be
provided. Such walk aisle shall contain a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers. Such railing, fence or other barrier
shall be at least thirty inches (30") in height and shall be sufficient to delineate a separation between patrons and entertainers; provided, however,
that such railing may contain individual breaks not exceeding five feet (5') in length and not exceeding more than fifty percent (50%) of the length of
the walk aisle between the entertainers' dressing room facilities and the stage. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-207: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. No adult entertainment business shall be operated in a manner that permits the observation, from public rights of way or locations outside the
establishment, of either: 1) adult entertainment material; 2) adult entertainment merchandise; 3) specified sexual activities; 4) specified anatomical
areas; or 5) any nude or seminude person. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
B. Exterior doors and windows of the adult entertainment business shall not be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open.
C. Exterior windows of the adult entertainment business shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.
D. Patrons shall not be permitted access to any area of the adult entertainment business that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
E. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the adult entertainment business at any time.
F. Adult entertainment businesses served by on site parking surfaces shall maintain a security system that visually monitors and records such parking
surfaces.
G. Security guards shall be employed in accordance with the following standards:
1. Businesses conducted within premises having a maximum occupancy capacity of one hundred (100) persons or fewer shall have two (2) security
guards on duty at all times while the business is open. Businesses conducted within premises having a maximum occupancy capacity greater than
one hundred (100) persons shall have three (3) security guards on duty at all times while the business is open.
2. The security guard(s) shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public.
3. The security guard(s) shall be charged with enforcing patron compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and with notifying the Beverly Hills
police department of any violations of law observed.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 188/797
4. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of
the manager's station while acting as a security guard.
H. No adult entertainment business shall operate between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on any day, except
that this provision does not apply to businesses also regulated by the California department of alcoholic beverage control.
I. The exterior grounds of the premises of the adult entertainment business shall be free from all adult entertainment material and adult entertainment
merchandise.
J. Adult arcades shall comply with the following additional requirements:
1. No viewing room or video booth may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.
2. At least one employee shall be on duty and stationed at each manager's station at all times that a patron is present insidethe premises.
3. Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to loiter in either: a) the vicinity of viewing rooms or booths; or b) the common area of the
business.
4. The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of viewing rooms and booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions.
Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any viewing rooms or booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate
sanitary controls.
K. Adult cabarets and adult theaters shall comply with the following additional requirements:
1. No entertainer shall perform except upon a stage that is both: a) at least eighteen inches (18") above the level of the floor; and b) separated by a
distance of at least six feet (6') from the nearest area occupied by patrons.
2. No patron shall be permitted within six feet (6') of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer nor shall a patron be permitted within six
feet (6') of any person dancing for any form of consideration.
3. No entertainer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any entertainer. This prohibition shall apply before, during and
after a performance, but only on the premises of the business. For the purposes of this subsection, "fondle or caress" means to touch with the intent
to sexually arouse or excite.
4. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to an entertainer in conjunction with a performance. For purpose of this provision, "directly pay or
give" shall mean the placement of a gratuity by a patron on any portion of an entertainer's person or clothing.
5. No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from a patron.
L. No owner or other person with managerial control over the adult entertainment business shall permit any person on the premises to engage in a live
performance characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-19-1999; Ord.
02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-7-208: GROSS RECEIPTS RECORDS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the owner of an adult entertainment business shall maintain complete records that can be
segregated with regard to all transactions involving products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis upon specified
sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. Such records shall besufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the
business that is derived from such transactions. Such records shall be maintained for at least three (3) years after the end of the calendar year for
which the records were created.
B. The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not be applicable to any adult entertainment business whose owner has submitted to the director
a written statement consenting to the application of this chapter to such business and agreeing to maintain the records specified above for a period of
six (6) months following the withdrawal of such consent. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-209: EMPLOYMENT OF ENTERTAINERS WITHOUT PERMITS:
No permittee, owner, operator or other person in charge of an adult entertainment business shall allow any person to perform at the business unless such
person is in possession of a valid adult entertainer permit. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-210: REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBER OF ENTERTAINERS:
A. Every owner of an adult cabaret and every owner of an adult theater shall maintain on the premises of such business a register of all entertainers who
perform at the business. Such register shall list each entertainer's legal name, stage name(s), and adult entertainer permit number.
B. Upon commencement of the business, and on an annual basis thereafter, every owner of an adult cabaret and every owner of an adult theater shall file
with the director a copy of the register of entertainers who perform at the business. Such filing shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the
owner, that all of the information in the register is true and correct. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-211: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 189/797
Every adult entertainment business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article for such
business. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult entertainment business.
(Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-212: INSPECTIONS:
The owner, operator, or other person in charge of an adult entertainment business shall allow city officers and their authorized representatives to conduct
unscheduled inspections of the patron accessible areas of the business premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter. Such
accessshall be afforded at any time the adult entertainment business is open for business or is occupied. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-
2386, eff. 12-9-2001)
4-7-213: TERM OF PERMIT:
An adult entertainment regulatory permit issued under this article shall be valid for twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance unless suspended or
revoked by the city or unless relinquished by the permittee. If an adult entertainment business ceases operating as an adult entertainment business prior
to the expiration of the adult entertainment regulatory permit for the business, then the permittee shall relinquish such permit by written notice to the
director within three (3) calendar days of the cessation of operations. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001)
4-7-214: RENEWAL:
A holder of an adult entertainment regulatory permit issued under this article shall submit an application for renewal no later than thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the expiration of the permit issued for such establishment. The renewal application shall consist of all of the elements prescribed by subsection 4-
7-202B of this article for an initial application except that the renewal applicant's fingerprints shall not be required if the renewal applicant is the permittee.
The renewal application shall be submitted together with a nonrefundable renewal fee in the amount set by resolution of the city council for adult
entertainment regulatory permit renewal applications, which amount shall be set forth in the city's official fee schedule. Applications for renewal of an adult
entertainment regulatory permit shall be processed in accordance with the procedures governing initial applications. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd.
Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001)
4-7-215: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIREMENTS:
Failure to comply with the requirements of sections 4-7-206 and 4-7-207 of this article shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of an
adult entertainment regulatory permit. Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, violation of these sections shall not constitute
grounds for criminal prosecution. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
Article 3. Adult Entertainer Permit
4-7-301: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to perform at an adultentertainment business unless such person first obtains from the director, and continues to maintain in
full force and effect, an adult entertainer permit. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-302: PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. No person less than eighteen (18) years of age shall be eligible for an adult entertainer permit.
B. A completed application form signed by the applicant shall be submitted to the director at the time of application for an adult entertainer permit. The
application form shall request the following information:
1. The applicant's legal name and any other names (including stage names and aliases) used by the applicant.
2. A state driver's license or state identification card. If the applicant does not possess a state driver's license or state identification card, then the
applicant shall submit a description of the applicant that sets forth the applicant's date of birth, height, weight, and hair and eye color.
3. The applicant's present residence address.
4. Satisfactory written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
5. Two (2) color photographs, taken within six (6) months prior to the date of application that clearly show the applicant's face.
6. A nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). This fee shall not be increased.
7. The business name and address where the applicant intends to perform.
C. If the director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and,
upon request of the applicant, shall return the application. As a convenience to the applicant, upon request of the applicant, the director shall grant the
applicant an extension of time of ten (10) calendar days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying the requested
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. Unless the applicant requests an extension of time
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 190/797
pursuant to this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve the director of the duty to make a decision within the time limits set
forth in section 4-7-304 of this article.
D. Pursuant to California Government Code section 6254(f), information submitted in connection with an adult entertainer permit application is not a public
record and shall not bedisclosed by the city to any person other than city public safety personnel. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-
2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999; Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001; Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-7-303: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
The director shall deny an application for an adult entertainer permit for any of the following causes:
A. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application or in any report or document
required to be filed with the application.
B. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
C. The adult entertainer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-304: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The director shall issue a provisional adult entertainer permit upon the filing, in person by the applicant, of a completed application form, including proof of
age of majority. Such provisional adult entertainer permit shall entitle the applicant to perform at an adult entertainment business pending the director's
decision on the application. The provisional adult entertainer permit shall expire upon the director's decision on the application. The director shall within
sixty (60) city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue the adult entertainer permit if a complete application has been submitted and
there are no grounds for denial; otherwise, the permit shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in
writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States postal service on the day of such decision. If the
application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be
extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. Any interested person may appeal the decision of the director to the hearing officer in
accordance with article 5 of this chapter. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998, amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999)
4-7-305: NONTRANSFERABLE:
A. No adult entertainer permit shall authorize the permittee to perform at an adult entertainment business other than the business stated in the application
for the permit.
B. No adult entertainer permit issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable.
C. Any attempt to transfer an adult entertainer permit is hereby declared invalid and the permit shall automatically become void effective the date of such
attempted transfer. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-306: DISPLAY OF PERMIT:
Every entertainer shall have his or her adult entertainer permit available for inspection at all times during which such entertainer is on the premises of the
adult entertainment business at which the entertainer performs. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-307: TERM OF PERMIT:
An adult entertainer permit issued under this article shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked. (Ord. 98-
O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-308: RENEWAL:
An entertainer permitted under this article shall submit an application for renewal prior to the expiration of the permit issued for such entertainer. The
renewal application shall consist of all of the elements prescribed by subsection 4-7-302B of this article for an initial application other than proof of age.
(Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
Article 4. Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits
4-7-401: GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. The director shall suspend or revoke an adult entertainment regulatory permit for the following causes:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 191/797
1. The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or in any report or record
required to be filed with the city.
2. The permittee has knowingly failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee, owner, agent,
partner, director, stockholder or manager of the adult entertainment business to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
3. The permittee has knowingly allowed the occurrence of criminal activity on the premises of the adult entertainment business.
4. The permittee has committed a misdemeanor or felony in the conduct of the adult entertainment business or has knowingly allowed an employee,
owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of the business to commit a misdemeanor or felony in the conduct of the business.
5. The permittee has knowingly failed to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized city official or has knowingly allowed an
employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of the adult entertainment business to fail to abide by any such disciplinary action.
6. The permittee has knowingly allowed the approved use to be substantially enlarged without city approval.
B. The director shall suspend or revoke an adult entertainer permit for the following causes:
1. The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or
record required to be filed with the city.
2. The permittee has knowingly engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult entertainment business:
a. Unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.
b. Unlawful solicitation of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.
c. Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under section 290 of the California Penal Code.
d. Lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of sections 315, 316, or 318 or subdivision b of section 647 of
the California Penal Code.
e. An act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors
including, but not limited to, sections 311 through 313.4.
f. Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.
3. Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized city official. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2386, eff.
12-9-2001; Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-7-402: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the director shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the
permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based.
The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the permittee, at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
B. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director. All parties involved shall have a right to: 1) offer testimonial,
documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 2) be represented by counsel; and 3) confront and cross examine witnesses. Any relevant
evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any
hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.
C. After holding the hearing in accordance with this section, upon determining that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action, the director shall
impose one of the following penalties:
1. A warning;
2. Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months;
3. Revocation of the permit.
The director may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate corrective
action. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
Article 5. Appeals
4-7-501: APPEAL APPLICATION:
A. Any interested person may appeal the director's issuance, denial of issuance, renewal, denial of renewal, suspension or revocation of an adult
entertainment regulatory permit or adult entertainer permit to the hearing officer in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. A written appeal petition must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days after the decision of the director; provided, however, that if the ten
(10) days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file
a timely appeal petition, together with the nonrefundable appeal fee, deprives the hearing officer of jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The appeal petition
shall be accompanied by anonrefundable appeal fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). This fee shall not be increased.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 192/797
C. The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the director's decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances
that the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the director's decision. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-
26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
4-7-502: DIRECTOR'S DECISION STAYED:
The effectiveness of any decision of the director to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment regulatory permit or an adult entertainer permit, or to deny
renewal of any such permit or to deny an adult entertainer permit, shall be stayed during: a) the appeal period set forth in this article; and b) the pendency
of any appeal. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001)
4-7-503: NOTICE OF HEARING:
The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and take the matter under submission for decision no later than thirty (30) city business days following the
timely filing of an appeal, unless the applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) consent in writing to an extension. At least ten (10) calendar
days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) by U.S. mail with a proof of
service attached. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999)
4-7-504: HEARING OFFICER CONSIDERATION:
Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the hearing officer. All parties involved shall have a right to: a) offer testimonial,
documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; b) be represented by counsel; and c) confront and cross examine witnesses. Any relevant
evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any
hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-505: BURDEN OF PROOF:
Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, in any hearing under this article the burden is on the city to prove that the determination of the director that
is being appealed is reasonable and not an abuse of discretion. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff.7-2-1998)
4-7-506: HEARING OFFICER DECISION:
The hearing officer shall, within ten (10) city business days from the submission of the matter for decision, render a written decision supported by findings.
No later than three (3) city business days after the hearing officer's decision, notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by first class mail,
postage prepaid, to the appellant. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time within which
judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6." (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-507: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
The applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with section 1-5-302 of
this code. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999; Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-19-1999)
Article 6. Miscellaneous
4-7-601: EXISTING ADULT BUSINESSES:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all adult entertainment businesses described
herein whether such businesses were established before or after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Any adult entertainment businesses legally in business prior to the effective date of this chapter shall have six (6) months to comply with the terms of
this chapter. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
4-7-602: REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult entertainment businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other applicable provisions of this code or other law. Notwithstanding the preceding, neither a conditional use permit for a
nightclub use nor a permit for public dancing shall be required for an adult entertainment business. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2386,
eff. 12-9-2001)
4-7-603: CONFLICTS:
If the provisions of this chapter conflict with or contravene any other provisions of this code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and
questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. (Ord. 98-O-2302, eff. 7-2-1998)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 193/797
Chapter 8
SPECIAL EVENTS
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that certain types of special events require specific regulation to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Special events,
including, but not limited to, festivals, carnivals, street fairs, parties, store openings, and awards ceremonies, provide cultural and economic benefits to the
city and its residents, but can also impact the community. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-2: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Each of the following activities shall be considered special events and shall require a special event permit issued under the provisions of this chapter:
A. An activity that requires a temporary change to a building's category of occupancy assigned pursuant to the city's building code;
B. An event at which the total number of guests exceeds the occupancy limit assigned to a location pursuant to the city's building code;
C. A temporary conversion of parking spaces to any purpose other than parking; and
D. A temporary encroachment into a public right of way that: 1) lasts fewer than forty eight (48) hours, and 2) occupies more than twenty (20) square feet
of the public right of way or leaves fewer than four feet (4') of sidewalk width unobstructed for pedestrian travel. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-3: SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT AUTHORIZED:
A special event permit may be issued pursuant to this chapter to permit temporary activity in a commercial zone that would not otherwise be permitted by
this code. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-4: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4-8-2 of this chapter, special event permits are not required for:
A. Parades or assemblies as defined in section 4-3-202 of this title. Any person who obtains a permit for a parade or assembly pursuant to chapter 3,
article 2 of this title need not obtain a separate special event permit for the same activity.
B. "Motion picture productions" or "still photography" as defined by section 4-3-102 of this title. Any person who obtains a permit for motion picture
productions or still photography pursuant to chapter 3, article 2 of this title need not obtain a separate special event permit for the same activity. (Ord.
07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-5: APPLICATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS:
Applications for special event permits shall be filed with the community services department and shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Applications shall be prepared on a form approved by the city and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.
B. Applications shall be filed a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date requested for the special event. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-6: PERMIT AUTHORITY:
The director of community services, or the director's designee shall have the authority to consider and issue or deny permits as provided in this chapter.
The director or designee may also refer any application for a special event to the city council for consideration by the city council rather than the director or
designee. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-7: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OF A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT:
A special event permit may be issued by the community services department if the director of community services or the director's designee determines
that:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 194/797
A. The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the permit application;
B. The applicant has not materially violated conditions of a previous city permit, or the ordinances or regulations of the city;
C. The special event will not conflict with a previously approved special event;
D. The special event will not exceed the city's or applicant's ability to provide sufficient personnel to ensure the event will be conducted without any
adverse impact on public health, safety, or welfare;
E. Sufficient parking and loading will be available to accommodate any special event that results in a change in occupancy classification, exceeds
occupancy limits, or converts parking spaces to uses other than parking;
F. The special event will not result in substantial adverse impacts on pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
G. The special event will not have a substantial adverse impact on the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-8: CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON PERMIT:
The director of community services or designee may impose conditions on any permit as the director or designee deems appropriate to make the
determinations set forth in section 4-8-7 of this chapter or otherwise protect the public health, safety or welfare. These conditions may include
reimbursement to the city for the cost of assigning public safety or other personnel to ensure that the event is conducted without any adverse impact to the
public safety and welfare. Any violation of the conditions of the permit shall be considered a violation of this code. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-9: NOTICE OF DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Upon denial of a permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and furnished a statement of the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 07-O-2541,
eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-10: APPEALS AND REFERRALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
Any decision of the director of community services or designee made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the
provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
On appeal or upon a referral from the director or designee, the city council may issue a special event permit if it makes the determinations set forth in
section 4-8-7 of this chapter or ifit finds that the special event will bring an overriding benefit to the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-11: ASSIGNMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL:
Any person may apply for a special assignment of public safety personnel to a special event or other occurrence which is to be held within the city
including, but not limited to, such functions as motion picture showings, openings of new businesses, weddings, social gatherings, or other activity which
may attract a large number of people and which may become a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare unless public safety services are provided
above the normal level of service furnished by the city. The applicant shall compensate the city for the cost of any additionally assigned personnel by
depositing the anticipated cost of such personnel prior to their assignment.
A. Application for the special assignment of public safety personnel shall be made to the city manager or the city manager's designee on a form approved
by the city.
B. The city manager or the city manager's designee may approve the application if the city manager or designee determines that the special assignment of
public safety personnel is warranted to protect the public health, safety and welfare, that the special assignment will not unreasonably impact the
availability of public safety personnel for other assignments, and that the city has adequate personnel available to staff the special assignment.
C. Any public safety officer specially assigned pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be on regular duty, shall have all the powers and responsibilities
associated with that duty, and shall be compensated as provided in the applicable labor agreement or the city's compensation plan.
In addition, even if no application for special assignment is made, but the special event or other occurrence requires the assignment of city personnel
for the purpose of controlling pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the owner of the property on which the event is held, and the organizer of the event, shall
be jointly and severally liable for the personnel and other costs reasonably incurred by the city for providing traffic control services above the normal
level of service provided by the city. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
4-8-12: ESTABLISHMENT OF APPLICATION FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish application fees for special events permits or other approvals set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-
5-2008)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 195/797
Title 5
PUBLIC HEALTH, WELFARE, AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NOISE REGULATIONS
Article 1. General Provisions
5-1-101: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City in its exercise of the police power to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noise levels from all
sources. At certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry, and in the public interest such noise is proscribed. (Ord. 11-O-
2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-102: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases herein shall be defined as follows:
"A" BAND LEVEL: The total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network. The unit is the dBA.
AMBIENT NOISE: The all encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources from various
distances.
BAND PRESSURE LEVEL: "Band pressure level" of a sound for a specified frequency band shall mean the sound pressure level for the sound contained
within the restricted band.
CYCLE: The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity which occurs during a period.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit of level which denotes the ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to
the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base-10 of this ratio.
EMERGENCY WORK: Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger to the health and safety of the persons or property.
FREQUENCY: "Frequency" of a function periodic in time shall mean the reciprocal of the primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit time and shall be
specified.
MICROBAR: A unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal to one dyne per square centimeter.
MOTOR VEHICLES: Shall include, but not be limited to, minibikes and go-carts.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, or by which the human
voice, music, or any other sound is amplified. "Sound amplifying equipment" shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns
or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks, for the measurement of
noise and sound levels in a specified manner.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL: "Sound pressure level" in decibels of a sound shall mean twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base-10 of the ratio of the
pressure of this sound to the reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-103: DECIBEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA:
Decibel measurements shall be made with a sound level meter and shall be based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars, as measured in
any octave band with center frequency, in cycles per second, as follows: 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000, and for the combined
frequency bands. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-104: GENERAL STANDARDS RELATIVE TO DISTURBANCE OF PEACE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause to be
made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, excessive, or unusual noise which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet or which causes discomfort or
annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness.
The factors which may be considered in determining whether such noise violates the provisions of this section shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
A. The volume of the noise;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 196/797
B. The intensity of the noise;
C. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
D. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
E. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
F. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
G. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
H. The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;
I. The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
J. The duration of the noise;
K. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and
L. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-105: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; INJUNCTIONS:
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which
operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness, or which endangers the comfort, repose,
health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to summary abatement, or by a
restraining order, or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
Article 2. Specific Noise Sources And Regulations
5-1-201: SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city to use or operate any sound amplifying equipment between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following day in such a manner as to be distinctly audible at or beyond the property line of the
property on which the equipment is located. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-202: MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT, FANS, AND AIR CONDITIONING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device in any manner
so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five (5)
decibels based on a reference sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars, as measured in any octave band center frequency, in cycles per second, as follows:
63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000 and for the combined frequency bands (all pass). (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-203: MOTOR VEHICLE ALARMS:
The council finds that on numerous and repeated occasions, alarms which have been installed in motor vehicles have been activated inadvertently by
accident or carelessness and not as the result of any criminal action or conduct; and the noise which results from the activation of such alarms has arisen
at all hours of the day and night and is detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and the council has a responsibility to ensure and preserve the
peace and tranquility of the city by regulating motor vehicle alarms and that the regulation of the intrusive and disturbing noise which results from the
inadvertent activation of motor vehicle alarms is reasonably related to the proper exercise of police power to protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of the public.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, or permit any alarm located in a motor vehicle registered in the name of or driven by such person to
emit any audible sound within the city for a period of more than ten (10) minutes. The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first
audible sound, and end ten (10) minutes thereafter, notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound.
B. Any violation of this section is hereby declared a public nuisance and in addition to other remedies if the alarm continues to be activated for a period in
excess of forty five (45) minutes, any police officer may have the vehicle removed from any zone in the city to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 11-O-2613,
eff. 10-31-2011)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 197/797
5-1-204: MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION AND REPAIR:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner that a reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness residing in that area is caused discomfort or annoyance.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the city in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness
residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance; provided, however, any such vehicle which is operated upon any public highway, street, or right
of way shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-205: RESTRICTIONS ON CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY:
A. No person shall engage in construction, maintenance or repair work which requires a city permit between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. of any day, or at any time on a Sunday or public holiday unless such person has been issued an after hours construction permit
issued pursuant to subsection C of this section. In addition, no person shall engage in such work within a residential zone, or within five hundred feet
(500') of a residential zone, at any time on a Saturday unless such person has been issued an after hours construction permit issued pursuant to
subsection C of this section. For the purpose of this section, "public holiday" shall mean:
1. New Year's Day.
2. Memorial Day.
3. Independence Day.
4. Labor Day.
5. Thanksgiving Day.
6. Christmas Day.
Nothing in this section shall restrict the performance of "emergency work" as that term is defined in section 5-1-102 of this chapter.
B. No person employed for the purposes of construction, maintenance, or repair work which requires a City permit shall enter a site on which such work
will be done prior to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Any violation of this subsection shall be deemed to be an infraction.
C. The City building official, after consultation with appropriate City officials, may issue an after hours construction permit authorizing work and/or entrance
to a work site otherwise prohibited by this section if the City building official determines that the public interest will be served by such a permit.
Situations in which the public interest may be served by the issuance of such an after hours construction permit includes, but are not limited to,
construction near school grounds, and construction that may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic in heavily traveled public rights-of-way.
D. Applications for an after hours construction permit issued pursuant to subsection C of this section shall be in writing and shall set forth how the public
interest will be served by issuing the permit. An after hours construction permit may be revoked or suspended by the City building official if the City
building official determines that activity conducted pursuant to the permit detrimentally affects the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff.
10-31-2011)
5-1-206: NOISE IN PROXIMITY OF SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS, AND CHURCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or church while
the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital; which noise substantially and unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed on such street, sidewalk, or public place indicating the
presence of a school, church, or hospital. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-207: HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to sell anything by public outcry within any area of the City zoned for residential uses. The provisions of
this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs,
circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-208: DRUMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drum, other percussion or musical instrument, or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by
the creation of noise within the City. The provision of this section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed
parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
5-1-209: PORTABLE GASOLINE ENGINE POWERED BLOWERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to use or operate any portable machine powered with a gasoline engine used to blow leaves, dirt, and
other debris off sidewalks, driveways, lawns, or other surfaces. (Ord. 11-O-2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 198/797
5-1-210: ANIMAL AND FOWL NOISE:
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person, any dog or other animal or
fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any loud or continuous cry, bark, howl, or other sound, unreasonably disturbs other persons. (Ord. 11-O-
2613, eff. 10-31-2011)
Article 3. Loud And Unruly Gatherings
5-1-301: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING: Means a gathering of three (3) or more persons for a social occasion or any other activity at any residential unit during
which loud or unruly conduct occurs that constitutes a violation of the California Penal Code or is otherwise a threat to the public peace, health, safety or
welfare, including, but not limited to, any or all of the following:
A. Loud noise or music from any source that results in a violation of the noise regulations contained in this chapter;
B. Obstruction of a street or other public right-of-way (as defined in section 8-7-2 of this Code), or a portion thereof, with vehicles or pedestrians;
C. Public intoxication or drinking in public;
D. The service of alcohol to minors;
E. Possession and/or consumption of alcohol by minors;
F. Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of the peace;
G. Vandalism or destruction of real or personal property;
H. Littering of any trash, debris, bottles, cans or other items of personal property on real property or on a public right-of-way; or
I. Urinating or defecating in public.
MINOR: Means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years old.
OWNER: Means any person(s), including any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, business, corporation, company or other entity,
who owns the residential unit where a loud or unruly gathering occurs, as shown on Los Angeles County's last equalized Property Tax assessment roll, or
the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Means any residential "dwelling unit", such as a single-family dwelling or residence, and each unit of all multiple dwelling unit
properties that were developed as apartment buildings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, cooperatives ("co-ops"), condominiums, or townhomes. A
residential unit also includes: a) any other buildings, structures and improvements on the premises, as well as balconies, decks, patios, yards, and all other
interior and exterior areas; and, b) common use or other areas of multiple dwelling unit properties. However, "residential unit" does not include any room or
unit of a hotel or motel.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Means and includes without limitation:
A. Any person(s) who owns, rents, leases or otherwise is in charge of the residential unit where a loud or unruly gathering occurs; or
B. Any person(s) (including any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, business, corporation, company or other entity) who
organizes, promotes or sponsors a gathering that becomes loud or unruly; or
C. Any person(s) who attends or is present at a gathering and engages in loud or unruly conduct.
If the responsible person is a minor, then the parent(s) or guardian(s) of such minor shall also be considered a responsible person. (Ord. 18-O-2756,
eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-302: LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING - PUBLIC NUISANCE:
It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person to cause or allow a loud or unruly gathering to occur at any residential unit within the
City. A loud or unruly gathering may be abated by the City by all reasonable means, including, but not limited to: a) an order of a peace officer to a
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 199/797
responsible person to immediately terminate the occasion or activity; and/or, b) an order of a peace officer to all non-resident persons at a gathering to
immediately leave the premises. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with an order of a peace officer that is
issued in connection with a loud or unruly gathering. The abatement of a loud or unruly gathering by peace officers shall not preclude the City from
exercising its other remedies against persons who violate this article, including without limitation, the issuance of administrative or criminal citations. (Ord.
18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-303: ABSENTEE OWNER - LIABILITY EXCEPTIONS:
Any owner who does not reside within the residential unit at the time a loud or unruly gathering occurs shall not be liable under this article if such owner
has: a) included covenants within the written lease or rental agreement for the premises on which a loud or unruly gathering occurs that contain specific
language prohibiting the activities described in this article; and b) demonstrated due diligence in abating an unmanageable tenant(s) or responsible
person(s) for a loud or unruly gathering. Prior to September 1, 2019, owner who does not reside within the residential unit and has a written lease or rental
agreement dated on or before the effective date of this section for the residential unit on which a loud or unruly gathering has occurred shall only need to
demonstrate due diligence in abating an unmanageable tenant(s) or responsible person(s) for a loud or unruly gathering to not be liable under section 5-1-
302 of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-304: LIABILITY FOR SUBSEQUENT RESPONSES TO LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS:
When a peace officer intervenes (by issuing 1 or more of the orders stated in section 5-1-302 of this article) at a loud or unruly gathering, the responding
officer shall issue a written notice to the responsible person(s) stating that such responsible person will be held liable for the costs of providing police
personnel over and above the normal services provided by the Police Department to those premises. A first warning shall be deemed to be the normal
services provided. If after the issuance of first warning, police personnel are required to respond to address another violation of this article at the same
residential unit within one year after issuance of said notice, then the responsible persons shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs of each
subsequent police response necessary to abate the condition, as set forth in section 5-1-305 of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-305: COST REIMBURSEMENT:
A. The responsible person(s), or if such person is a minor, then the parents or legal guardians of the minor, shall be jointly and severally liable for all of the
following costs attributable to the loud or unruly gathering:
1. The actual cost incurred by the City beyond the initial response by the City necessary to abate the loud or unruly gathering, including but not limited
to police and fire response;
2. Damage to public property;
3. Injuries to City personnel; and
4. Administrative costs incurred by the City in connection with the billing and collection of such costs.
B. The Police Department shall accurately compute the cost to the City of providing such services pursuant to subsection A of this section. The
responsible person(s) shall be billed for these costs by the City and payment shall be due and payable within fifteen (15) days of the billing date.
Should the amount of the bill not be paid when due, the City may collect the debt, as well as any costs incurred in collecting the debt due to
nonpayment, pursuant to any available provision of the law. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-306: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS:
For any violation of this article, the administrative fine shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
5-1-307: WRITTEN NOTICE:
The Chief of Police is authorized and directed to prepare appropriate advisory procedures to be followed by officers responding to a loud or unruly
gathering, including preparation of written materials advising the responsible person or persons of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-
2018)
5-1-308: APPEAL:
Any person receiving an administrative fine or a bill for City services provided pursuant to this article may file a written request for appeal pursuant to the
provisions provided in title 1, chapter 3, article 3, "Administrative Penalties", of this Code. (Ord. 18-O-2756, eff. 8-17-2018)
Chapter 2
ANIMALS, FOWL, AND REPTILES
Article 1. General Restrictions And Prohibitions
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 200/797
5-2-101: KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS, FOWL, AND REPTILES PROHIBITED:
A. No person shall have, keep, or maintain any animal, fowl or reptile with the exception of dogs, cats, rabbits, parrots, parakeets, mynah birds, lovebirds,
and other normally accepted psittacine birds, on any real property within the city.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
1. The keeping of animals or reptiles by a research laboratory, hospital, or educational institution for experimental purposes.
2. Where a special permit has been granted by the city under the provisions of section 5-2-103 of this article. (1962 Code §§ 5-1.101, 5-1.102)
5-2-102: ANIMALS IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or any animal drawn vehicle upon any public street, unless a
special permit has been granted by the city under section 5-2-103 of this article. (1962 Code § 5-1.103)
5-2-103: SPECIAL PERMITS:
A. The official designated by the city may issue a special permit granting a temporary exception to section 5-2-101 or 5-2-102 of this article under the
following conditions:
1. A permit may be issued for the temporary keeping of an animal, bird or reptile prohibited by section 5-2-101 of this article where such animal, bird or
reptile will be kept in a safe and secure manner at all times, will not be disruptive to the neighborhood, and will not create a threat to the safety or
property of any person.
2. A permit may be issued for the temporary riding, or driving of an animal upon a public street where the activity will not unduly interfere with traffic,
and will not create an undue hazard to persons or property.
B. Any final decision of the official designated by the city to act on permits requested under this section may be appealed to the city council under title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (1962 Code §§ 5-1.102, 5-1.103)
5-2-104: FEEDING PIGEONS AND OTHER BIRDS PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, or cause to be fed, pigeons on any public property, or on any property open to the public.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, or cause to be fed, any wild birds on private property where such feeding of birds creates a nuisance
condition. For the purposes of this section, a nuisance condition shall include, but not be limited to, any unsanitary condition, or excessive noise, or
property damage, caused by the feeding of such birds. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 05-O-2486, eff. 11-25-2005; Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-105: ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC AND CERTAIN PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having the charge or control of any animal to permit such animal to defecate and to allow the feces to remain
upon any public or private property not owned or possessed by the owner or person having the charge or control of such animal, and the person shall
immediately and securely enclose all feces deposited by the animal in a bag, wrapper, or other container and dispose of it in a sanitary manner. A sightless
person who has the charge or control of a guide dog shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (1962 Code § 5-1.207; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff.
2-6-2009)
5-2-106: DOG KENNELS PROHIBITED:
No person shall own, conduct, or maintain any dog kennel within the city. For the purposes of this section, "dog kennel" shall mean any lot, building,
structure, or premises whereon or wherein four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept, harbored, or maintained for any purpose, other
than in a pet store for sale to the public, for care or treatment in an animal hospital, or in a "pet boarding facility" as defined in section 10-3-100 of this code
for which a conditional use permit has been granted. (Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017)
5-2-107: CAT KENNELS PROHIBITED:
No person shall own, conduct, or maintain any cat kennel within the city. For the purposes of this section, "cat kennel" shall mean any dwelling unit,
structure, or premises whereon or wherein six (6) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept, harbored, or maintained for any purpose, other
than in a pet store for sale to the public, for care or treatment in an animal hospital, or in a "pet boarding facility" as defined in section 10-3-100 of this code
for which a conditional use permit has been granted. (Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017)
5-2-108: RABBITRY PROHIBITED:
No person shall own, conduct, keep, or maintain any rabbitry within the city. For the purposes of this section, "rabbitry" shall mean any lot, building,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 201/797
structure, or premises whereon two (2) or more rabbits over the age of two (2) months are kept, harbored, or maintained for any purpose, other than in a
pet store for sale to the public or for care or treatment in an animal hospital. (1962 Code § 5-1.106; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-109: KEEPING BEES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, or maintain any hive or swarm of bees within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
keeping of bees within an educational institution for study or observation or within a physician's office or laboratory for medical research, treatment, or
other scientific purposes provided the bees are not permitted to fly at large. (1962 Code § 5-1.104; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-110: ANIMAL AND FOWL NOISE:
No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person, any dog or other animal or
fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any loud or continuous cry, bark, howl, or other sound, unreasonably disturbs other persons as provided in
section 5-1-210 of this title. (1962 Code § 5-1.107; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-111: LIABILITY FOR INJURY OR DAMAGES:
A. Any person owning, controlling, or having care or custody of any animal shall be liable for any injury caused by such animal, and for any damage
caused to any public property, or to any private property.
B. Any person owning, controlling or having care or custody of any animal shall take such reasonable and necessary precautions as required to protect all
persons from physical harm from such animal, and to protect the private property of any other person. (1962 Code §§ 5-1.108, 5-1.207; amd. Ord. 09-
O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-112: INTERFERENCE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, or resist any person enforcing provisions of this chapter, or any police officer, health officer,
humane officer, or any of their deputies or assistants while engaged in the performance of any duty prescribed by the provisions of this chapter. (1962
Code § 5-1.202; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-113: ANIMALS INFECTED WITH RABIES OR HYDROPHOBIA:
A. It shall be the duty of the owner or person having charge of any animal known to have rabies or hydrophobia, or known to have been bitten by any
animal having rabies or hydrophobia, either to kill such animals or to impound such animal in the pound designated by the city for observation to
determine whether such animal has become infected with rabies or hydrophobia.
B. Police officers, the health officer, and officials authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter, and their assistants or deputies are empowered to enter
upon private property for the purpose of ascertaining whether any animal kept or harbored thereon is afflicted with rabies or hydrophobia.
C. Any animal which has bitten any person or animal, or any animal bitten by any other animal known to be infected by rabies or hydrophobia, or which
has been exposed to rabies or hydrophobia, shall be isolated and quarantined for observation either upon the premises of the owner or custodian
thereof or at the pound designated by the city, as deemed advisable by the health officer or other official charged with responsibility for enforcing the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Any animal isolated and quarantined under the provisions of this section shall not be released therefrom except upon the authorization of the health
officer or other designated official. Any animal determined to have rabies or hydrophobia shall be destroyed. (1962 Code §§ 5-1.218, 5-1.219, 5-1.220;
amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
5-2-114: DELEGATION OF LICENSING AND ENFORCEMENT FUNCTIONS:
The director of finance administration, with the approval of the city manager and city council, may delegate the licensing and enforcement functions of this
chapter to any agency under contract with the city which is qualified to enforce animal regulation within the city. The director of finance administration shall
promulgate such rules and regulations as necessary to ensure compliance with the licensing and enforcement provisions of this chapter where such
functions are delegated to another agency under the provisions of this section. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
Article 2. Other Regulations Pertaining To Dogs
5-2-201: IMPOUNDING DOGS AT LARGE:
Any dog which is running at large without a leash in or upon any public street, alley, or other public place or in or upon any unenclosed lot or premises
within the city, whether or not such dog is licensed shall be impounded by any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 5-
1.203; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 202/797
5-2-202: WALKING DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling, or having in their care or custody, whether upon a leash or not, upon any public street, alley, or
public place or upon any unenclosed land or property, four (4) or more dogs at any one time. (1962 Code § 5-1.206; amd. Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
Article 3. Animal Control And Licensing Requirements
5-2-301: CITY OF LOS ANGELES ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTION:
A. Except as hereinafter provided, article 3 of chapter V, animals and fowls, of the Los Angeles municipal code, as amended and in effect on July 1, 2015,
is hereby adopted by reference as the animal control ordinance of the city of Beverly Hills and may be cited as such.
A copy of article 3 of chapter V, animals and fowls, of the Los Angeles municipal code, as amended and in effect on July 1, 2015, has been deposited
in the office of the city clerk of the city of Beverly Hills and shall at all times be maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, whenever any of the following words and phrases are used in the animal control
ordinance, except for sections 53.18.5, 53.34.2, 53.34.3, and 53.34.4 of the Los Angeles municipal code as adopted by reference, such name or term
shall be defined as follows:
BOARD OF ANIMAL SERVICES COMMISSION: Shall mean and include the Beverly Hills hearing officer.
CITY OF LOS ANGELES OR CITY: The city of Beverly Hills, except where the city of Los Angeles is the correct notation due to the circumstances.
DEPARTMENT (Or Any Similar Term): Shall mean and include the code enforcement division of the Beverly Hills building and safety department.
GENERAL MANAGER (Or Any Similar Term): Shall mean and include the director of community development, or his designee, of the city of Beverly
Hills.
Whenever the animal control ordinance refers to a "person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any animal", or whenever the animal
control ordinance refers to an "owner", that person or owner shall mean "guardian" for the purposes of the animal control ordinance, referring to any
person who cares for a domestic pet. (Ord. 15-O-2688, eff. 9-18-2015)
5-2-302: ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE AMENDED:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-2-301 of this chapter, the animal control ordinance is amended by deleting sections 53.08, 53.15.1, 53.38,
53.39, 53.42(c), 53.42(d), 53.43, 53.47, 53.49, 53.55, 53.59, 53.60, 53.63, 53.64, 53.68, and 53.69.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-2-301 of this chapter, the following text from section 53.50(f) is hereby deleted:
"The fees imposed herein for a pet show or a dog show shall be waived in the event that such show is held in a public park".
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-2-301 of this chapter, the following text from section 53.73 is hereby deleted:
"The ordinance will become operative six months after its effective date, and expire on June 30, 2016, unless extended by ordinance".
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-2-301 of this chapter, the animal control ordinance is amended by amending sections 53.00 (amending the
definitions of "cat kennel" and "dog kennel"), 53.06, 53.06.2, 53.15.2(c), 53.18.5 (amending the first 2 sentences only), 53.27, 53.33, 53.42(e), 53.50(a),
and 53.66 to read as follows:
53.00 Cat Kennel.
"Cat kennel" shall mean any dwelling unit, structure, or premises, whereon or wherein six (6) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept,
harbored, or maintained for any purpose, other than in a pet store for sale to the public or for care or treatment in an animal hospital.
53.00 Dog Kennel.
"Dog kennel" shall mean any lot, building, structure, or premises whereon or wherein four (4) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are
kept, harbored or maintained for any purposes other than in a pet shop for sale to the public or for care or treatment in an animal hospital.
53.06 Animals At Large.
No person owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal, except cats which are not in heat or season, shall cause, permit
or allow the animal to stray, run, or in any manner to be at large in or upon any public street, sidewalk or park.
53.06.2 Restraint Of Dogs.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 203/797
Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon his own premises provided,
however, that such dog may be off such premises if it be under the control of a competent person and restrained by a substantial chain or leash
not exceeding six feet in length.
53.15.2(c) Breeding Permit.
(1) No person shall cause or allow any dog or cat owned, harbored or kept within the city of Beverly Hills to breed.
(2) Any commercial establishment selling dogs and cats shall prominently display the name and address of the breeder(s) of such dogs and cats
and any other information required by the general manager.
(3) Any commercial establishment which sells or otherwise transfers a dog or cat, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall provide to the new
animal owners city application(s) for a license and permit as well as written information regarding the license and permit requirements of the city
applicable to such animal.
53.18.5 Hearing Procedures And License Revocations.
This section shall govern procedures for the revocation of dog licenses and related matters. For purposes of this section the term "dog" includes
the plural and the term "owner" means the owner or person having charge, care or custody of a dog.
53.27 Transfer Of Ownership; Notice Required.
Each owner or operator of any dog hospital or pet shop or as a veterinarian who sells, gives away or in any manner causes the ownership or
permanent possession of any dog, whether over four (4) months or age or not, to be transferred to any person, shall notify in writing the
department of that fact within five (5) days after the date of such sale or transfer. Such notice shall state the kind of dog, the name of such dog, if
any, and the person to whom such dog has been sold or transferred.
53.33 Vicious Animals - Private Premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city a vicious dog, nor shall any person, owning or having custody or control of any dog, or
any other animal known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises
of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises.
53.42(e) Animals, Sale Of - As Novelties - On Streets.
(e) This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of rabbits, natural chicks, ducklings or other fowl, in proper faculties by stores
engaged in the business of selling the same, to be raised for food purposes.
53.50(a) Permit Required.
No person, without first obtaining a permit therefor in writing from the department, shall keep, conduct or operate within the city any pet shop,
animal grooming parlor, pony ring or pony ride, circus, pet show, cat show or animal acts or exhibitions.
53.66 Guard Dogs.
(a) No person shall keep, use or maintain any guard dog or sentry dog within city limits.
(b) For the purposes of this section, "guard dog" means any dog kept, used or maintained on any commercial or industrial premises or any dog
used to guard, protect, patrol or defend any property or person.
(c) For the purposes of this section, "sentry dog" means any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol or defend any premises, area or yard, or any dog
trained as a sentry or to protect, defend or guard any person or property or any dog which is schutzhund or any similar classification.
(Ord. 15-O-2688, eff. 9-18-2015)
5-2-303: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
A. Unless a different penalty is provided for in this chapter, violation of any provision of the animal control ordinance shall be punishable as provided for in
title 1, chapter 3, article 1 of this code.
B. Any person violating any of the following sections of the animal control ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor that is punishable as provided for in title 1,
chapter 3, article 1 of this code:
Section 53.03(c)
Section 53.06.5(c)
Section 53.15(f)
Section 53.15.2(b)(2)(F)(7)
Section 53.15.2(d)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 204/797
Section 53.15.3(b)
Section 53.18.5(n)
Section 53.34
Section 53.34.2(a)
Section 53.34.4(f)(1)
Section 53.58
Section 53.72(c)
(Ord. 15-O-2688, eff. 9-18-2015)
5-2-304: FEES:
The city council shall establish by resolution the fee schedule for permits, spaying, neutering, impounding, licensing and all other fees to be collected by
the city for providing services under this chapter, including fees for services to be performed by the city of Los Angeles or other entity designated by the
city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
Article 4. Exemptions For Police Dogs
5-2-401: PROVISIONS EXEMPTED:
The provisions of sections 5-2-106, "Dog Kennels Prohibited", 5-2-111, "Liability For Injury Or Damages", and 5-2-202, "Walking Dogs", of this chapter and
53.06, "Animals At Large", 53.33, "Vicious Animals - Private Premises", and 53.15.3, "Dog License Fee", of the Los Angeles animal control ordinance,
shall not apply to any dog or dogs owned, controlled or maintained by the police department of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 09-O-2560, eff. 2-6-2009)
Article 5. Regulations Pertaining To Feral Cats
5-2-501: TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN PROGRAM PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A program is hereby adopted to control feral cat populations in certain areas of the city of Beverly Hills ("city"), and to address associated health and safety
hazards, and other impacts in the city. The program was developed in a collaborative effort with community residents and feral cat trap-neuter-return
(TNR) program professionals. The program shall be known as the city of Beverly Hills feral cat TNR program. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-502: APPLICABILITY OF FERAL CAT TNR PROGRAM:
A. Permits may be issued under this article only for TNR activities in the Central Area of the city as depicted in the city's zoning map.
B. No feeding and/or trapping activity shall be permitted within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of any city park. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-
2009)
5-2-503: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall be construed as defined herein.
CAT: A member of the species Felis catus.
DIRECTOR: The director of community development or his/her designee.
FERAL CAT: A cat that lives permanently outside of a domestic home and is not owned and cared for as a typical companion animal or pet, as a result of
having been born feral, abandoned by an owner, or rendered homeless, wild or stray by any other means.
FERAL CAT CAREGIVER: Any person who:
A. Feeds feral cats, humanely traps feral cats, provides care, including shelter or medical care, to the feral cats, or any combination of the foregoing
activities, and works in cooperation with a TNR partner permitted by the city; and
B. Is registered with a permitted TNR partner and has proof of such registration.
FERAL CAT COLONY OR COLONY: A group of cats and the geographic location where that group typically live or where they forage or hunt for food, or
are fed and generally cared for by a TNR partner by associated feral cat caregivers or by TNR individuals.
FOOD/FEEDING: "Food" as well as "feeding" includes water.
TNR INDIVIDUAL: A person who is permitted by the city to engage in implementing the TNR program regulations and guidelines on the property of their
primary residence without being affiliated with a TNR partner.
TNR PARTNER: An organization permitted by the city to engage in implementing TNR via education, training, funding spay-neuter, providing traps, holding
spay-neuter clinics, providing long term colony care through volunteers or otherwise implementing TNR.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 205/797
TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN (Also Referred To As "TNR"): The practice whereby feral cats are humanely trapped by feral cat caregivers or TNR individuals,
taken to a veterinary hospital or spay-neuter facility where they are sterilized and vaccinated, ear tipped, de-flead, and adopted or returned to their colony
to be cared for until the end of their natural life.
TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN PROGRAM REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES OR TNR PROGRAM REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES: The rules adopted
by the city council allowing permitted organizations or individuals to undertake TNR activities, which rules include standards of care and guidelines for
implementation activities. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-504: FEEDING OF FERAL CATS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
The feeding of feral cats is prohibited in the city of Beverly Hills unless otherwise permitted pursuant to this article and conducted in accordance with the
TNR program regulations and guidelines. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-505: TNR PERMIT AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. An annual permit shall be required for any organization or individual that wishes to operate as a TNR partner or TNR individual in the city.
B. A separate permit shall be required for each feral cat colony, even if multiple colonies are cared for by the same entity or person.
C. A permit application shall be submitted in the form and with the information required by the city, including the following:
1. TNR Partner Permit Requirements: A completed TNR partner permit application form shall be submitted, and accompanied with the following
supplemental information:
a. Applicant contact and address information.
b. TNR partner contact and address information.
c. A map of the colony location and colony details to the extent known, including, but not limited to, an approximate number of:
(1) Cats in colony;
(2) Successful spayed-neutered, de-flead, and ear tipped cats; and
(3) Successful adoptions.
d. A map showing the location of each feeder and trapping location.
e. A list of all feral cat caregivers providing TNR support for the colony, and contact information for each caregiver.
f. Feral cat caregiver affidavit forms signed by each affiliated feral cat caregiver confirming their receipt of a copy of the city of Beverly Hills feral cat
TNR program regulations and guidelines and stating that they have read, understand, and will comply with those regulations and guidelines.
g. If feeding or trapping is proposed on private property, a copy of both the property owner's and the resident's consent agreeing to allow TNR
activities on the private property.
h. If feeding or trapping locations are proposed on public property, proof of comprehensive general liability insurance in a form acceptable to and in
an amount determined by the city's risk management department, with the city named as an additional insured. The insurance shall be maintained
in force through the life of the permit, including any renewals, and coverage shall not be modified without the consent of the city.
i. A statement accepting and agreeing to abide by all of the standard conditions of approval set forth in the TNR program regulations and guidelines
signed by a duly authorized representative of the TNR partner.
j. Envelopes addressed to each owner of property within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each proposed feeding and trapping location, with first class
postage attached.
k. Envelopes addressed to the occupant of each residential unit within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each proposed feeding and trapping location,
with first class postage attached.
2. TNR Individual Permit Requirements: A completed TNR individual permit application form shall be submitted, and accompanied with the following
supplemental information:
a. Applicant contact and address information.
b. TNR individual's contact and address information.
c. A map of the colony location and colony details to the extent known, including, but not limited to, an approximate number of:
(1) Cats in colony;
(2) Successful spayed-neutered, de-flead, and ear tipped cats; and
(3) Successful adoptions.
d. A map showing the location of each feeder and trapping location.
e. Feral cat caregiver affidavit forms signed by each TNR individual confirming their receipt of a copy of the city of Beverly Hills feral cat TNR
program regulations and guidelines stating that they have read, understand, and will comply with those regulations and guidelines.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 206/797
f. A statement accepting and agreeing to abide by all of the standard conditions of approval set forth in the TNR program regulations and guidelines
signed by the TNR individual.
g. Envelopes addressed to each owner of property within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each proposed feeding and trapping location, with first class
postage attached.
h. Envelopes addressed to the occupant of each residential unit within one hundred fifty feet (150') of each proposed feeding and trapping location,
with first class postage attached.
i. If feeding or trapping is proposed on property that is not owned by the TNR individual, a copy of the property owner's consent agreeing to allow
TNR activities on the private property. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-506: NOTICE AND COMMENT PERIOD; FEEDING:
A. Upon determination that an application for a TNR permit is complete for processing, the director shall provide notice of the application and a ten (10)
day comment period by first class mail to the owners of all property and residents within a one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of each proposed feeding
location.
B. The notice shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. The locations of feeding devices;
2. The feeding hours; and
3. Contact information for the TNR partner and all affiliated feral cat caregivers, or the TNR individual.
C. Notice for feeding devices that are not separated by more than twenty five feet (25') from another feeding or trapping device may use a single notice,
but which shall be mailed to all owners of properties and residents within the one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of any device.
D. During the ten (10) day comment period, interested parties may submit written comments to the director on whether the application meets the criteria of
this article or may submit a written objection to the location of the feeder if it is proposed to be placed adjacent to their property. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff.
10-16-2009)
5-2-507: NOTICE AND COMMENT PERIOD; TRAPPING:
A. Upon determination that an application for a TNR permit is complete for processing, the director shall provide notice of the application and a three (3)
day comment period by first class mail to the owners of all property and residents within a one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of each proposed
trapping location.
B. The notice shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. The locations of trapping devices;
2. The trapping hours; and
3. Contact information for the TNR partner and all affiliated feral cat caregivers, or the TNR individual.
C. Notice for trapping devices that are not separated by more than twenty five feet (25') from another feeding or trapping device may use a single notice,
but which shall be mailed to all owners of properties and residents within the one hundred fifty foot (150') radius of any device.
D. During the three (3) day comment period, interested parties may submit written comments to the director on whether the application meets the criteria
of this article or may submit a written objection to the location of the trap if it is proposed to be placed adjacent to their property. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff.
10-16-2009)
5-2-508: DETERMINATION ON PERMIT:
A. The determination of whether to issue a permit is a ministerial action. The city shall review permit applications deemed to be in compliance with the
TNR program and guidelines requirements. The director shall approve the application unless:
1. The permit application does not comply with the TNR program and guidelines requirements;
2. The permit application does not include all of the required information as set forth in this article;
3. A letter objecting to the location of feeder and/or trap has been submitted by a resident or property owner whose property is adjacent to the
proposed location of the feeder and/or trap;
4. A permit has already been issued to another TNR partner for the same feral cat colony or a feral cat colony located in the same area or general
vicinity;
5. The applicant has been previously issued a permit pursuant to this article and has violated the requirements of this article or the TNR program
requirements and guidelines; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 207/797
6. The director of public works has reported that the proposed location of a feeder or trap will interfere with public works activities.
B. Upon approval of a permit application, the department of community development shall issue a permit card(s) to the TNR partners, feral cat caregivers,
and TNR individuals as applicable. The permit card shall be worn by the permittee and any person conducting TNR activity so that it is clearly visible to
another person at all times while conducting TNR activity. Residents and/or property owners personally conducting TNR activity on their own property
are not required to wear the permit card. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-509: TNR PERMIT CONDITIONS:
A. As a prerequisite to receiving approval of a permit for a TNR partner or a TNR individual, the TNR partner or individual shall agree to comply with the
standard conditions of approval set forth in the adopted TNR program requirements and guidelines. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-510: STANDARDS OF CARE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF TNR PARTNERS, FERAL CAT CAREGIVERS, AND TNR
INDIVIDUALS:
TNR partners, feral cat caregivers, and TNR individuals shall comply with and fulfill the responsibilities and minimum standards of care as set forth in the
TNR program regulations and guidelines. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-511: RETURN OF FERAL CATS:
The return of feral cats as part of a TNR program is exempt from any abandonment laws because the feral cat is trapped solely for the purpose of
neutering or adopting. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-512: FEEDING AND TRAPPING TIMES:
Food may be placed in authorized feeding stations and traps may be placed in permitted locations during the hours set forth in the TNR program
regulations and guidelines. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-513: TNR PROGRAMS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; RESTRICTIONS:
A. Feeding locations shall be maintained in accordance with the adopted TNR program regulations and guidelines.
B. Recipients of a TNR individual permit shall not be allowed to feed feral cats on public property.
C. Feeding and trapping of feral cats in public parks shall not be permitted. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-514: REQUEST TO REMOVE FEEDERS OR TRAPS LOCATED ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY:
A. After the issuance of a TNR partner permit, a property owner or resident may submit a request to the director to request removal of a feeder or trap that
is located adjacent to their property or on their private property.
B. Upon receipt of the request, the director shall notify the permittee. The permittee shall remove the feeder and/or trap within seventy two (72) hours of
such notice. If the feeder and/or trap is not removed, the city shall cause the feeder and/or trap to be removed without any further notice to the
permittee.
C. The department of public works shall receive copies of all applications involving placement of feeders or traps in the public right of way. The city at any
time may request removal of a feeder or trap located on the public right of way by providing notice to the permittee. The permittee shall remove the
feeder and/or trap within seventy two (72) hours of such notice. If such feeder and/or trap is not removed, the city shall cause the feeder and/or trap to
be removed without any further notice to the permittee. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-515: ANNUAL PERMIT RENEWALS:
A. Permits may be renewed annually, and requests for renewal shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the existing permit on forms
approved by the city. The permittee shall have no property interest in the renewal and the permit shall not be renewed if the director makes any of the
determinations set forth in subsection 5-2-508A of this article.
B. Notice pursuant to sections 5-2-506 and 5-2-507 of this article is not required unless changes in feeder or trap locations or new feeders or traps, or a
combination thereof, are requested in conjunction with a renewal. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-516: PERMIT MODIFICATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 208/797
A. A permittee may request modifications to an existing permit to add or otherwise change the approved locations for feeding, trapping or combination
thereof. Modification applications shall be submitted on a form approved by the city.
B. Removal of feeding or trapping locations shall not require permit modification but the permittee shall inform the city of the removal of the location. The
permit shall not be modified if the director makes any of the determinations set forth in subsection 5-2-508A of this article.
C. Permit modifications shall be accompanied with the same documentation required for an initial permit application.
D. Noticing shall be required if a new location is requested for a feeder, trap, or combination thereof. Relocation of any feeder, trap, or combination thereof
shall require a new notice to be sent as required by sections 5-2-506 and 5-2-507 of this article. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
5-2-517: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Standards Of Care: The city may enforce the standards of care applicable to TNR partners, feral cat caregivers and TNR individuals in accordance with
the city's administrative penalty process or may refer violations of the standards of care to the appropriate TNR partner or TNR individual for assistance
in correcting the violations. Nothing in this subsection is intended to restrict the remedies available to the city for a violation of the requirements of this
article or the TNR programs regulations and guidelines.
B. Revocation Of Permit: In addition to any other remedy available to the city, the city may revoke the permit of a TNR partner or TNR individual if the
director determines that the TNR partner, TNR individual or a feral cat caregiver have violated the provisions of this article or the TNR program
regulations and guidelines.
C. Complaints: Any person may file a written complaint with the department of community development regarding any permit issued under this article.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, an investigation will be initiated by the city regarding the allegations in the complaint. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-
2009)
5-2-518: PROHIBITION AGAINST RELEASE:
A cat not trapped through the city's TNR program is prohibited from being released into the city or otherwise allowed to roam free in the city, whether or not
the release occurs on private or public property. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section
1-3-106 of this code. (Ord. 09-O-2568, eff. 10-16-2009)
Article 6. Ban On Onychectomy (Declawing)
5-2-601: FINDINGS:
A. There is a widespread misunderstanding in the community regarding a commonly performed surgical procedure known as onychectomy, or "declawing".
Contrary to most people's understanding, declawing consists of amputating not just the claws but the whole phalanx (up to the joint), including bones,
ligaments, and tendons.
B. Declawing is not a simple cosmetic procedure akin to a manicure or a pedicure. On the contrary, to remove a claw, the bone, nerve, joint capsule,
collateral ligaments, and the extensor and flexor tendons must all be amputated. Thus, declawing is not a "simple", single surgery but ten (10)
separate, painful amputations of the third phalanx up to the last joint of each toe. In human terms, this is akin to cutting off the last joint of each finger.
C. Declawing robs an animal of an integral means of movement and defense. Because they cannot defend themselves adequately against attacks by
other animals, declawed animals that are allowed outdoors are at increased risk of injury or death. Likewise, animals subjected to flexor tendonectomy,
a procedure in which the animal's toes are cut so that the claws cannot be extended, are also robbed of an integral means of defense and thus imperils
its health and safety.
D. Research has demonstrated that the rate of complication with onychectomy is relatively high compared to other procedures considered "routine".
Complications can include excruciating pain, damage to the radial nerve, hemorrhage, bone chips that prevent healing, painful regrowth of deformed
claw inside of the paw which is not visible to the eye, necrosis, lameness and chronic back and joint pain as shoulder, leg and back muscles weaken.
E. Although there is a widespread belief that declawing makes cats more "house friendly" and, therefore, less likely to be abandoned and subsequently
euthanized, a survey conducted by Forgotten Felines and Friends of Caddo Parish in Louisiana found that approximately seventy percent (70%) of cats
surrendered to the city shelter were declawed. Declawed cats are generally not adoptable from shelters because of their behavioral and other
problems, and they are therefore usually euthanized.
F. There are a number of alternatives to onychectomy (declawing) and flexor tendonectomy that involve no physical harm to the animal. Harmless
alternatives include training the pet to use a scratch post, use of deterrent pheromone sprays, covering furniture, restricting the pet's access to certain
areas of the home, use of plastic nail covers, and more.
G. In addition to the harm these procedures cause to cats, they also have detrimental consequences for humans. Declawing unnecessarily increases
public health and safety risks. Research indicates that a substantial number of declawed cats become more prone to biting as a form of defense.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 209/797
Research has also shown that declawed cats tend to avoid use of litter boxes because the rough surface hurts their paws, and this causes sanitation
problems.
H. Considering the wide array of alternatives, the city council finds that the mere convenience of the onychectomy (declawing) and/or flexor tendonectomy
procedures to the pet's guardian does not justify the unnecessary pain, anguish and permanent disability caused to the animal.
I. The city of Beverly Hills enacts this article pursuant to the authority vested in the city by article XI, section 7 of the California constitution allowing a city to
make and enforce within its limits all local, police, sanitary, and other ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general laws. At present, the law of
the state of California does not prohibit the city from acting to prohibit onychectomy and flexor tendonectomy and therefore the city is not preempted by
Business and Professions Code section 460 from adopting this article. See also, California Veterinary Medical Ass'n v. City of West Hollywood, 152
Cal.App.4th 536 (2007) (court of appeal held that the city of West Hollywood's ordinance prohibiting onychectomy and flexor tendonectomy was within
the city's police power to prevent animal cruelty and such an ordinance was not preempted by state law).
J. The city council finds that prohibiting these procedures will protect and promote the general health, safety and welfare of cats and humans alike. (Ord.
09-O-2573, eff. 12-18-2009)
5-2-602: PROHIBITED:
No person, licensed medical professional or otherwise, shall perform or cause to be performed, assist in the performance of, or procure the performance of
an onychectomy (declawing) or flexor tendonectomy procedure by any means on any cat or other animal within the city of Beverly Hills, except when
necessary for a therapeutic purpose. "Therapeutic purpose" means the necessity to address the medical condition of the animal, such as an existing or
recurring illness, infection, disease, injury or abnormal condition in the claw that compromises the animal's health. "Therapeutic purpose" does not include
cosmetic or aesthetic reasons or reasons of convenience in keeping or handling the animal. In the event that an onychectomy or flexor tendonectomy
procedure is performed on any cat or other animal within the city of Beverly Hills in violation of this section, each of the following persons shall be guilty of
a violation of this section: a) the person or persons performing the procedure, b) all persons assisting in the physical performance of the procedure, and c)
all persons or entities that procured the procedure, including, but limited to, any animal guardian, owner or other person that ordered, requested or paid for
the procedure. (Ord. 09-O-2573, eff. 12-18-2009)
Chapter 3
HEALTH CODE AND REGULATIONS
5-3-1: COUNTY PUBLIC HEALTH CODE AND PUBLIC HEALTH LICENSING REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Regulations governing public health matters in the city are those prescribed in division 1 of title 11 (the county health code) and division 1 of title 8 (public
health licenses) of the Los Angeles County code, as the same have been amended and are in effect as of May 1, 2000, and the same are hereby adopted
by reference and made part of this chapter, subject to such amendments and additions as set forth herein. A certified copy of division 1 of title 11 and
division 1 of title 8 shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk for use and inspection by the public. (1962 Code § 5-4.01; amd. Ord. 00-O-2350,
eff. 10-20-2000)
5-3-2: INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION:
The following rules shall govern the interpretation and administration of the health code and public health licensing regulations adopted in this chapter:
A. Whenever the word "county" or any abbreviation thereof appears in said health code or regulations, it shall be interpreted and deemed to mean the
word "city".
B. Whenever the words "Los Angeles" or any abbreviation thereof appear in said health code or regulations, they shall be interpreted and deemed to mean
the words "Beverly Hills".
C. Whenever there is a conflict between any of the provisions of the health code and/or regulations, and other sections of this code or laws of the city
relating specifically to the same subject matter, the latter shall prevail.
D. The definition or regulation of any activity, condition, or structure in the health code or regulations shall not be interpreted or deemed to permit or allow
the conduct of any such activity or the construction or maintenance of any such condition or structure as may be otherwise prohibited or restricted by
any other section of this code or other laws of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted. (1962 Code § 5-4.02; amd. Ord. 00-O-2350, eff. 10-20-2000)
5-3-3: DIVISION 1, TITLE 8, AMENDED:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-3-1 of this chapter, section 8.04.339 of chapter 8.04 of division 1 of title 8 of the Los Angeles County code is
hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 8.04.339. Owner Initiated Inspection.
"Owner initiated inspection" means an inspection of a food facility that is conducted no more than once in any twelve (12) month period by the county
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 210/797
health officer at the request of a food facility's owner to provide the food facility the opportunity to improve the letter grade or numerical score issued
by the county health officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Each owner initiated inspection shall be conducted in compliance with all
applicable enforcement policies and Advisory Bulletins of the Department of Health Services."
(Ord. 00-O-2350, eff. 10-20-2000)
Chapter 4
SMOKING REGULATIONS
5-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMON AREA: Every interior or exterior area of a multi-unit residence or common interest development that residents of more than one unit of the
multi-unit residence or owners of more than one unit of the common interest development are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls, paths,
lobbies, courtyards, elevators, stairs, community rooms, recreation areas or rooms, playgrounds, gym facilities, swimming pools, jacuzzis, parking
garages, parking lots, restrooms, laundry rooms, cooking areas, and eating areas. Common area shall also mean "common area" as defined in California
Civil Code section 4095, or any successor legislation.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: A. A community apartment project as defined in California Civil Code section 4105, or any successor legislation,
B. A condominium project as defined in California Civil Code section 4125, or any successor legislation,
C. A planned development as defined in California Civil Code section 4175, or any successor legislation, and
D. A stock cooperative as defined in California Civil Code section 4190, or any successor legislation.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: An electronic and/or battery operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an
inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic
cigarette, an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. The
term does not include any inhaler prescribed by a licensed doctor.
ENCLOSED: Closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.
EXISTING LEASE: Any lease or rental agreement that allows a person to occupy a unit that was entered into before January 1, 2018.
HOME OWNERS' ASSOCIATION OR HOA: An organization or entity established for the purpose of managing and/or maintaining a common interest
development. A homeowners' association shall also mean "association" as defined in California Civil Code section 4080, or any successor legislation.
HOTEL: Shall have the same definition as that set forth in title 10, chapter 3 of this Code.
LANDLORD: Any person who owns property let for residential use.
MIXED HOTEL/COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: A project that is comprised of both a hotel and a common interest development. The
project can be in any configuration such as, but not limited to, the hotel and common interest development being located in separate buildings, or the hotel
and common interest development being located on separate floors of the same building.
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE: A residential property containing two (2) or more units on the same lot, where one or more of the units is offered for rent. The
following types of housing are specifically excluded from this definition:
A. A single-family home;
B. A detached or attached accessory dwelling unit on a single-family zoned property;
C. A hotel;
D. A common interest development; and
E. A mixed hotel/common interest development project.
NEW LEASE: Any lease or rental agreement that allows a person to occupy a unit that was entered into, amended, or renewed on or after January 1,
2018. This includes any month-to-month lease that is renewed after January 1, 2018.
NONENCLOSED: A predominantly outdoor area that does not meet the definition of "enclosed", including, but not limited to, open air dining areas.
OPEN AIR DINING AREA: Any nonenclosed area located on private or public property made available to or customarily used by the general public that is
designed, established or regularly used for consuming food and/or beverages or where food and/or beverages are served whether or not for
compensation. This includes, but is not limited to, restaurants, hotels, bar standing and seating areas, patios, and coffee shops. An open air dining area
does not include open air dining areas that are immediately adjacent to and accessory to a private smokers' lounge, as that term is defined in Labor Code
section 6404.5 or its successor statute.
OWNER: The owner of a "separate interest" as that term is defined in California Civil Code section 4185, or any successor legislation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 211/797
SMOKE, SMOKING, VAPE OR VAPING: The carrying, holding, or operating of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, or other kind of smoking
equipment. Smoke also means the lighting, operating, emitting, or exhaling of the smoke or vapor of a pipe, cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette or other
kind of smoking equipment. Smoke also means the gaseous or vaporous products and particles created by the use of a lighted or operated pipe, cigar,
cigarette, electronic cigarette or other kind of smoking equipment.
UNIT: Any personal dwelling space in a multi-unit residence or common interest development. A unit shall include any associated exclusive-use area, such
as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio. A unit shall also have the same meaning as "separate interest" as that term is defined in
California Civil Code section 4185, or any successor legislation. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 17-O-2737, eff. 11-3-2017)
5-4-2: SMOKING IN OPEN AIR DINING AREAS PROHIBITED:
Smoking is prohibited in all open air dining areas located on private or public property, including the public right-of-way. In addition, smoking is prohibited
within twenty feet (20') of an open air dining area, except smoking will be allowed if, and only if, the smoker is actively passing by the open air dining area.
Notwithstanding this prohibition, smoking shall be allowed in up to twenty five percent (25%) of contiguous deck space surrounding hotel swimming pools.
(Ord. 17-O-2730, eff. 5-5-2017)
5-4-3: POSTING OR PLACING OF SIGNS:
Any business with an area subject to the prohibition set forth in section 5-4-2 of this chapter shall post or cause to be posted and shall maintain "no
smoking" signs in conspicuous locations within said area. All such signs shall be prominently displayed, shall clearly recite the phrase "no smoking" and/or
use the international no smoking symbol and shall cite section 5-4-2 of this chapter. Such signs shall be posted not less than five feet (5') nor more than
eight feet (8') above floor level and shall be of sufficient number and location to cause the message of the signs to be clearly visible and readable and
must be made of permanent, weather resistant materials. No person shall wilfully mutilate or destroy any sign required by this section. Signs required
under this section are exempt from the sign requirements in title 10, chapter 4 of this Code. (Ord. 07-O-2518, eff. 10-1-2007)
5-4-4: RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF OWNERS, OPERATORS AND EMPLOYERS:
A. Any person who owns, operates, manages, or controls any business regulated by this chapter may designate the entire business as a no smoking area.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the owner, operator or manager of any existing business to make any structural or other
physical alterations, modifications, or improvements to such business, other than the posting or placing of signs required by section 5-4-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2518, eff. 10-1-2007)
5-4-5: PROHIBITION OF CIGARETTE OR ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES:
Unless otherwise prohibited by State or Federal law, no person shall install, place, operate, or maintain within the City any cigarette vending machine.
"Cigarette vending machine" shall mean any self-service device which, upon insertion of money or tokens, dispenses cigarettes or electronic cigarettes
without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-6: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES IN AND AROUND PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
Smoking electronic cigarettes is prohibited in and around City public buildings in the City where smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by California
Government Code section 7597 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-7: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES IN ENCLOSED PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
Smoking electronic cigarettes is prohibited in all enclosed places of employment where smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by California Labor Code
section 6404.5 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-8: LANDLORD MAY PROHIBIT SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES:
A landlord may prohibit the smoking of electronic cigarettes in the same manner as the smoking of tobacco products as provided by California Civil Code
section 1947.5 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-9: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES IN AND AROUND PLAYGROUNDS AND TOT LOTS:
Smoking electronic cigarettes is prohibited in and around playgrounds and tot lots where smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by California Health
and Safety Code section 104495 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-10: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES IN DAYCARE FACILITIES:
Smoking electronic cigarettes is prohibited at all daycare facilities where smoking of tobacco products is prohibited by California Health and Safety Code
sections 1596.795, 1596.890 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 212/797
5-4-11: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES ON CITY PUBLIC TRANSIT SYSTEM AND IN CITY
VEHICLES:
Smoking electronic cigarettes is prohibited on the City's public transit system and in City vehicles where smoking of tobacco or any other plant product is
prohibited by California Health and Safety Code sections 118925 through 118945 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. 14-O-2657, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-12: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN OUTDOOR SERVICE LINES:
Smoking is prohibited in all outdoor service lines. For purposes of this section, an "outdoor service line" shall mean any outdoor area designed to be or
regularly used by one or more persons to receive or wait to receive a service, enter a public place, or make a transaction whether or not such service or
transaction includes the exchange of money including, for example, ATMs, bank teller windows, telephones, ticket lines, information kiosks and takeout
counters. (Ord. 14-O-2659, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-13: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN FARMERS' MARKETS:
Smoking is prohibited in all farmers' markets. For purposes of this section, a "farmers' market" shall mean any food market at which local farmers sell fruit
and vegetables and other items such as meat, cheese, and bakery products directly to consumers, whether on public or private property. (Ord. 14-O-2659,
eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-14: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PLAZAS:
Smoking is prohibited in all public and private plazas except in areas of private plazas that are specifically set aside for smoking and designated by posted
signage, provided that such areas are not within twenty feet (20') of building entrances or exits or designated pathways. For purposes of this section, a
"public and private plaza" shall mean any unenclosed place, other than a publicly owned sidewalk, that is paved and permanently set aside for pedestrian
use, including, for example, a courtyard, plaza or promenade. (Ord. 15-O-2680, eff. 7-9-2015)
5-4-15: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING AT OUTDOOR PUBLIC GATHERINGS:
Smoking is prohibited at all outdoor public gatherings, except in areas specifically set aside for smoking and designated by posted signage. For purposes
of this section, an "outdoor public gathering" shall mean an unenclosed area where members of the general public are attending, viewing or participating in
a group activity, such as a special event, parade or fair. (Ord. 14-O-2659, eff. 6-1-2014)
5-4-16: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CITY PARKS AND BEVERLY CANON GARDENS:
Smoking is prohibited in all City parks as designated in section 8-1-101 of this Code and in the Beverly Canon Gardens located at 241 N. Canon Drive in
the City of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 17-O-2721, eff. 2-10-2017)
5-4-17: PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY:
Smoking is prohibited in the public right-of-way (including all public sidewalks and alleyways) in the City, except smoking will be allowed if, and only if, the
smoker is actively traveling on the public right-of-way. (Ord. 17-O-2730, eff. 5-5-2017)
5-4-18: SMOKING REGULATIONS FOR MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCES:
Smoking in multi-unit residences shall be governed by the following rules:
A. Beginning January 1, 2018, the following regulations apply:
1. Smoking is prohibited in all common areas.
2. Smoking is prohibited in all units governed by a new lease.
3. A landlord shall not permit the presence of ash trays, ash cans, or other receptacles designed for, or primarily used for, the disposal of smoking
waste within any common area.
4. Every new lease shall include a provision substantially consistent with the following: "Beverly Hills Municipal Code section 5-4-18 prohibits smoking
in all common areas in a multi-unit residence, and in all units governed by a lease that was entered into, renewed, or amended after January 1, 2018.
It is a material breach of this lease for the tenant, or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the
tenant, to engage in smoking on the property, including in the unit and common areas (as those terms are defined in Beverly Hills Municipal Code
section 5-4-1), or to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property."
B. On or before January 1, 2018, the following regulations apply:
1. The landlord shall post, or shall cause to be posted, clear and unambiguous "No Smoking" signs in sufficient numbers and locations in the multi-unit
residence to make it obvious to a reasonable person that smoking is prohibited in all common areas. The signs shall have letters of no less than one
inch (1") in height or contain the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 213/797
circle crossed by a red bar). Such signs shall be maintained by the landlord. The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any
provision of this chapter.
2. The landlord shall provide written notice to all tenants whose units are governed by existing leases stating that: a) smoking is prohibited in all
common areas of the multi-unit residence beginning January 1, 2018, b) any unit that is governed by a lease that was entered into on or after
January 1, 2018 is designated as a non-smoking unit, and c) any unit that is governed by a lease that was entered into before January 1, 2018 will
be designated as a non-smoking unit when the lease is renewed or extended, or January 1, 2019, whichever is earlier, unless an earlier date is
chosen by the landlord. The landlord does not need to comply with this provision if smoking is already prohibited in all common areas and units in the
multi-unit residence.
C. In addition to the above, beginning January 1, 2019, smoking is prohibited in all units.
D. If the landlord has fully complied with subsections A4 and B1 and B2 of this section, the landlord shall not be criminally or civilly liable to any person for
a person's breach of any smoking provision while on the multi-unit residence. (Ord. 17-O-2737, eff. 11-3-2017)
5-4-19: SMOKING REGULATIONS FOR COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS:
Smoking in common interest developments shall be governed by the following rules:
A. Beginning January 1, 2018, the following regulations apply:
1. Smoking is prohibited in all common areas.
2. The HOA, or any person having legal ownership over the common areas of a common interest development, shall not permit the presence of ash
trays, ash cans, or other receptacles designed for, or primarily used for, the disposal of smoking waste within any common area.
3. If an owner enters into a new lease to lease a unit to a tenant, that unit shall be designated as a non-smoking unit until such time as the owner
resumes the occupancy of the unit. Any new lease for the occupancy of a unit in a common interest development entered into, renewed, or amended
on or after January 1, 2018, shall include a provision notifying the tenant that it is a material breach of the lease or other rental agreement to allow or
engage in smoking in the common interest development. Such clause shall be substantially consistent with the following: "It is a material breach of
this agreement for the tenant, or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant, to engage in
smoking on the property, including in the unit and common areas (as those terms are defined in Beverly Hills Municipal Code section 5-4-1), or to
violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property."
B. On or before January 1, 2018, the following regulations apply:
1. The HOA, or any person having legal ownership over the common areas of the common interest, shall post clear and unambiguous "No Smoking"
signs in sufficient numbers and locations in the common interest development to make it obvious to a reasonable person that smoking is prohibited
throughout the common interest development. The signs shall have letters of no less than one inch (1") in height or contain the international "No
Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a red bar). Such signs shall be
maintained by the HOA or any person with legal control over the common areas of the common interest development. The absence of signs shall not
be a defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.
2. The HOA shall provide written notice to all owners of units clearly stating that: a) smoking will be prohibited in all common areas of the common
interest development beginning January 1, 2018, and b) that all units will become non-smoking beginning January 1, 2019. The HOA does not need
to comply with this provision if smoking is already prohibited in all common areas and units in the common interest development.
C. In addition to the above, beginning January 1, 2019, smoking is prohibited in all units.
D. If the HOA Board has fully complied with subsections A2, and B1 and B2 of this section, the HOA shall not be criminally or civilly liable to any person as
a result of an owner or any other person violating the smoking regulations while on the common interest development's property. If an owner has fully
complied with subsection A3 of this section, then the owner shall not be criminally or civilly liable to any person for a tenant or a tenant's guest violating
the smoking regulations while on the common interest development's property.
E. The above-referenced regulations will apply to a mixed hotel/common interest development project except as follows:
1. The regulations will not apply to the buildings, portions of the buildings, or any other areas that are designated as part of the hotel including, but not
limited to, hotel rooms, and common areas that are used by hotel patrons and guests.
2. The regulations will not prohibit the designation of a smoking area in the hotel portion of the project regardless of whether the designated smoking
area can be used by both hotel patrons and owners.
3. The regulations will not prohibit smoking at hotel swimming pools consistent with section 5-4-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2737, eff. 11-3-2017)
5-4-20: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the regulation under this chapter to
fail to comply with its provisions.
B. It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 214/797
C. The City Prosecutor, any peace officer and any City Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
D. Punishment under this Code shall not preclude punishment pursuant to any provision of law pertaining to smoking or littering. Nothing in this chapter
precludes any person from seeking any other remedies, penalties or procedures provided by law. The remedies provided in this Code are cumulative
and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
E. No provision of this chapter shall authorize a criminal prosecution prohibited by Health and Safety Code sections 11362.71, et seq., or 11362.1, et seq.
In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under title 1 of this Code and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties
allowable under State law shall govern. (Ord. 14-O-2659, eff. 6-1-2014; amd. Ord. 17-O-2721, eff. 2-10-2017; Ord. 17-O-2730, eff. 5-5-2017; Ord. 17-
O-2737, eff. 11-3-2017)
Chapter 5
BICYCLES
5-5-1: GENERAL:
Provisions of this chapter govern the use and operation of bicycles within the city and implements the licensing provisions of division 16.7 of the state
Vehicle Code. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle, as defined in section 39000 of the Vehicle Code of the state, upon any street, public path or
way, or other public property in the city unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-3: LICENSE PROCEDURE:
Issuance of bicycle licenses shall be governed by the following procedure:
A. Submission of a completed application for a bicycle license on the form designated by the director of finance administration.
B. A complete description of the bicycle, including frame or serial number and proof of ownership shall be submitted with the application.
C. Payment of the fee prescribed in section 5-5-5 of this chapter shall accompany the application.
D. Upon compliance with subsections A, B and C of this section, the director of finance administration, or designee shall issue a license in compliance with
division 16.7 of the state Vehicle Code, and shall cause the license to be affixed to the frame of the bicycle in such a manner that it cannot be removed
without breaking the seal or affixing device. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-4: PERFORMANCE OF LICENSING FUNCTIONS BY AUTHORIZED BICYCLE DEALERS:
The director of finance administration may designate as his duly authorized agent any bicycle dealer as defined in 39006 of the Vehicle Code for the
purpose of issuing bicycle licenses pursuant to this chapter. The director of finance administration is authorized to issue rules and regulations to implement
the provisions of this section and may authorize such agents to retain one dollar ($1.00) of each license or transfer issued under the provisions of this
chapter for performing such licensing function. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-5: TERM OF LICENSE AND FEES AND USE OF FUNDS:
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on January 1 of the third year of issuance.
B. The license fee shall be in the amount established by council resolution.
C. The transfer fee for transferring a current valid license to a new owner shall be in the amount established by council resolution.
D. Bicycle dealers who hold valid business licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1, article 2 of this code shall be exempt from the
payment of such fees when acquiring bicycles for sale, resale, or trade.
E. All revenues collected from licensing under the provisions of this chapter shall be used in manner as designated in section 39004 of the state Vehicle
Code. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-6: BICYCLE DEALERS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 215/797
Every bicycle dealer shall comply with the following requirements:
A. File a report with the director of finance administration of all new or used bicycles purchased or sold with the identification of the purchaser or seller
within ten (10) days of such transaction.
B. Furnish each purchaser a record of the following information: the name of the retailer, the address of the retailer, the year and make of the bicycle, and
the serial number of the bicycle.
C. Shall not purchase a secondhand bicycle or any bicycle part from a minor under eighteen (18) years of age. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-7: CHANGE OF ADDRESS OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP:
A. Any person selling or transferring a bicycle shall file notice thereof with the city on the form designated by the director of finance administration within
ten (10) days of the transaction.
B. Any purchaser or transferee of a bicycle shall file notice thereof with the city on the form designated by the director of administration and transfer license
registration within ten (10) days of the transaction.
C. Any licensee under the provisions of this chapter who changes addresses, shall file notice thereof with the city on the form designated by the director of
finance administration within ten (10) days of such change of address. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
5-5-8: RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS:
A. The operator of a bicycle shall operate such bicycle as near the curb as possible on any public street or highway;
B. The operator of a bicycle shall not cling to or attach such bicycle to any other moving vehicle upon a public street or highway;
C. The operator of a bicycle shall not carry another person on the bicycle upon any public street or highway;
D. The operator of a bicycle shall not tow or draw any coaster or other vehicle or person on roller skates on a public street or highway;
E. The operator of a bicycle shall not ride on the public sidewalk in any business district as prohibited by section 5-6-801 of this title;
F. The operator of a bicycle shall operate such bicycle with due regard to the surface, width, and type of public street, highway, or public path upon which
the bicycle is being operated, the pedestrians and other vehicles thereon, and the traffic regulations applicable thereto;
G. Any bicycle operated on a public street or highway between one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and until one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise shall be
equipped with appropriate lamps or reflectors as provided by sections 21201 and 21201(a) of the state Vehicle Code. (1962 Code § 3-1.01 et seq.)
Chapter 6
MISCELLANEOUS RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
Article 1. Interference With City Communications, Police Animals And False Reports
5-6-101: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE, FIRE, AND OTHER CITY COMMUNICATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate, or maintain any electrical or mechanical machine or device so as to interrupt, interfere with, or prevent
the continuous operation of any shortwave length transmitter or receiver used by the police, fire, or other city departments. (1962 Code § 4-13.03)
5-6-102: DUTY OF PERSONS TO PREVENT INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE, FIRE COMMUNICATIONS:
It shall be the duty of every person installing, operating, or maintaining any electrical or mechanical machine or device which might interrupt, interfere with,
or prevent the clear and satisfactory operation of any police or fire shortwave length radio transmitter or receiver to shield all such machines and devices
and the places where they are installed, operated, or maintained so as to prevent such interruption or interference. (1962 Code § 4-13.04)
5-6-103: INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully tease, torment, agitate, provoke, beat, kick, injure, maim, disable, kill, or in any way interfere with any dog,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 216/797
horse, or other animal used in a police function by law enforcement officers. (1962 Code § 5-1.109)
5-6-104: FALSE REPORTS TO THE CITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make to the city, or to any officer or department thereof, any false, misleading, or unfounded report, either
verbal, written, or by mechanical signaling device or otherwise, for the purpose of obstructing, misleading, interfering with, obtaining service from, obtaining
a preference with, or otherwise influencing the city, or any officer or department thereof, to do or not to do any act or to expend any materials, labor, or
money. (1962 Code § 4-4.01)
Article 2. Nighttime Curfew And Daytime Loitering Restrictions For Minors
5-6-201: NIGHTTIME CURFEW:
A. Established; Violation: Every minor who is present in or upon any public or private street, road, drive, alley, or trail, any public or community park or
recreation area, any public ground, place, or building, or any vacant lot or abandoned or vacant building between the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and the time of sunrise of the following day is guilty of an infraction unless the minor meets one of the exceptions set forth in subsection C of this
section.
B. Parental Responsibility: Every custodial person who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
C. Exceptions: This section shall not apply if the minor is:
1. Accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; or
2. On an errand directed by, or in possession of written permission from, a parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal
care or custody of the minor; or
3. Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from a school approved activity or one that is supervised by school personnel, a medical
appointment, a religious activity, other lawful educational or recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the school, the city, a civic
organization, or a similar entity that takes responsibility for the child; or
4. Engaged in a lawful employment activity or in a place in connection with or as required by a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which the
minor is lawfully engaged, or going directly to or returning directly from such activity; or
5. Engaged in or going directly to or returning directly from any other lawful activity with written permission from a parent or parents or legal guardian or
other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; or
6. Involved in an emergency or seeking medical assistance; or
7. Exercising rights protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution or article 1 of the California constitution, including, but not limited
to: free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and freedom of assembly; or
8. In the right of way abutting the minor's residence; or
9. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; or
10. Emancipated pursuant to California Family Code sections 7000 through 7123; or
11. Homeless; or
12. Returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity; or
13. Traveling on the public streets and in possession of written permission to be traveling on the public streets from a parent or legal guardian or other
adult person having legal care or custody of the minor. The permission may be general or specific and need not be dated. (Ord. 07-O-2515, eff. 6-15-
2007)
5-6-202: DAYTIME LOITERING:
A. Established; Violation: Every minor who is subject to compulsory education and who is present in or upon any public or private street, road, drive, alley,
or trail, any public or community park or recreation area, any public ground, place, or building, or any vacant lot or abandoned or vacant building
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and three sixteen o'clock (3:16) P.M. on days when his or her school is in full day session, and between
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and the time of school dismissal on days when his or her school is dismissed early is guilty of an infraction unless the minor
meets one of the exceptions set forth in subsection C of this section.
B. Parental Responsibility: Every custodial person who allows or permits a minor in his or her custody to violate any provision of this section is guilty of an
infraction.
C. Exceptions: This section shall not apply if the minor is:
1. Accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian, or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 217/797
2. On an errand directed by, or in possession of written permission from, a parent or parents, his or legal guardian or other adult person having the
legal care or custody of the minor; or
3. Engaged in a lawful employment activity or in a place in connection with or as required by a business, trade, profession, or occupation in which the
minor is lawfully engaged, or going directly to or returning directly from such activity; or
4. Involved in an emergency or seeking medical assistance; or
5. Has permission to leave school campus for lunch or for a school related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school issued, off campus
permit; or
6. Exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or
7. Authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code section 48205, or any other applicable state
or federal law including the first amendment of the United States constitution or article 1 of the California constitution; or
8. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. (Ord. 07-O-2515, eff. 6-15-2007)
Article 3. Fortune Telling (Rep. by Ord. 95-O-2246, eff. 10-7-1995)
Article 4. Gambling And Amusement Devices
5-6-401: AMUSEMENT DEVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, licensee, manager, employee, or agent to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate, play,
or use, or cause or allow to be conducted, managed, carried on, maintained, operated, played, or used, any amusement device; provided further, the
prohibition of this section shall not apply to an amusement device in a private residence. (1962 Code § 4-7.102)
5-6-402: AMUSEMENT DEVICE DEFINED:
"Amusement device" shall mean any electrically or mechanically operated instrument, machine, or piece of equipment activated, operated, or played by
coins or tokens or other devices, by which it is possible to obtain any article, result, or score from one operation or one play of such machine different from
another, or through or by reason of which one person may receive a different result from the playing or operating thereof than another person; provided
further, coin operated machines commonly known as vending machines and jukeboxes are hereby exempted from the definition herein. (1988 Code)
5-6-403: GAMBLING PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to keep, conduct, or maintain within the city any premises or place
used in whole or in part where any game not mentioned in sections 330 or 330a of the state Penal Code is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with
cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other representative of value or for any merchandise
or any other thing of value.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, knowingly to permit any premises or place owned by, or under
their charge or control, to be used in whole or in part for playing, conducting, dealing, or carrying on therein any game not mentioned in sections 330 or
330a of the state Penal Code with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other
representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to play or bet at or against any game not mentioned in sections 330 or 330a of the state Penal Code which game is
played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls, cues, or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit, or any other
representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value. (1962 Code § 4-5.18)
5-6-404: GAMBLING SYSTEMS AND DEVICES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to demonstrate, instruct, or teach to any other person a gambling system or the operation of a gambling device or
gambling game, such as faro, monte, roulette, lansquenet, rouge et noir, rondo, tan, fan-tan, poker, seven-and-a-half, twenty one, blackjack, craps, or
hokey pokey, or any banking or percentage game played with cards, dice or any other device.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be applicable to the following:
1. Such activity in a private residence where performed without compensation.
2. Published or printed matter not used in connection with a display or exhibition or demonstration of such devices or game materials.
3. The keeping, exhibiting or display of such devices or game materials in any mercantile store where such devices or game materials are kept solely
for sale, and members of the public are not permitted to operate, manipulate or play except as incidental to a demonstration for purposes of sale.
(1962 Code § 4-5.17)
Article 5. Littering And Distribution Of Written Materials
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 218/797
5-6-501: LITTERING AND DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATERIALS UPON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
A. No person shall place, deposit, affix, drop, throw, scatter, or cast upon any lawn, walkway, driveway, courtyard, entrance or other exterior portion of any
residential property, whether or not secured to the residential structure or property, any advertising material if the owner, agent, occupant, or person in
control or possession of the property has filed with the director of finance a written statement expressing his or her refusal to receive such advertising
material. For the purposes of this article, "advertising material" shall mean any handbill, pamphlet, circular, leaflet, or other written material devised or
intended to promote any commercial or moneymaking activity.
B. The director of finance shall maintain a "refusal list" of those residential properties for which a refusal to receive such advertising material has been
communicated pursuant to subsection A of this section.
C. The director of finance shall provide the "refusal list", upon payment of a fee to defray the actual cost of preparing the list, to any person desiring to
distribute advertising material upon residential property. No person shall distribute advertising material upon residential property, without first having
obtained the "refusal list" from the director of finance.
D. Any person who distributes advertising material upon residential property shall obtain a current "refusal list" upon each renewal of his or her business
license pursuant to section 3-1-206 of this code. The director of finance shall provide the current "refusal list" upon payment of a fee to defray the
actual cost of preparing the list. No person shall distribute advertising material upon residential property without first having obtained a current "refusal
list" from the director of finance.
E. The director of finance shall mail to each distributor of advertising material who has a business license any written statements filed by owners or
occupants of residential properties with the director after the issuance or renewal of the distributor's business license. (1962 Code § 6-2.01; amd. Ord.
94-O-2190, eff. 2-18-1994; Ord. 95-O-2230, eff. 2-3-1995)
5-6-502: LITTERING AND DISTRIBUTION OF WRITTEN MATERIALS UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND VEHICLES:
No person shall place, deposit, affix, drop, throw, scatter, or cast upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, right of way or other public property, or place on
any vehicle parked in or upon any public right of way, any advertising material. (1962 Code § 6-2.01; amd. Ord. 94-O-2190, eff. 2-18-1994; Ord. 94-O-
2190, eff. 2-18-1994; Ord. 95-O-2230, eff. 2-3-1995)
Article 6. Aircraft Operations
5-6-601: LANDING PROHIBITED:
No person shall land any aircraft, including a helicopter, within the city, except that the council may grant permission for such landing to protect the
personal security of the president or vice president of the United States when visiting the city. (1962 Code § 4-1.01)
5-6-602: EXEMPTION:
Section 5-6-601 of this chapter, prohibiting the landing of helicopters, shall not apply to any helicopter operated by the federal government, or state, county
or city agency engaged in law enforcement, emergency or disaster aid, fire suppression, or going to the aid of any person or the person's property thereof,
so long as the same is operated in accordance with federal and state regulations and by authorized personnel of said federal, state, county or city agency.
(Ord. 06-O-2496, eff. 3-9-2006)
5-6-603: EXTERNAL LOAD OPERATIONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall use any helicopter for external load operations within the city. For the purposes of this section, "external load operations" shall include any
load which is carried or extends outside the aircraft fuselage. (1962 Code § 4-1.02; amd. Ord. 06-O-2496, eff. 3-9-2006)
5-6-604: PROHIBITION AGAINST USING AN UNMANNED AIRCRAFT TO RECORD OR TRANSMIT VISUAL OR AUDIO
RECORDINGS:
A. No person shall use an unmanned aircraft to record or transmit any visual image or audio recording of any person or private real property located in the
city under circumstances in which the subject person or owner of the subject real property has a reasonable expectation of privacy (including, but not
limited to, inside a private residence or office, and inside an enclosed yard).
B. This section shall not prohibit the use of any model aircraft, which is flown in compliance with section 336 of the FAA modernization and reform act of
2012 and which does not transmit or record visual images or audio recordings of any person or real property located in the city.
C. This section shall not prohibit the use of any unmanned aircraft by law enforcement or public safety agencies:
1. If a warrant is issued authorizing the use of an unmanned aircraft; or
2. For the purpose of providing emergency management, fire, or police protection services in response to a life threatening emergency, or for surveying
the condition of persons or property during a duly declared state of emergency; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 219/797
3. Under circumstances where a warrant would not otherwise be required by law.
D. For the purpose of this section, an "unmanned aircraft" is a device that flies and is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from
within or on the aircraft. (Ord. 14-O-2667, eff. 11-21-2014)
Article 7. Firearm Regulations
5-6-701: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the city in any place other than a city approved firing range. Law enforcement personnel
are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 89-O-2061, eff. 5-9-1989; amd. Ord. 98-O-2314, eff. 12-11-1998)
Article 8. Bicycles, Skateboards, And Roller Skates Prohibited In Certain Areas
5-6-801: BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, AND ROLLER SKATES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS IN THE BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride, or propel any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates or similar type device on the sidewalk in any business
district. For purposes of this section, "business district" shall be defined as designated in section 235 of the state Vehicle Code; "skateboard" shall
mean a board, of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which is propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to
which there is not affixed any device or mechanism to turn and control the wheels. "Roller skate" shall mean any footwear, or device which may be
attached to feet or footwear, to which wheels are attached and such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to on duty peace officers as defined in section 830 of the state Penal Code, on duty city parking
enforcement officers and city parking control officers, and other persons as authorized by the city for a specific purpose. (Ords. 94-O-2216, 94-O-2223,
eff. 11-10-1994; amd. Ord. 98-O-2316, eff. 12-18-1998; Ord. 15-O-2686, eff. 9-18-2015)
5-6-802: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, IN-LINE SKATES, SCOOTERS AND SIMILAR WHEELED DEVICES PROHIBITED
ON GROUNDS OF PUBLIC SCHOOL:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride or propel any skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, scooter or similar wheeled device on the
grounds of any public school, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, playground or parking area therein, unless
authorized in writing by appropriate school officials.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to on duty peace officers as defined in section 830 of the state Penal Code or to on duty city parking
enforcement officers and city parking control officers. (Ord. 03-O-2428, eff. 9-26-2003)
Article 9. Repair, Maintenance, And Storage Of Vehicles
5-6-901: STORAGE OF INOPERABLE VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
No motor vehicle shall be stored or parked on private property in any district zoned for residential purposes except in an entirely enclosed space, unless
such vehicle is capable of movement under its own power. (1962 Code § 3-6.2001)
5-6-902: USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES:
No person who owns or has the possession, custody, or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive
period of seventy two (72) hours. (1962 Code § 3-6.1005)
5-6-903: REPAIRING OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:
No person shall repair, or cause to be repaired, perform maintenance or cause maintenance to be performed to, or dismantle, or cause to be dismantled,
any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street or alley in the city. (1962 Code § 3-6.1007)
5-6-904: WASHING OR POLISHING VEHICLES:
No person shall wash, or cause to be washed, or polish, or to be polished, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street in the city. (1962 Code
§ 3-6.1008)
Article 10. Maintenance Of Private Property
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 220/797
5-6-1001: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, move, remove, damage, trim, or interfere with any tree, shrub, vegetation, or planting of any character or with
any post, lighting standard, foundation, or improvement whatsoever in any public parkway, park, or on any public land or move, remove, damage, or
interfere with any post, lighting standard, foundation, or improvement of any character in any public park, parkway, street alley, sidewalk, or any other
public land or place in the city, unless expressly authorized by the city. (1962 Code § 7-2.01)
Article 11. Residential Property Lighting
5-6-1101: EXCESSIVE LIGHTING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except governmental agencies, to install, use, or maintain any lighting which creates an intensity of light on residential
property which is greater than one foot-candle above ambient light level; and provided further, all permissive lighting shall be arranged to focus on the
property from which it originates, and shall not directly reflect upon any adjacent residential property. (1962 Code § 4-15.01)
Article 12. Disposal Of Solid Waste
5-6-1201: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall be applicable for the purposes of this article:
BULKY ITEMS: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and noncombustible waste materials from residential dwelling units, commercial,
industrial, or institutional establishments which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste collection vehicles.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may do either of the following:
A. Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness.
B. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed.
MEDICAL WASTE: Means and includes, without limitation, biohazardous waste or sharps waste, waste that is generated or produced as a result of the
diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of biologicals. Medical
waste may contain infectious agents. "Medical waste" does not include any of the following: waste containing microbiological cultures used in food
processing and biotechnology and any containers or devices used in the preparation or handling of these cultures that is not considered to be an infectious
agent; waste that is biohazardous such as paper towels, paper products, articles containing nonfluid blood and other medical solid waste products
commonly found in the facilities of medical waste generators, hazardous waste, radioactive waste or waste generated from residential uses, waste
generated from normal and legal veterinarian, agricultural and animal livestock management practices on a farm or ranch.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials which are capable of being reprocessed or being manufactured and diverted to reuse and include, without
limitation, office and higher grade paper, corrugated paper, newspaper, telephone books and cardboard, plastics, aluminum, ferrous metal, glass and tin.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial
wastes, demolition and discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste,
and other discarded solid and semisolid waste.
Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or low level radioactive waste regulated under chapter 7.6 of division 20 of the California Health and Safety
Code. Solid waste does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the medical waste management act, chapter 6.1 of division 20 of the
California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste, whether treated or untreated, is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste
which has been treated and is deemed to be solid waste is considered solid waste.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: Any container authorized by or provided by the city or the city's authorized agent for the collection of solid waste.
SPECIAL WASTE: Hazardous waste, medical waste, motor oil, tires, asbestos, raw sewage sludge, industrial sludge, automobile shredder waste,
automobile bodies, white goods, bulky items, or any other waste that requires special handling or cannot be disposed of in a class III landfill.
WHITE GOODS: Kitchen and other large appliances. (Ord. 91-O-2124, eff. 9-6-1991; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993)
5-6-1202: SCAVENGING THROUGH SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
A. No person shall scavenge, search through, or remove from a container or other receptacle located on any public street, alley, parkway, right of way or
other public property any solid waste or recyclable materials which have been placed therein for collection.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to city authorized solid waste collection activities, authorized members of any law enforcement agency or to
any members of the same household and their contractors or employees who place solid waste or recyclable materials in a container or other
receptacle on a public street, alley, parkway, right of way or other public property in the city. (Ord. 91-O-2124, eff. 9-6-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2137, eff.
3-6-1992; Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993)
5-6-1203: ILLEGAL DUMPING:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 221/797
No person shall dump, unload or otherwise dispose of solid waste, special waste, including, without limitation, medical waste or hazardous waste on
another person's property or in a solid waste or recycling container owned by or designated for the exclusive use of any other person, or located on the
property of any other person without the consent of that other person, nor shall any person dump, unload or otherwise dispose of any solid waste on public
property other than in areas designated for such purposes. (Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993)
5-6-1204: BURYING SOLID WASTE:
No person shall bury any solid waste or special waste, including, without limitation, medical waste or hazardous waste or deposit such waste in the city in
a manner not authorized by this code or any regulations adopted pursuant to this code. Any violation of the regulations is considered a violation of this
code. (Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993)
5-6-1205: REGULATIONS AUTHORIZED:
The director of public works may establish regulations relating to the disposal of solid waste and special waste and such regulations shall become effective
upon approval of the city council. Any violation of the regulations is considered a violation of this code. (Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993)
Article 13. Prohibited Conduct On Public Property And Private Property Open To The
Public
5-6-1301: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
5-6-1302: DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall consume any beer, wine, or other intoxicating beverage on any public street, greenbelt, median island, parking lot, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place, except at such times and in such areas designated or permitted by the city for such use. No person shall consume any beer, wine, or other
intoxicating beverage on any private parking lot, walk, wall, stairway, driveway or other property open and accessible to the public without the permission
of the owner, occupant or person in control of such private property. (Ord. 93-O-2165, eff. 4-23-1993)
5-6-1303: SITTING OR LYING ON PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall sit, lie or sleep in or upon any public street, greenbelt, median island, parking lot, alley, sidewalk, or other public place or way open for
pedestrian or vehicular travel. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit a person from sitting upon a public street, greenbelt, median island, parking
lot, alley, sidewalk, or other public place if:
A. Necessitated by the physical disability of such person; or
B. Such person is viewing a legally conducted parade; or
C. Such person is seated on a bench lawfully installed for such purpose. (Ord. 93-O-2165, eff. 4-23-1993)
5-6-1304: LEAVING PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC WAYS:
No person shall leave or permit to remain on any public street, greenbelt, median island, parking lot, alley, sidewalk, or other public place or way open for
pedestrian or vehicular travel any merchandise, baggage or other article of personal property except as permitted by the city. (Ord. 93-O-2165, eff. 4-23-
1993)
5-6-1305: SLEEPING DRAGONS AND OTHER SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person shall carry or possess while on any public street, greenbelt, median island, parking lot, alley, sidewalk, or other public place or way open for
pedestrian or vehicular travel any sleeping dragon device with the intent to use the sleeping dragon device to deny or obstruct the public's ability to freely
move about on roadways, sidewalks, or into or out of buildings. For the purposes of this section, a "sleeping dragon device" shall mean a section of pipe,
or a container, filled with weighted materials, handcuffs, chains, or other locking devices utilized for the purpose of locking a person or persons to other
persons or other objects. (Ord. 00-O-2348, eff. 8-1-2000)
5-6-1306: TRESPASS ON GROUNDS OF PUBLIC SCHOOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the grounds, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, playground or parking area
therein, or any property or buildings of a public school or remain on such grounds or property in violation of posted rules. Any such conduct shall constitute
a trespass upon school property. (Ord. 03-O-2428, eff. 9-26-2003)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 222/797
5-6-1307: HUMAN WASTE:
No person shall urinate or defecate on public property except in a facility intended for accepting human waste located in a public restroom. (Ord. 07-O-
2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1308: ACCESS TO CITY OWNED PARKING STRUCTURES:
A. No person may be present in a city owned parking structure unless he or she is engaged in one of the following activities or accompanying someone
who is so engaged:
1. Parking or unparking a vehicle or riding in a vehicle that is being parked or unparked.
2. Departing from or returning to a vehicle that is parked in the parking structure.
3. Using or going to or from a public restroom located in the parking structure.
4. Operating or maintaining the parking structure as an employee or contractor of the city.
B. The term "city owned parking structure" means the following structures, excepting retail or commercial space:
1. Beverly North, located at 345 N. Beverly Drive, Beverly Hills.
2. Beverly South, located at 216 S. Beverly Drive, Beverly Hills.
3. Beverly-Canon, located at 439 N. Beverly Drive and 438 N. Canon Drive, Beverly Hills.
4. Brighton, located at 9510 Brighton Way, Beverly Hills.
5. Camden, located at 440 N. Camden Drive, Beverly Hills.
6. Bedford, located at 461 N. Bedford Drive, Beverly Hills.
7. Rexford, located at 450 N. Rexford Drive, Beverly Hills.
8. Beverly Hills Gardens, located at 241 N. Canon Drive, Beverly Hills and 240 N. Beverly Drive, Beverly Hills.
9. La Cienega, located at 321 S. La Cienega Boulevard, Beverly Hills.
10. Crescent North, located at 333 N. Crescent Drive, Beverly Hills.
11. Crescent South, located at 221 N. Crescent Drive, Beverly Hills.
12. Dayton, located at 9361 Dayton Way, Beverly Hills.
13. SM-1, located at 485 N. Beverly Drive, Beverly Hills.
14. SM-2, located at 485 N. Rodeo Drive, Beverly Hills.
15. SM-3, located at 485 N. Camden Drive, Beverly Hills.
16. SM-4, located at 485 N. Bedford Drive, Beverly Hills.
17. SM-5, located at 485 N. Roxbury Drive, Beverly Hills. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1309: OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC RESTROOM:
No person shall occupy a city owned public restroom more than twenty (20) minutes per hour, and no person shall occupy a city owned public restroom at
any time such facility has been closed to the public. This provision shall not apply to persons maintaining a city owned public restroom as an employee or
contractor of the city. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1310: BATHING IN PUBLIC FOUNTAIN OR PUBLIC RESTROOM:
No person shall bathe, wash or make other contact with the water in a public fountain, other than a drinking fountain. No person shall use any city owned
public restroom to wash any portion of their body other than their arms, neck and face. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
Article 14. Aggressive Solicitation
5-6-1401: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION ORDINANCE of the city. (Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
5-6-1402: DEFINITIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 223/797
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: An electronic device that accepts or dispenses currency in connection with a checking, savings, credit or other
monetary account.
PUBLIC PLACE: A public sidewalk, street, alley, park, parking lot, parking structure or building.
SOLICIT: To ask for money or something of value by spoken word, bodily gesture or sign as a donation or as consideration for a service or sale of
merchandise. (Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
5-6-1403: UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION; MANNER:
No person shall solicit in any public place in any of the following manners:
A. By using verbal or physical conduct that would cause a reasonable person to fear for his or her safety;
B. By intentionally causing physical contact with the person solicited;
C. By intentionally blocking the path of the person solicited;
D. By following a person who walks away after refusing the solicitation;
E. By approaching a person occupying a motor vehicle other than a commercial vehicle or emergency vehicle offering services to the public;
F. By approaching a person standing in a line, seated in an outdoor dining area, or similarly stationary for a specific purpose, so that, to a reasonable
person, it is apparent that the purpose would be frustrated by relocation to avoid the solicitation. (Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
5-6-1404: UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION; LOCATION:
No person shall solicit in any of the following places:
A. Within fifteen feet (15') of any automated teller machine or parking pay station;
B. Within fifteen feet (15') of any designated bus stop, taxi stand or similar location;
C. In any public bus or similar public transportation vehicle;
D. At the pedestrian entrance/exit or elevator lobby of a city owned parking structure. For purposes of this provision, "city owned parking structure" shall
have the meaning set forth in subsection 5-6-1308B of this chapter;
E. Within fifteen feet (15') of an open air dining area. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1405: EXEMPTION:
This article does not prohibit solicitations made by persons affiliated with the recipient of an encroachment permit in a public place for which such
encroachment permit has been issued. (Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
5-6-1406: REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this article regulating aggressive solicitation are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance
with any other applicable laws including the charitable solicitation regulations of title 4, chapter 3, article 8 of this code. (Ord. 00-O-2355, eff. 11-3-2000)
Article 15. Camping Or Storing Personal Property On Public Property
5-6-1501: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the meaning of words and phrases used in this article.
CAMP: To pitch or occupy camp facilities; to use camp paraphernalia.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 224/797
CAMP FACILITIES: Shall include, but not be limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters.
CAMP PARAPHERNALIA: Shall include, but not be limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or noncity provided cooking facilities and
similar equipment.
CITY OWNED PARKING STRUCTURE: A city owned parking structure designated in subsection 5-6-1308B of this chapter.
PARK: A public park designated in section 8-1-101 of this code.
STORE: To put aside for use when needed; to put for safekeeping; to leave in a location for later retrieval. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1502: UNLAWFUL CAMPING:
No person shall camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:
A. Any park.
B. Any street.
C. Any city owned parking structure.
D. Any other city owned or operated property. (Ord. 07-O-2538, eff. 12-21-2007)
5-6-1503: UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY:
No person shall store personal property, including, without limitation, camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas:
A. Any park.
B. Any street.
C. Any city owned parking structure.
D. Any other city owned or operated property.
If property is placed in a location for such a length of time as to cause visible damage to grass or other landscaping, or to interfere with regular
maintenance activities, then such damage or interference shall be evidence that the property has been stored in violation of this section. (Ord. 07-O-2538,
eff. 12-21-2007)
Chapter 7
MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION OF PREMISES, AND ADJACENT PUBLIC RIGHT OF
WAY
5-7-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A. The council has determined that the city has an extensive and widely recognized history and reputation for well kept properties and that the general
welfare of the city is founded, in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of properties.
B. The council has determined that improper maintenance of properties will result in substantial diminution in the enjoyment, use, aesthetic, and property
values of surrounding properties.
C. The council has determined that it is desirous to enhance and promote the maintenance of property and the enhancement of the livability, community
appearance, and the social and economic conditions of the community.
D. The council has further determined that the maintenance of property as required by this chapter reasonably relates to the proper exercise of police
powers to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
E. The council has determined that the provisions of this chapter will enhance the appearance and value of such properties rather than be a burden on the
owners thereof. (1962 Code § 5-5.101; amd. Ord. 90-O-2087, eff. 2-8-1990; Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 225/797
5-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
PREMISES: Any lot or parcel of land or property, including any building or portion thereof, improved or unimproved.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any area or parcel of land granted, deeded, dedicated to, or otherwise acquired by the city or the public at large for any public
purpose, including, but not limited to, alleys, roadways, parkways, pedestrianways, sidewalks, public streets, and uses for storm drains and drainage,
sanitary sewers, water pipes, gas pipes, electric and telephone conduits, electronic services, overhead wires, and supporting structures.
SIDEWALK: That strip of property lying in front of and between the curb line and property line of the adjoining or abutting lot, piece, or parcel of land within
the city and bounded on the sides by the prolongation in a straight line of the side lines of such lot, piece, or parcel of land in front of which such strip
exists. (1962 Code § 5-5.102; amd. Ord. 90-O-2087, eff. 2-8-1990; Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-7-3: MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES AND ADJACENT PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Any person, or the agent thereof, owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any premises in the city, shall keep and maintain such
premises and the right of way abutting such premises in a safe, clean, orderly, sanitary and aesthetic condition.
B. Except for city owned public parks, all vacant properties not otherwise subject to the provisions of section 10-3-4201 of this code, shall be surrounded
by a minimum six foot (6') high chainlink fence on or adjacent to the property boundaries, or other alternative fencing acceptable to the director of
community development, that is adequate to protect the public safety and welfare, unless the director determines that the installation of such fencing
will be detrimental to the public safety and welfare. Any fencing required under this section may additionally require screening if the director finds it
necessary in order to protect the safety, streetscape and overall appearance of the site. The provisions of this subsection shall be effective on July 1,
2005.
1. Any person, or the agent thereof, owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any vacant properties in the city, shall be required to
submit a landscaping, fencing, and maintenance plan, and post a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the director or other security satisfactory
to the director to guarantee compliance with such landscaping, fencing, and maintenance plan.
2. As a condition of any approval of the plan by the director, the plan must be accompanied by an agreement, approved by the city attorney, wherein
the property owner or person having lawful control of the vacant property, covenants and agrees to landscape, fence and maintain the property in
accordance with the plan and the provisions of this code and to provide for exterior security of the vacant property.
3. The maintenance of a vacant property shall conform to the maintenance plan approved by the director. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.103, 7-6.02, 7-8.02; amd.
Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999; Ord. 05-O-2464, eff. 3-18-2005)
5-7-4: CONDITIONS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:
The following conditions do not comport with a safe, clean, orderly, sanitary and aesthetic condition on premises and are prohibited by section 5-7-3 of this
chapter:
A. Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or partially constructed or uncompleted buildings after building permits have expired;
B. Buildings with deteriorating or peeling paint which allows the exterior building coverings to deteriorate or allows the effects of sun or water penetration
so as to cause decay, dry rot, warping, or cracking;
C. Broken windows, doors, attic vents, or underfloor vents;
D. Improperly maintained landscaping which is visible from streets, including, but not limited to:
1. Lawns with grasses in excess of six inches (6") in height;
2. Untrimmed hedges;
3. Dying trees, shrubbery, lawns, and other desired plant life from lack of water or other necessary maintenance; and
4. Trees and shrubbery growing uncontrolled without proper pruning;
E. Overgrown vegetation which is unsightly and likely to harbor rats or vermin;
F. Dead, decayed, or diseased trees, weeds, and other vegetation;
G. Trash, garbage, or refuse cans, bins, boxes, or other such containers stored in front or side yards visible from public streets and rear yards;
H. Lumber, junk, trash, debris, or salvage materials maintained upon any premises which are visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 226/797
I. Abandoned, discarded, or unused furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible at the
ground level from a public alley, street, or adjoining premises;
J. Premises having a topography, geology, or configuration which, as a result of grading operations or improvements to the land, causes erosion,
subsidence, unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage problems or potentially injurious to adjacent premises;
K. Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative automobiles, trailers, campers, boats, and other motor vehicles which are accumulated or stored in
yard areas;
L. Oversized vehicles parked or stored in required setbacks or yard areas. For the purposes of this section, "oversized vehicle" shall mean any vehicle
exceeding eighteen feet (18') in length, and eighty four inches (84") in width, and eighty four inches (84") in height and any nonpassenger vehicle that
is licensed by the state of California as a commercial vehicle. "Oversized vehicle" shall not include passenger vehicles, such as sport utility vehicles,
whose dimensions do not exceed twenty three feet (23') in length, eight feet six inches (8'6") in width, and eight feet six inches (8'6") inches in height.
1. Exception: Notwithstanding the foregoing, an oversized vehicle may be parked or stored in a side or rear yard on a paved surface, provided such
yard is completely screened with a solid fence or wall at least six feet (6') in height. Further, an oversized vehicle may be parked or stored in the front
yard area on an approved paved surface for no more than forty eight (48) hours in any thirty (30) day period. The director of community development
may issue a permit for the parking or storage of an oversized vehicle in excess of forty eight (48) hours when:
a. Such oversized vehicle is owned or under the lawful control of a guest of the subject property; and
b. Such guest resides fifty (50) or more miles away from the subject property.
Said permit shall expire ten (10) days from the date and time of issuance. No more than one such permit shall be issued at a property within a six (6)
month period;
M. The accumulation of dirt, litter, or debris in vestibules, doorways on the premises, or adjoining walkways;
N. Mounds of soil, dry grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, abandoned asphalt or concrete, rubbish, refuse, or waste or other unsanitary material of any
kind;
O. Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, or walkways which are cracked, broken, defective, deteriorated, in disrepair, or defaced due to any writing,
inscription, figure, scratch, orother marking commonly referred to as "graffiti", which is subject to the provisions of chapter 9 of this title;
P. Any unsightly, partly completed, or partly destroyed buildings, structures, or improvements in the city which endanger or injure neighboring properties or
the public health, safety, or general welfare;
Q. Any tree which overhangs a street, alley, sidewalk in such a manner as to cause an obstruction to any person using such street, alley, or sidewalk;
R. Any other condition which adversely affects the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.102, 5-5.103(b), 7-2.02; amd. Ord. 05-O-2464, eff.
3-18-2005; Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-7-5: CONDITIONS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
The following conditions do not comport with safe, clean, orderly, and sanitary conditions on any public right of way and are prohibited by section 5-7-3 of
this chapter:
A. Any dirt, litter, debris, rubbish, weeds or any other kind of waste or unsanitary material of any kind;
B. Any curb cut or driveway approach, or portion thereof, which is no longer needed or which no longer provides vehicular access to the adjacent
premises;
C. Any curb, sidewalk, parkway, or driveway which is cracked, broken, or otherwise in need of repair, replacement, or maintenance. (1962 Code §§ 5-
5.201, 5-5.202, 7-6.01, 7-8.01)
5-7-6: VIOLATION A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the other penalties provided in this code, any violation of this chapter is expressly declared to be a public nuisance, and in addition to other
remedies is subject to the abatement procedures of this chapter and state law, and any person responsible for such nuisance is also liable for any cost and
attorney fees incurred by the city in abating such nuisance. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.401, 5-5.402)
5-7-7: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY:
The building official shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of section 5-7-4 of this chapter relative to premises; and the
transportation/engineering official shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of section 5-7-5 of this chapter relative to the public right of way. (1962
Code § 5-5.301, 7-6.03, 7-8.03)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 227/797
5-7-8: ABATEMENT OF UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS:
In addition to the other remedies available to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the city official responsible under section 5-7-7 of this
chapter for enforcing the provisions of this chapter may proceed with the abatement procedure as set forth herein. (1962 Code §§ 5-5, 7-6, 7-8)
5-7-9: CONTENTS OF ABATEMENT NOTICE:
When the city official, as designated in section 5-7-7 of this chapter finds that any condition prohibited by this chapter exists on any premises or public right
of way, the city official may give, or cause to be given notice to abate the unlawful condition. Such notice shall be in writing and shall detail the existing
condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form:
NOTICE TO ABATE
TO THE OWNER, AGENT OF THE OWNER, LESSEE, OCCUPANT, OR PERSON IN POSSESSION OF THE PROPERTY HEREINAFTER
DESCRIBED:
YOUR ATTENTION IS DIRECTED to the provisions of Chapter 7, Title 5, of the Municipal Code of the City of Beverly Hills, California, on file in the
office of the City Clerk in the City Hall.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections , you are hereby notified that
(DESCRIPTION OF UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS)
You are therefore notified to abate the above specified conditions by taking the following action(s):
(DESCRIPTION OF ACTIONS NECESSARY TO ABATE UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS)
Such action(s) must be completed within (insert time period) days from the date of this notice, and thereafter you must maintain the said premises free
of any of the unlawful conditions described above.
In the event you shall fail to complete such work within the time hereinabove mentioned, the undersigned shall cause the appropriate action to be
taken and completed, and the charges therefor will be a lien upon the premises.
The premises is that certain real property situated in the City of Beverly Hills, Los Angeles County, California, specificallydescribed as LOT , BLOCK ,
TRACT .
Dated
Designated City Official
City of Beverly Hills, California
(1962 Code §§ 7-8.04, 7-6.06, 5-5.302)
5-7-10: SERVICE AND POSTING OF ABATEMENT NOTICE:
A. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the time such abatement must occur, the abatement notice required by section 5-7-9 of this chapter shall either be
personally served, upon the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of the premises described in the notice; or by
depositing it in the United States mail at Beverly Hills, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or
person in possession of the premises therein described at such person's last known address; provided further, if no address is known or made known
to the city official, then by mailing such notice to the owner at the owner's last known address as the name appears on the latest equalized assessment
roll.
B. In addition to the notice required by subsection A of this section, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises.
C. In the absence of fraud, an error or mistake in the sending of the notices, or failure on the part of any property owner to receive the notice, shall not in
any way affect the validity of the proceedings, but the person mailing or posting such notice shall file an affidavit of mailing or posting, and such affidavit
shall be conclusive evidence that the notices have been mailed or posted as required. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.302, 7-6.03, 7-6.04, 7-6.05, 7-8.05, 7-8.06)
5-7-11: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any requirement of the city official in the notice to abate may be appealed to council by any interested party under the provisions of title 1, chapter 4,
article 1 of this code. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.304, 7-6.08, 7-8.08)
5-7-12: CITY ABATEMENT OF UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS:
If the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of the premises fails to take such action as required by the notice and within
the time therein provided, or as extended by the council, the designated city official shall take the action as specified in the notice to abate the unlawful
condition. The official shall then prepare a statement of theexpense incurred in abating the unlawful condition and shall file such statement with the city
clerk. Such statement shall refer to the particular premises, and shall describe such premises in such a way that it is easily identifiable. Such statement
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 228/797
shall also show the cost of the action taken; provided, however, if the premises include more than one lot, each separate lot, or all of the lots may be set
forth in the same statement. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.305, 7-6.09, 7-8.07, 7-8.08)
5-7-13: NOTICES OF EQUALIZATION OF ASSESSMENTS:
Within fourteen (14) days after the filing of the statement referred to in section 5-7-12 of this chapter, the city clerk shall cause to be served under the
procedure set forth in subsection 5-7-10A of this chapter, upon the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of the premises
described in the statement a notice of a hearing on the assessment of costs before the city council. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.306, 7-6.10, 7-8.10)
5-7-14: CONTENTS OF ASSESSMENT NOTICE:
The notice of assessment shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE RE EQUALIZATION OF ASSESSMENT FOR:
(DESCRIPTION OF ACTION TAKEN TO ABATE PROHIBITED CONDITION)
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the City Council of the City of Beverly Hills, California, will, on the day of , 19 , in the Council Chamber of the City
Hall, beginning at the hour of of said day, hear any protest or objection to the cost of
(describe proposed action to be taken)
(describe the premises)
, in the City of Beverly Hills, California, for the purpose of correcting, modifying, or confirming the said costs and assessing the same against the said
premises. Failure to make any objection will be deemed to be a waiver of any objection or protest to any and all procedures concerning this matter. A
statement showing all premises affected and charges against the premises and/or the cost and proposed assessment for such action is on file in the office
of the City Clerk at the City Hall and is open to the public inspection.
Date
City Clerk
(1962 Code §§ 5-5.306, 7-6.14, 7-8.14)
5-7-15: HEARING ON ASSESSMENT:
Persons served with a notice of assessment, or any other person holding an interest in the property, may object to the proposed assessment by filing a
written protest with the city clerk prior to the time set for the hearing. The city clerk shall present to the council all protests so filed. The council, sitting as a
board of equalization at the hearing, may modify or correct any assessment, and if no corrections or modifications are made, the assessment shall be
deemed confirmed. The decision of the council thereon shall be final and conclusive, and the assessment shall thereupon become a lien against the
property and shall remain a lien thereon until the assessment is paid. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.307, 7-6.12, 7-8.12)
5-7-16: FILING OF ASSESSMENT:
The director of finance administration shall record the assessment in the office of the county recorder. Any assessment which is delinquent shall be subject
to the same penalties and interest as provided for ordinary municipal taxes and may be subject to foreclosure as provided by law. (1962 Code §§ 5-5.308,
7-6.14, 7-8.13)
5-7-17: ASSESSMENTS, PAYMENTS, AND REFUNDS:
No assessment or act relating to the assessment or collection of any sum of money for any work done by the city official under the provisions of this
chapter shall be illegal or void on account of any informality in connection with the levying of the assessment or the doing of the work or because the work
was not completed within the time required by law. Any payment erroneously paid or illegally collected under the provisions of this chapter may be
refunded upon an order of the council after a proper showing of such erroneous payment or illegal collection. Any claim for any such refund shall be
verified and filed within ninety (90) days after making the payment sought to be refunded. (1962 Code § 5-5.310)
5-7-18: CITY SUIT FOR AMOUNT OF ASSESSMENT:
The city may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the assessment, penalties, and costs, and the satisfaction of any judgment
obtained shall cancel any lien for the assessment. (1962 Code § 5-5.311)
5-7-19: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent of the owner, lessee, or anyone in possession of any premises within the city to refuse to allow the
designated city official or any authorized city employee to enter upon the premises at any time during the hours of daylight for the purpose of the
abatement of the prohibited conditions, or to interfere in any way with any work undertaken by the city under the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code
§ 5-5.312)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 229/797
Chapter 8
ASSIGNMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL
(Rep. by Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
Chapter 9
GRAFFITI PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REMOVAL
5-9-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for the removal of graffiti from walls, structures and other permanent surfaces located on both public
and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 06-O-2510,
eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADHESIVE LABEL: Any so called "bumper sticker", sheet of paper, fabric, or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing.
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER: Any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of
spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property.
FELT TIP MARKER: Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth (1/8) of an inch and which
contains an ink or other pigmented liquid.
GRAFFITI: Any inscription, word, figure, picture, painting, design or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, or
painted, engraved, pasted, or otherwise affixed to or on any wall, structure or other permanent surface of any public or private real or personal property
within the city of Beverly Hills to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant thereof.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker, gum label, paint stick, etching tool capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood,
or other surface, adhesive label, or any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width upon any
surface of any material.
PAINT STICK OR GRAFFITI STICK: A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in width.
STRUCTURES: Any structure as defined in the city's building code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, and
cargo/shipping containers. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-3: GRAFFITI PROHIBITION:
A. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply graffiti to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle located within the city. It
shall also be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply or affix any adhesive label to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle not
owned or lawfully possessed by such person, or without advance authorization by the owner thereof.
B. It is unlawful for the owner of any private property to permit graffiti to remain so as to be capable of being visible from any adjacent property (private or
public), street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right of way or other area open to the public. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-4: POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS BY MINORS:
A. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years ("minor") to possess any graffiti implement while upon
private property without the prior written consent of the owner of such property.
B. This section shall not apply to any minor attending, or traveling to or from, school at which time the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a
class at said school which has a written requirement of the class for the possession of the graffiti implements or if the minor's employment requires
possession of any graffiti implement, provided the minor has written verification of any such job requirement and written consent from the employer
which is dated and signed. The burden of proof in any prosecution for a violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish enrollment
in a class or employment requires the possession of the graffiti implements. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-5: FURNISHING GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause
or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years without the
consent of the parent or other lawfully designated guardian, which consent shall be given in advance in writing. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-6: POSSESSION OF GRAFFITI IMPLEMENTS PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED PUBLIC PLACES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 230/797
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in or upon any city owned buildings,
grounds, park or other city facility or while in or within ten feet (10') of an underpass, bridge, abutment, storm drain, or similar types of infrastructure not
normally used by the public, unless otherwise authorized by the city. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-7: GRAFFITI CONSTITUTES A NUISANCE:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38771, the city council hereby declares the maintenance of graffiti visible from any adjacent property
(private or public), street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right of way or other area open to the public to constitute a nuisance, the abatement of which shall
be provided as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-8: GRAFFITI REMOVAL REQUIREMENT:
A. Any person applying graffiti within the city shall remove the same within twenty four (24) hours after notice to said person by the city or by the public or
private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is
applied by an unemancipated minor, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment therefor.
B. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control, repair or maintenance of private property, to permit the
property to be defaced with graffiti for a period in excess of three (3) days after service of notice by the city regarding the defacement of the property
with graffiti.
C. For purposes of this chapter, the removal or abatement of graffiti shall include the repair or replacement of the portion of the property defaced by graffiti,
in the event that the graffiti cannot be removed cost effectively. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-9: ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI BY CITY WITH CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER OR POSSESSOR:
A. Whenever the director of community development, or his or her designee, determines that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned real or
personal property within the city so as to be capable of being visible from any adjacent property (private or public), street, sidewalk, alley, or other
public right of way or other area open to the public, the director of public works services is authorized to provide for the use of city funds for the
abatement of the graffiti, or if the graffiti cannot be abated cost effectively, the repair or replacement of the portion of the property that was defaced,
upon the following conditions:
1. In abating the graffiti, the painting, repair, and/or replacement of an area more extensive than where the graffiti is located shall not be authorized,
except where the city owns the structure or property and the director of public works services, or his or her designee, determines that a more
extensive area must be repainted, repaired, and/or replaced, or where the private property owner agrees to pay for the costs of repainting, repairing,
and/or replacing a more extensive area.
2. Where the structure or permanent surface is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of graffiti may be performed only after securing
the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure or permanent surface and only after such entity executes an appropriate release
and right of entry form permitting such graffiti removal.
3. Where the structure or permanent surface is privately owned, the removal of graffiti by city employees or by a private contractor under the direction
of the city, may be performed only after securing the consent of the owner or possessor and only after the owner or possessor executes an
appropriate release and right of entry form permitting such graffiti removal.
B. As an alternative to the procedure provided in subsection A of this section, upon discovering the existence of graffiti on a privately owned structure or
other permanent surface on privately owned property within the city so as to be visible from any public right of way or other public or private property,
the director of community development, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with
the procedure set forth in section 5-9-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006; amd. Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
5-9-10: ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI BY CITY WITHOUT CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER OR POSSESSOR:
A. If the consent of the private property owner or possessor of the property cannot be obtained, graffiti which is located on a privately owned structure or
other permanent surface on privately owned property within the city and which can be viewed from any adjacent property (private or public), street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public right of way or other area open to the public may be abated by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance
pursuant to the following provisions:
1. The director of community development, or his or her designee, shall issue a three (3) day notice of intention to abate and remove the graffiti as a
public nuisance to the owners of the affected property and shall serve such notice in any of the following methods: a) by personal service on the
owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; b) by posting at a conspicuous place on the property or abutting public right of way; or
c) by sending a copy of the notice by United States mail addressed to the owner or person in charge or control of the property, at the address shown
on the last available assessment roll, or if the owner's address is unknown, then in care of the property address. Service by mail shall be complete at
the time of deposit with the U.S. postal service, and service shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by affidavit, the original of which shall
be filed with the city clerk. The owner shall have three (3) days after the date of service of the notice to remove the graffiti or be subject to abatement
of the graffiti by the city and assessment of the costs of such abatement as a lien or special assessment on the subject property.
2. The notice shall be on city letterhead in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO ABATE GRAFFITI
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti in existence on the property located at
(address) California, which is visible to public view, within three (3) days after the date of this notice.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 231/797
The graffiti is visible to public view and, therefore, constitutes a public nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order, City employees, or private
contractors employed by the City, will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by the removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost
of the abatement by the City employees, or its private contractors, will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien or a
special assessment upon the property until paid.
Any person having any objections to, or interest in, said matters may file within three (3) days from the date of this notice a written appeal to the
City Risk Manager ("Risk Manager") stating the reasons the person believes that the City should not abate the graffiti.
Unless an appeal is filed with the Risk Manager, or the graffiti is not otherwise abated, the City will proceed with the abatement of the graffiti on
your property at your expense without further notice at the conclusion of this three (3) day period.
B. If an appeal is timely filed, the risk manager, or his or her designee, shall hold a hearing on the objections to the abatement within five (5) days of
receiving the appeal. Notice of the decision shall be given as provided in subsection A1 of this section for the notice of intent to abate graffiti. If the city
risk manager denies the appeal, the property owner shall have three (3) days to remove the graffiti from the date of notice of the risk manager's
decision. The risk manager's decision shall be final.
C. If no appeal is filed, or if the appeal is denied following a hearing, and if the owner fails to remove or fails to cause the graffiti to be removed by the
designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the risk manager approves, then the director of public works services shall cause the graffiti to be
abated by city forces or private contract, and the city, or its private contractor, may enter upon the premises for such purposes after obtaining a warrant
authorizing the entry upon the property for abatement of the graffiti. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006; amd. Ord. 07-O-2516, eff. 6-29-2007; Ord. 14-O-
2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
5-9-11: ASSESSMENT OF COSTS:
A. The personnel or persons who abate the nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall keep an account of the cost of abatement. Such personnel
or persons shall submit to the city council for confirmation an itemized report showing such costs. The city council may modify the report if it is deemed
necessary and shall confirm the report by motion or resolution.
B. Pursuant to Government Code section 38773.5, the total cost of the abatement, including all administrative costs, shall constitute a special assessment
against that parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it shall constitute a special assessment on the parcel.
C. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.
D. Alternatively, pursuant to Government Code section 38773.1, the total cost of the abatement, including all administrative costs, shall constitute a lien
against the property on which the nuisance is maintained. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it shall constitute a lien on the parcel.
E. Prior to a recordation of a lien or special assessment for the recovery of abatement and related administrative costs, the city, in accordance with
California Government Code section 38773.1 or 38773.5, shall provide written notification, by registered or certified mail, to the property owner that a
lien or special assessment will be assessed against the property.
F. As used in this section, the term "related administrative costs" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney fees, and the law enforcement costs
incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-12: ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI BY CITY AT GRAFFITI PERPETRATOR'S EXPENSE:
A. Lien Against Property Owned By Perpetrator: The expense of abatement of graffiti shall become a lien against any property owned by any minor or
other person creating, causing, or committing the nuisance and shall be a personal obligation of such minor or other person as set forth in Government
Code section 38772. The parent or guardian having custody and control of such minor shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor and the
expense of abatement of such graffiti shall be a personal obligation and become a lien or an assessment on the property of such parent or guardian.
B. Graffiti Nuisance Abatement Lien: The city may collect the costs of abatement of graffiti, as well as related administrative costs, by a graffiti nuisance
abatement lien upon the lot or parcel of the minor or other person who applied graffiti to the property, or upon the lot or parcel of the parent or guardian
of the minor. If the total costs of abatement of the graffiti are not paid to the city in full within ten (10) days after the date of the notice from the city of the
city council's determination regarding the costs of the abatement, the city clerk may record, in the county recorder's office in the county in which the
parcel of land is located, a graffiti nuisance abatement lien, which, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment
lien. Prior to the recordation of the lien, notice of the lien shall be personally served upon the person owning the lot or parcel of land upon which the lien
is sought, whether such person may be the minor, other person, or parent or guardian of the minor, in accordance with California Government Code
section 38773.2. The graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, that the lien is imposed on behalf of the city, the street
address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the property, upon which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded
owner of the property. The lien will continue in full force and effect until the entire amount due is paid in full. The graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be
foreclosed by an action brought by the city. As used in this subsection, the term "related administrative costs" includes, but is not limited to, court costs,
attorney fees, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person.
C. Special Assessment: As an alternative to the procedure set forth in subsection B of this section, the city may make the costs of abatement of graffiti, as
well as "related administrative costs" as defined in subsection B of this section, a special assessment against the lot or parcel owned by the minor or
other person or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, as provided in Government Code section 38773.6. If the total costs
of the abatement of the graffiti are not paid to the city in full within ten (10) days after the date of the notice from the city of the city council's
determination regarding the costs of the abatement, the city may cause the total costs of abatement, including related administrative costs to be
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 232/797
charged to the owner of the subject lot or parcel on the next regular tax bill. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws of the state applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes are hereby made
applicable to the special assessment. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
5-9-13: PENALTIES:
A. Criminal Penalties: Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and subject to the penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 3 of this
code.
B. Additional Penalties: Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the city's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties or
conditions of any grant or probation, diversion, deferred entry of judgment, or other court supervision (including upon a determination that a minor is to
be a ward of the court as a result of committing an act of vandalism or graffiti) upon conviction:
1. Suspension or delay in issuance of driver's license (pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 13202.6);
2. Community service and/or graffiti removal service (pursuant to California Penal Code sections 640.6 and 1203 et seq., Welfare and Institutions Code
sections 728 and 729.8, and Vehicle Code section 42001.7).
C. Cumulative Remedies: The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other
applicable city ordinances, the laws of the state of California, or the laws of the United States. (Ord. 06-O-2510, eff. 12-22-2006)
Chapter 10
CARRYOUT BAGS
5-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions apply to this chapter:
CUSTOMER: Any person purchasing goods from a store.
OLD GROWTH FORESTS: Forests having the following characteristics: a) they are largely naturally regenerated; b) less than thirty percent (30%) of the
stand/forest area has been logged or cleared within the past century; c) they are relatively undisturbed such that human activities have not significantly
altered native forest structure, composition or function; d) they are dominated by native tree species; e) they are relatively unmanaged although they may
suffer from a history of fire suppression or grazing; and f) they are composed of individual or stands of trees of varying ages, with old growth components
constituting at least half of the stand or forest unit, and having at least four (4) trees per acre over one hundred fifty (150) years of age.
OPERATOR: The person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of the
store.
PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG: Any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically based source, such as corn or other
plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. "Plastic carryout bag" includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not
include reusable bags, produce bags, or product bags.
POSTCONSUMER RECYCLED MATERIAL: A material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use
and product life cycle. "Postconsumer recycled material" does not include materials and byproducts generated from, and commonly reused within, an
original manufacturing and fabrication process.
PRODUCE BAG OR PRODUCT BAG: Any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a
store or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items.
RECYCLABLE: Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered
form in the manufacture of a new product. "Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.
RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG: A paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: a) contains no contents from old growth forests; b) is
one hundred percent (100%) recyclable overall and contains a minimum of forty percent (40%) postconsumer recycled material; c) is capable of
composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society Of Testing And Materials (ASTM) standard D6400; d) is accepted for
recycling in curbside programs in Los Angeles County; e) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was
manufactured, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used; and f) displays the word "Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside
of the bag.
REUSABLE BAG: A bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: a) has
a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty five (125) uses, which for purposes of this definition, means the capability of carrying a minimum of twenty two
(22) pounds one hundred twenty five (125) times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy five feet (175'); b) has a minimum volume of fifteen liters
(15 l); c) is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; d) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal
in toxic amounts, as defined by applicable state and federal standards for packaging or reusable bags; e) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is
permanently affixed to the bag, the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of
postconsumer recycled material used, if any; and f) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick.
STORE: Any of the following retail establishments located within the city of Beverly Hills:
A. A retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or more that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items
and some perishable items;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 233/797
B. A store of at least ten thousand (10,000) square feet of retail space that generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns uniform local sales
and use tax law (part 1.5 (commencing with section 7200) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code) and that has a pharmacy licensed
pursuant to chapter 9 (commencing with section 4000) of division 2 of the Business And Professions Code;
C. A drugstore, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food store, foodmart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a line of goods
that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods, including those stores with a type 20 or 21 license issued by the department of alcoholic beverage
control; or
D. A retail store with gross annual sales of less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items
and some perishable items. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-2: PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS PROHIBITED:
No store shall provide to any customer a plastic carryout bag. This prohibition applies to bags provided for the purpose of carrying away goods from the
point of sale and does not apply to produce bags or product bags. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-3: PERMITTED BAGS:
All stores shall provide or make available to a customer only recyclable paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or
other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that they
bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-
23-2014)
5-10-4: REGULATION OF RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRYOUT BAGS:
A. Any store that provides a recyclable paper carryout bag to a customer must charge the customer ten cents ($0.10) for each bag provided, except as
provided in section 5-10-6 of this chapter.
B. No store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the ten cent ($0.10) charge required in subsection A of this section.
C. All stores must indicate on the customer receipt the number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the bags.
D. All monies collected by a store under this chapter will be retained by the store and may be used only for any of the following purposes: 1) costs
associated with complying with the requirements of this chapter, 2) actual costs of providing recyclable paper carryout bags, or 3) costs associated with
a store's educational materials or education campaign encouraging the use of reusable bags, if any.
E. All stores must report to the director of public works services, on a quarterly basis, the total number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided, the total
amount of monies collected for providing recyclable paper carryout bags, and a summary of any efforts a store has undertaken to promote the use of
reusable bags by customers in the prior quarter. Such reporting must be done on a form prescribed by the director of public works services, and must
be signed by a responsible agent or officer of the store confirming that the information provided on the form is accurate and complete. For the periods
from January 1 through March 31, April 1 through June 30, July 1 through September 30, and October 1 through December 31, all quarterly reporting
must be submitted no later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter.
F. If the reporting required in subsection E of this section is not timely submitted by a store, such store shall be subject to the fines set forth in section 5-10-
7 of this chapter. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-5: USE OF REUSABLE BAGS:
A. All stores must provide reusable bags to customers, either for sale or at no charge.
B. Each store is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags. (Ord.
14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-6: EXEMPT CUSTOMERS:
All stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, either reusable bags or recyclable paper carryout bags or both, at the store's option, to any
customer participating either in the California special supplemental food program for women, infants, and children pursuant to article 2 (commencing with
section 123275) of chapter 1 of part 2 of division 106 of the Health And Safety Code or in the supplemental food program pursuant to chapter 10
(commencing with section 15500) of part 3 of division 9 of the Welfare And Institutions Code. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-7: ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATION; PENALTY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 234/797
A. The director of public works services has primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The director of public works services is authorized to
promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to,
investigating violations, issuing fines and entering the premises of any store during business hours.
B. If the director of public works services determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, he/she will issue a written warning notice to the operator
of a store that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that will apply for future violations.
C. Any store that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter after a written warning notice has been issued for that violation
shall be guilty of an infraction.
D. If a store has subsequent violations of this chapter that are similar in kind to the violation addressed in a written warning notice, the following penalties
will be imposed and shall be payable by the operator of the store:
1. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation after the written warning notice is given; a fine not exceeding two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for the second violation after the written warning notice is given; or
2. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third and any subsequent violations after the written warning notice is given.
E. A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue.
F. All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the solid waste conservation fund to assist the department of public works services with
its costs of implementing and enforcing the requirements of this chapter.
G. Any store operator who receives a written warning notice or fine may request an administrative review of the accuracy of the determination or the
propriety of any fine issued, by filing a written notice of appeal with the director of public works services no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a
written warning notice or fine, as applicable. The notice of appeal must include all facts supporting the appeal and any statements and evidence,
including copies of all written documentation and a list of any witnesses that the appellant wishes to be considered in connection with the appeal. The
appeal will be heard by a hearing officer designated by the city manager. The hearing officer will conduct a hearing concerning the appeal within forty
five (45) days from the date that the notice of appeal is filed, or on a later date if agreed upon by the appellant and the city and will give the appellant
ten (10) days prior written notice of the date of the hearing. The hearing officer may sustain, rescind, or modify the written warning notice or fine, as
applicable, by written decision. The hearing officer will have the power to waive any portion of the fine in a manner consistent with the decision. The
decision of the hearing officer is final and effective on the date of service of the written decision, is not subject to further administrative review, and
constitutes the final administrative decision. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
5-10-8: OPERATIVE DATE:
This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 2014, for stores defined in subsections A and B of the definition of "store" in section 5-10-1 of this chapter.
For stores defined in subsections C and D of the definition of "store" in section 5-10-1 of this chapter, this chapter shall become operative on January 1,
2015. (Ord. 14-O-2658, eff. 5-23-2014)
Title 6
UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES
Chapter 1
CITY UTILITY SERVICES
Article 1. General Provisions Relating To City Utility Service
6-1-101: TYPES OF SERVICE:
The city water, waste water, and refuse collection services are governed by the provisions of this chapter. (1988 Code)
6-1-102: REQUEST FOR SERVICE:
Prior to the commencement of city water service, wastewater service, residential and/or commercial solid waste collection service, an application shall be
filed with the city. The application shall be on the form designated by the director of public works or his/her designee, and shall be signed by the applicant
under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 93-O-2185, eff. 12-17-1993)
6-1-103: SECURITY DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. The following applicants for city utility service shall be required to submit a security deposit:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 235/797
1. Nonresidential applicants who have never received Beverly Hills utility service and residential applicants who have never received Beverly Hills utility
service and whose credit histories do not meet the standards set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of finance
administration;
2. Nonresidential applicants who have not received Beverly Hills utility service within the previous two (2) years and residential applicants who have not
received Beverly Hills utility service and whose credit histories do not meet the standards set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the
director of finance administration;
3. Applicants who have failed to pay utility service bills when payment was due two (2) or more times within the six (6) most recent billing cycles during
which that applicant received service.
B. Existing users shall submit a security deposit or an existing security deposit shall be increased to the amount required by subsection C of this section if:
1. City utility service was discontinued for nonpayment of a utility service account; or
2. Payment of city utility service bills have become delinquent four (4) or more times within the six (6) most current billing cycles.
C. If required, a security deposit shall be submitted to the city prior to the commencement or reinstatement of city utility service or, if utility service is being
currently provided, the deposit shall be submitted to the city within ten (10) calendar days of a request by the city.
The amount of the security deposit shall be set forth in the rules and regulations promulgated by the director of finance administration. (Ord. 93-O-
2185, eff. 12-17-1993)
6-1-104: TYPES OF SECURITY DEPOSITS:
The following types of security shall satisfy the security deposit requirements:
A. Cash deposited with the city; or
B. Assignment to the city of a certificate of deposit or an interest in a savings account in a federal or state bank or savings and loan. All interest thereon
shall accrue to the assignor; or
C. Such other types of security as may be designated in the rules and regulations promulgated by the public works administrator. (1988 Code)
6-1-105: RATES AND CHARGES:
The council shall have the power by resolution to establish, amend, or revise the rates and charges for utility services to any user, whether the service is
rendered inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. (1988 Code)
6-1-106: BILLING OF SERVICES:
The city will bill monthly for commercial refuse collection service, and will bill bimonthly for water and for waste water service, unless designated otherwise
by council resolution. Water and wastewater meter readings will be taken by the city for billing purposes bimonthly, or at such other times as established by
rules and regulations of the public works administrator when scheduled readings cannot be accomplished. (1988 Code)
6-1-107: PAYMENT:
Bills for city utility services shall be due and payable on issuance and mailing of the bill to the user. Bills shall be deemed received by the user seventy two
(72) hours after deposit in the United States mail. Bills shall be paid at the location specified on the billing. If the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days of
issuance and mailing, it shall be deemed delinquent, and an interest charge as established by resolution of the city council, shall attach on any balance
which is delinquent thirty (30) or more days. (Ord. 10-O-2592, eff. 11-18-2010)
6-1-108: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CITY:
A. The city may discontinue utility service upon ten (10) days' written notice to the utility user, which period shall not commence until five (5) days after
mailing of such notice for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure of the user to pay any delinquent bill for utility service within fifteen (15) days after the bill becomes delinquent unless there is a bona fide
dispute concerning the bill or any portion of the bill which relates to that service;
2. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations promulgated by the director of public works;
3. Refusal to allow authorized city personnel reasonable access to the premises for inspection or any other purpose related to maintenance or repair of
such utility service.
Twenty four (24) hours prior to termination of service, the city shall attempt to notify the utility user by telephone or personal contact of the termination
of service and if it is not possible to contact the utility user, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place not earlier than forty eight (48) hours prior to
termination of service.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 236/797
B. The city may discontinue utility service without notice for any of the following reasons:
1. If an unsafe or hazardous condition exists on the user's premises, or if any apparatus, appliance, or equipment on the user's premises creates an
immediate health or safety threat to the public or any person. Upon termination, the city shall notify the user of the reason for the discontinuance and
the necessary corrective action to be taken by the user before service will be restored.
2. If a utility service is used without authorization and approval by city. (Ord. 93-O-2185, eff. 12-17-1993)
6-1-109: TERMINATION OF SERVICE BY USER:
The user may terminate utility service upon a minimum twenty four (24) hours' notice to the city. The user shall be responsible for all charges incurred until
termination of service. (1988 Code)
6-1-110: USE OF SECURITY DEPOSIT:
Where a delinquent utility bill is not paid within forty eight (48) hours of a notice of delinquency issued by the city, or upon termination of utility service by
the user, the city may apply the security deposit under section 6-1-103 of this chapter toward satisfaction of the utility charge. (1988 Code)
6-1-111: SECURITY DEPOSIT RELEASE:
Security deposits required by section 6-1-103 of this chapter may be released by the city upon request by the utility user, provided that the user has not
been delinquent in payment of the utility service charges for at least two (2) years prior to the date of the request. No interest shall be paid by the city on
any security deposit. (Ord. 93-O-2185, eff. 12-17-1993)
6-1-112: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF CITY UTILITY:
Any user of city utility service for which the city has imposed a charge shall file an application for such service and shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter. Any user wrongfully receiving a utility service provided by the city shall be responsible for all charges accrued for such service. The city may
discontinue without notice any city utility service which has not been authorized by the city. (1988 Code)
6-1-113: UTILITY CHARGES TO CITY:
The amount of any utility charge or penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced on
behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent utility charge or penalty. (1988 Code)
6-1-114: VIOLATIONS:
Any person guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (1988 Code)
6-1-115: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay utility charges lawfully due shall not relieve such person from paying the charges due and
unpaid at the time of such conviction. All remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any
other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (1988 Code)
Article 2. Water Service
6-1-201: GENERAL:
The city shall endeavor to provide a dependable supply of water from available sources in amounts which are adequate to meet the reasonable needs of
those users within the city service area. The public works administrator shall develop regulations for administration of water service, and these regulations
shall become effective upon approval by the council. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-202: TYPES OF SERVICE:
The city provides three (3) types of water service which includes:
A. Potable water for the consumption of domestic, commercial and industrial users.
1. Domestic service: Water services for single-family residences or multiple-unit residences not exceeding two (2) units.
2. Commercial services: Water services for premises devoted primarily to business or professional activities and shall include water services rendered
to multiple unit residences in excess of two (2) units.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 237/797
3. Industrial service: Water services for premises where the use is primarily in manufacturing or processing activities.
B. Water for fire protection service for city, commercial and industrial users. "Fire protection service" shall mean water services to premises solely for fire
protection purposes.
C. Water for temporary service use. "Temporary service" shall mean water services for construction work and other uses where the services are required
only for a limited time. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-203: CONDITIONS OF SERVICE:
Water service is supplied to users subject to the following conditions:
A. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations as set forth by the public works administrator as approved by the council;
B. Acceptance of the available pressure and service at the location serviced, and the city shall not be liable for any damages that may be caused due to
excessive high or low pressure, fluctuations of pressure, shortages or insufficiency of supply, and/or any conditions not within the control of the city;
C. Installation by the user of facilities for water use which meet the city's specifications;
D. The right of the city to temporarily interrupt water supply without notice for purposes of making emergency repairs;
E. The right of the city to interrupt service for purposes of repair or maintenance of the water system, provided further, that the city shall endeavor to give
at least twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to such interruption in the water supply;
F. The right of the City to apportion the available water supply in an equitable manner in case of an emergency or water shortage with due consideration
for public health and safety;
G. The right of the City to discontinue service where the user's equipment or operations cause excessive fluctuations in use or pressure which disrupts or
impairs service to other users; provided further, that service may be continued when the user rectifies the problem;
H. That the user is responsible for any loss or damage to City water meters or other City water facilities which is caused by the use, operation, or
appliances on the user's premises; including, but not limited to, hot water, steam, or chemicals;
I. That the City's responsibility for delivery of water service shall terminate at the curb stop valve or the water meter, and the City shall not be responsible in
any way for damages or injuries caused by the escape of water from faucets, pipe connections, appliances or other facilities on the user's premises;
J. That the City is relying upon the information in the application for service relative to the size, type and location of requested water service, and that the
applicant is responsible for any additional costs incurred by the City because of erroneous information furnished by applicant;
K. The paramount right of users within the City boundaries to the available water supply, and that portion of water which is surplus is available to users
outside of the City boundaries. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-204: WATER FACILITIES ON USER PREMISES:
Any user of City water service shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Install and maintain service connections and water facilities on the user's premises which comply with City specifications and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Public Works Administrator;
B. Install a valve between the meter and first outlet being supplied with water service for purposes of facilitating or impeding the flow of water;
C. Installation of a quick closing valve or other device which causes excessive and disruptive pressure surges in the City water system shall be prohibited;
D. Provide and maintain reasonable access to all water system facilities installed on the user's premises and allow authorized City personnel into and
upon the user's premises at all reasonable hours for purposes of inspection of water facilities or for any other purposes reasonably related to
maintenance or operation of the water system;
E. Control valves on the inlet side of the City water meter shall be operated only by authorized City personnel;
F. All meters, housings, valves and service connections installed by the City on the user's premises shall be and remain the property of the City, and the
City shall have the right to remove or relocate such devices;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 238/797
G. Multi-family residential dwellings comprising of six (6) or fewer units for which a building permit is issued after June 30, 2019 shall install a separate
water meter for each unit in the manner approved by the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.
1. Every water meter installed pursuant to this section shall be installed by the City on the public right-of-way such that the water meter can be read
and maintained by designated City employees to ensure accurate billing.
2. Every water meter installed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the rates and fees established pursuant to article 1, "General Provisions
Relating To City Utility Service", of this chapter including but not limited to fees for water meter connection, capacity, and supply.
3. The service provided to every water meter installed pursuant to this section shall be billed at the single-family residential rate;
H. Multi-family residential dwellings comprising of seven (7) or more units for which a building permit is issued after June 30, 2019 shall install a master
meter on the public right-of-way such that the water meter can be read and maintained by designated City employees to ensure accurate billing for the
total water use of the multi-family project.
1. The master water meter installed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the rates and fees established pursuant to article 1, "General Provisions
Relating To City Utility Service", of this chapter including but not limited to fees for water meter connection, capacity, and supply.
2. The owner of the multi-family residential project subject to this section shall also install on-site sub-meters to measure the water consumption of
individual residential units. The sub-meters shall be read and maintained by the owner or his or her designee;
I. Nothing in this chapter exempts a building owner from complying with the requirements in title 9, chapter 4, article 4, "Water Efficient Landscaping", of
this Code, if such requirements are applicable to the project. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.; amd. Ord. 19-O-2782, eff. 7-1-2019)
6-1-205: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
In addition to the provisions of section 6-1-108 of this chapter, the City may discontinue water service:
A. Upon forty eight (48) hours' notice where water supplied for private fire protection water service to any user is used for any purpose other than fire
suppression or for filling or refilling the facilities of the user which have been drained in connection with tests or repairs.
B. Without advance notice to a temporary use from a fire hydrant when the Fire Department requires the use of such fire hydrant. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et
seq.)
6-1-206: TAMPERING WITH WATER METER:
No person shall tamper with a City water meter; and no person shall turn on a City water meter except authorized City personnel. Where a meter has been
turned off or otherwise disconnected by the City, for nonpayment of water service, or for violation of the provisions of this Code, the user shall be required
to pay the charges designated by Council resolution prior to reconnection of water service. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-207: SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY BOUNDARIES OR SERVICE AREA:
The city may provide water service to users beyond the city boundaries when requested to furnish such service. The city may provide water service to a
customer outside its service area if the property to be served is contiguous to the city's service area, and the user obtains a release from its existing water
service supplier. The city may, upon request, release an existing water service user, if the user desires to secure water services from another supplier.
(1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-208: TEMPORARY WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS:
The city may provide temporary water service where rendering such temporary service will not be detrimental to operation of the city water service. The
user of temporary water service shall comply with the rules and regulations promulgated by the public works administrator, and shall pay the costs and
charges set forth in the resolution of council. Temporary service may be terminated at any time upon notice to the user. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
6-1-209: TEMPORARY WATER SUPPLIED FROM FIRE HYDRANTS:
The city may authorize use of a city fire hydrant for a temporary water supply, provided use of the water or the hydrant is not detrimental to operation of the
city water service. The user of water from a fire hydrant shall comply with the rules and regulations promulgated by the public works administrator, and
shall pay the costs and charges set forth in the resolution of council. (1962 Code § 5-7.01)
6-1-210: EXTENSIONS, ENLARGEMENTS, OR ALTERATION OF WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
"Water distribution system" shall mean the mains and appurtenant facilities linked with reservoirs, wells, water treatment plants, and pumping facilities for
the purpose of delivering water to users including all supply mains, pumping facilities, storage facilities, or other facilities required for service. Extensions,
enlargements, or alterations of the water distribution system shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Compliance with city rules and regulations as promulgated by the transportation/engineering official.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 239/797
B. Payment of any charges established by council resolution.
C. Title to facilities shall be vested in the city, and title to any facilities which are not constructed by the city shall be conveyed to the city upon city
acceptance of the facilities.
D. The city may require construction mains in excess of the capacity necessary to serve a specific development in order to facilitate general water system
capacity and orderly expansion; however, the city shall not charge for any portion which exceeds the required capacity to serve the specific
development.
E. City charges for extension, expansion, or alteration of water mains to serve a new subdivision or development shall be on a lineal foot basis as
established by council resolution.
F. City charges for any special facilities required by the user, or adjustments to the water system requested by the user shall be on the basis established by
council resolution.
G. Private contractors may be permitted to construct extensions or enlargements of the water system to facilitate subdivision or development projects;
provided however, all work and materials shall comply with the rules, regulations, plans, and specifications of the public works administrator and
payment shall be in accordance with the charges as established by council resolution. (1962 Code § 5-7.01 et seq.)
Article 2.5. Water Capacity Charge
6-1-250: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a water capacity charge for the cost of water facilities in existence and for new water facilities to be acquired or
constructed that are of proportional benefit to the person being charged, including supply or capacity contracts for rights or entitlements, real property
interests, and entitlements and other rights of the city involving capital expense relating to its use of existing or new water facilities. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-
20-2015)
6-1-251: ESTABLISHMENT OF A WATER CAPACITY CHARGE:
The user of city water service shall pay a water capacity charge in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The water capacity charge is
due upon the occurrence of one of the following events, as deemed appropriate by the director of public works services, or his or her designee: a)
installation of a new water meter, b) change in the size of a water meter, or c) the final inspection of a project. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
6-1-252: PROJECT AND FLOOR AREA DEFINED:
A. For the purposes of this article, "project" means the construction or addition of "floor area" which requires a building permit. "Project" also shall mean
any change of use of property, which requires a larger water meter and a building permit.
B. For the purposes of this article, "floor area" shall mean the following:
1. Nonresidential and multi-family residential zones: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all floors or levels included within the surrounding walls of a
building or structure. Space devoted only to the following shall not be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure:
a. Stair shafts;
b. Elevator and escalator shafts and elevator lobbies located in parking areas or on rooftops. The area of each elevator lobby at each floor shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet per elevator cab; provided, however, that any elevator lobby area in excess of one hundred (100) square
feet per elevator cab shall be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure;
c. Courts;
d. Parking spaces below the first floor and access thereto, including void spaces in parking areas below the first floor used exclusively for storage
related to operation of the building. Such void spaces may be enclosed and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet on each parking
floor or five percent (5%) of the floor area of the entire building, whichever is less;
e. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment or machinery;
f. Parking spaces at or above the first story and access thereto provided that in commercial zones:
(1) Not less than the front forty feet (40') of the ground floor shall be devoted to retail sales, offices, or financial uses; notwithstanding such
restriction, the director of planning and community development may reduce the amount of floor area required under this provision by up to ten
percent (10%) pursuant to the provisions of title 10, chapter 3, article 36 of this code regarding minor accommodations if the director finds that
the dimensions of the site do not provide adequate space for internal circulation for parking and such accommodation would not substantially
compromise pedestrian activity in the area; and
(2) At least one full level of parking below grade is provided;
g. Mall areas; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 240/797
h. Space used or provided within a building or structure for publicly owned off street parking facilities.
2. Single-family residential zone: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all portions of floors and levels, including basements, which have a roof or floor
level above and are enclosed by exterior walls by more than fifty percent (50%). Further, "floor area" shall include the area of that portion of an upper
level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly, but shall not include crawl spaces and up to four hundred (400) square feet of
garage area. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
6-1-253: COLLECTION OF WATER CAPACITY CHARGE:
The city may collect the water capacity charge from the water user with a bill for water service charges, or by delivering a separate bill for the water
capacity charge. The city may collect the water capacity charge in two (2) or more installments. The city council may provide, by resolution, for an
alternative procedure for collection of the water capacity charge. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
6-1-254: ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUND FOR CHARGE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 66013, there is hereby established a special fund entitled the "water capital facilities fund". The city shall place the
revenues from the water capacity charge into the water capital facilities fund to be used solely for the purposes established by this article. (Ord. 15-O-
2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
6-1-255: ANNUAL REPORT:
The city shall annually provide the information required by Government Code section 66013, as such law may be amended from time to time, in the
manner provided by such law. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
6-1-256: ADJUSTMENTS:
A person may apply to the director of public works services or his/her designee for an adjustment to the water capacity charge for a project based upon
facts that show the person previously paid a water capacity charge in an amount that reflects the proportional costs to serve the new or expanded
connection to the water system for the property. (Ord. 15-O-2674, eff. 3-20-2015)
Article 2.7. Water Supply Fee
6-1-270: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a water supply fee for the cost of water facilities in existence and for new water facilities to be acquired or
constructed to provide water supplies to serve a new or expanded connection to the water system, including supply or capacity contracts for rights or
entitlements, real property interests, and entitlements and other rights of the city involving capital expense relating to its use of existing or new water
facilities that are of proportional benefit to the person being charged. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-271: ESTABLISHMENT OF A WATER SUPPLY FEE:
The user of city water service shall pay a water supply fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The water supply fee is due upon the
occurrence of one of the following events, as deemed appropriate by the director of public works services, or his or her designee: a) installation of a new
water meter, b) change in the size of a water meter, or c) the final inspection of a project. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-272: PROJECT AND FLOOR AREA DEFINED:
A. For the purposes of this article, "project" means the construction or addition of "floor area" which requires a building permit. "Project" also shall mean
any change of use of property, which requires a larger water meter and a building permit.
B. For the purposes of this article, "floor area" shall mean the following:
1. Nonresidential and multi-family residential zones: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all floors or levels included within the surrounding walls of a
building or structure. Space devoted only to the following shall not be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure:
a. Stair shafts;
b. Elevator and escalator shafts and elevator lobbies located in parking areas or on rooftops. The area of each elevator lobby at each floor shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet per elevator cab; provided, however, that any elevator lobby area in excess of one hundred (100) square
feet per elevator cab shall be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure;
c. Courts;
d. Parking spaces below the first floor and access thereto, including void spaces in parking areas below the first floor used exclusively for storage
related to operation of the building. Such void spaces may be enclosed and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet on each parking
floor or five percent (5%) of the floor area of the entire building, whichever is less;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 241/797
e. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment or machinery;
f. Parking spaces at or above the first story and access thereto provided that in commercial zones:
(1) Not less than the front forty feet (40') of the ground floor shall be devoted to retail sales, offices, or financial uses; notwithstanding such
restriction, the director of planning and community development may reduce the amount of floor area required under this provision by up to ten
percent (10%) pursuant to the provisions of title 10, chapter 3, article 36 of this code regarding minor accommodations if the director finds that
the dimensions of the site do not provide adequate space for internal circulation for parking and such accommodation would not substantially
compromise pedestrian activity in the area; and
(2) At least one full level of parking below grade is provided;
g. Mall areas; and
h. Space used or provided within a building or structure for publicly owned off street parking facilities.
2. Single-family residential zone: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all portions of floors and levels, including basements, which have a roof or floor
level above and are enclosed by exterior walls by more than fifty percent (50%). Further, "floor area" shall include the area of that portion of an upper
level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly, but shall not include crawl spaces and up to four hundred (400) square feet of
garage area. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-273: COLLECTION OF WATER SUPPLY FEE:
The city may collect the water supply fee from the water user with a bill for water service charges, or by delivering a separate bill for the water supply fee.
The city may collect the water supply fee in two (2) or more installments. The city council may provide, by resolution, for an alternative procedure for
collection of the water supply fee. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-274: ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUND FOR FEE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 66013, there is hereby established a special fund entitled the "water supply capital facilities fund". The city shall
place the revenues from the water supply fee into the water supply capital facilities fund to be used solely for the purposes established by this article. (Ord.
16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-275: ANNUAL REPORT:
The city shall annually provide the information required by Government Code section 66013, as such law may be amended from time to time, in the
manner provided by such law. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
6-1-276: ADJUSTMENTS:
A person may apply to the director of public works services or his/her designee for an adjustment to the water supply fee for a project based upon facts
that show the person previously paid a water supply fee in an amount that reflects the proportional costs to serve the new or expanded connection to the
water system for the property. (Ord. 16-O-2714, eff. 1-7-2017)
Article 3. Wastewater System
6-1-301: TITLE:
This article shall be referred to as the WASTEWATER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-302: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to protect the environment and public health by providing for the regulation of the construction and operation of wastewater
systems and the discharge of wastewater into the city of Beverly Hills wastewater system, to provide a fair and equitable method of imposing wastewater
charges, and to facilitate enactment of regulations for the wastewater system that are mandated by the environmental protection agency and the state of
California. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-303: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall be construed herein as set forth in this section:
ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251, et seq. (40 CFR 403.3(B)).
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW: The number of gallons of sewage discharged into the public sewers during a twenty four (24) hour period.
BOD OR BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The measure of decomposable organic material in domestic or industrial wastewaters as represented by
the oxygen utilized over a period of five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C) and as determined by the appropriate procedure in "standard
methods".
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 242/797
BACKWATER VALVE OR DEVICE: A valve installed in a house or industrial connection sewer to prevent sewage backflows into the internal plumbing
facilities.
CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL: The chief administrative official for the building and safety department of the city or his duly authorized representative.
CLARIFICATION: The process of removal and retention of turbidity, settleable solids, and deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from wastes by
sedimentation or flotation.
CLARIFIER: A device or structure which separates and retains suspended solids, settleable solids, deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable matter from
wastes prior to discharge into public sewer.
COMMERCIAL USE: Any commercial or business establishment, office, hotel, motel, or hospital.
DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION AND ENGINEERING: The chief administrative official of the transportation and engineering department of the city or
his duly authorized representative.
DISCHARGER: Any person who discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The water carried wastes not produced from commercial or industrial activity and which result from normal human living
processes.
EPA: The United States environmental protection agency.
FACILITY: A pipe or structure constructed for the purpose of collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of industrial wastewater and sewage.
GREASE TRAP: A device that separates grease or oil from wastewater flows prior to discharge to the industrial connection sewer.
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The area included within the exterior of the surrounding walls of a building or portions thereof, exclusive of courts.
HOUSE CONNECTION SEWER: That part of the sewer piping that connects to the internal structure plumbing and connects with the public sewer in the
public right of way.
INDIRECT CHARGE (Into A Sewer): The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307 (B), (C) or (D)
of the act (40 CFR 401.11 (C)).
INDUSTRIAL CONNECTION SEWER: A house connection sewer used primarily for the discharge of industrial waste.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Liquid or solid waste, except domestic sewage, including radioactive substances and explosives, and noxious or toxic gas in the
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT FACILITY: Any works or device for the treatment of industrial waste, prior to discharge into the
public sewer.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER: All water carried wastes and wastewater excluding domestic wastewater and uncontaminated water, and shall include all
wastewater from commercial, manufacturing, institutional, agricultural, or other operations where it includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman
origin.
INSPECTOR: A person authorized by the public works administrator to inspect wastewater facilities.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which, or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: a) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and b) is therefore a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of a sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the
following statutory provision and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulation): section 405 of the clean water act,
the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and recovery act (RCDA)), and including
state regulations contained in any sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA, the clean air act, and the marine protection,
research and sanctuaries act (40 CFR 403.3 (I)).
LOT: Any parcel of land occupied or to be occupied for use permitted by this code.
NPDES PERMIT: A national pollution discharge elimination system permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (40 CFR 404.3 (K)).
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, NCPS, NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD, OR
STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307 (B) and (C) of the act which
applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to section 403.5 of title 40 of the code of federal regulations
(40 CFR 404.3 (J)).
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307 (C) of the act applicable to such source.
OFF SITE DISPOSAL: The disposal or removal of industrial wastes or other materials regulated by this article to a site other than the premises where the
wastes are generated whether or not such site is under the control of the industrial waste disposal permittee.
ON SITE DISPOSAL: The management, treatment, control or disposal, other than to the public sewer system, of industrial wastes or other materials within
the premises named in an industrial waste permit whether or not the wastes were generated at the permitted site or by the permittee.
PASS THROUGH: A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) (40 CFR 403.3 (N)).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 243/797
PEAK FLOW OR PEAK FLOW RATE: The maximum thirty (30) minute rate of sewage flow to be generated from the premises as estimated by the public
works administrator.
POLLUTION OF UNDERGROUND OR SURFACE WATERS: Affecting the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of such waters by
manmade or man induced activities.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW or disposal facility.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by use of an industrial waste treatment
facility or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403.6 (D). (40 CFR 403.3 (Q).)
PUBLIC SEWER: A main line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use and owned by the city.
PUBLIC WORKS ADMINISTRATOR: The chief administrative official of the public works department of the city or the duly authorized representative.
RESIDENTIAL USE: Any single-or multiple-family dwelling.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER: The wastewater of the community received by the sewer system consisting of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial and industrial buildings, and institutions, and of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal without special treatment into
the public sewer system.
SEWER DISPOSAL: The disposal of industrial waste or other materials by means of a connection to the public sewer system from the premises named in
an industrial waste permit.
SOLID WASTES: Wastes that are not water carried and that are suitable for disposal with refuse at sanitary landfill refuse disposal site.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION: A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.
STANDARD METHODS: The current edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public
Health Association.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS OR SS: The insoluble solid matter suspended in wastewater that is separable by filtration in accordance with the procedure
described in "standard methods".
TAPPING: The forming of a connection to a public sewer after the sewer is in place.
TEE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a ninety
degree (90°) angle to the public sewer pipe.
UNCONTROLLED DISCHARGE: Any discharge, intentional or accidental, occurring in such a manner that the discharger is unable to determine or
regulate the quantity, quality or effects of the discharge.
WYE SADDLE: A short pipe fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of a fitting to a hole tapped in the public sewer forming a forty five
degree (45°) angle to the public sewer pipe. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-304: APPLICABILITY:
A. Facilities: This article shall apply to all sewer facilities in the city, including house connection sewers, industrial connection sewers, clarifiers, grease
traps, and their appurtenances, except that nonconforming facilities may be continued in use as determined by the public works administrator in
determining the best interests of the city.
B. Discharges: This article shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all liquid carried wastes to the sewer system of the city. Generally, liquid wastes
originating within the city will be removed by the city sewer system, unless the wastes cause damage to structures, create nuisances such as odors,
menace to public health, impose unreasonable collection, treatment or disposal costs on the city, violate quantity and quality requirements prescribed
by state and federal laws, interfere with wastewater treatment processes, violate applicable state and federal laws, or detrimentally affect the
environment.
C. Limitations On Effect Of Permit: Permits issued pursuant to this article and subsequent amendments do not authorize the commission of any act
causing injury to the property of another, nor protect the discharger from his liabilities under federal, state, or local law, nor guarantee the discharger a
capacity right in the receiving waters. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-305: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Penalties: It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this article, the conditions or limitations or any permit issued under this article, or any rule or
regulation prescribed and adopted pursuant to this article.
B. Unlawful To Violate: Violation of this article or any condition or limitation of the permits issued pursuant to this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or six (6) months in jail, and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor unless prosecuted as a civil
administrative matter pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 or 4 of this code. Each day that a violation continues is a separate violation of this article.
Violations of limitations or regulations of industrial waste permits are also subject to civil damages up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per
violation. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304; amd. Ord. 00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 244/797
6-1-306: RECORD KEEPING BY CITY:
The director of transportation and engineering shall keep complete records of all permit applications and permits issued for sewer construction. All permit
applications and permits issued under this article for industrial discharges shall be maintained by the public works administrator or his duly authorized
representative. All applications shall include location, plans and specific description of the use, and the names and addresses of applicants and
permittees. All records of fee payments made in compliance with this article shall be maintained by the director of finance administration. (1962 Code §§ 5-
6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-307: WASTEWATER SYSTEM; GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. Inspection: Inspection of every facility involved with the discharge of wastewater to the city sewer system may be made by the public works
administrator, or a duly authorized representative, as often as is deemed necessary for the proper operation of the city sewer system. These facilities
shall include, but not be limited to, sewers, clarifiers, grease traps, pollution control devices, all industrial processes, industrial wastewater generation,
conveyance and pretreatment facilities, and similar facilities. Inspection may be made to determine whether such facilities comply with the provisions of
this article.
B. Required Access For Inspection: No person shall interfere with, delay, or refuse entrance to authorized city personnel attempting to inspect any facility
connected directly or indirectly to the city sewer system.
C. Authority To Enter In Emergency: If the public works administrator has reasonable cause to believe that there are violations of this article occurring that
are so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to protect the public health or safety, the public works administrator shall
have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such
inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied,
he shall first present proper credentials, as authorized by the public works administrator, to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons
therefor and the purpose of his inspection. No person shall fail or refuse to permit reasonable inspection.
D. House Connection Sewers To Serve Only One Lot: No more than one lot shall be connected to any one house connection sewer.
E. Cesspools And Septic Tanks Prohibited: The disposal of sewage by means of septic tanks and cesspools or leach fields is a nonconforming sewer
facility in the city and their use is to be discontinued within a time frame deemed reasonable by the city building official.
F. Maintenance Of Sewers, Clarifiers, Sewage Plants, And Appurtenances: All house connection sewers, house sewers, industrial connection sewers,
clarifiers, sewage and industrial waste treatment facilities, private pretreatment plants, grease traps, and their appurtenances shall be maintained in
good operating condition and in conformity with applicable law by the owner of the property to which such facilities serve.
G. Responsibility For Maintenance: Maintenance and repair of house connection sewers and industrial connection sewers from the point of connection
with the internal facility plumbing to the connection to the public sewer shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.
H. Disconnection Of Unlawful Connection: The director of transportation and engineering may order disconnection of any house connection sewer installed
or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article. Reconnection of such a disconnected sewer shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as
provided in this article. Before such permit is issued or considered, the applicant shall reimburse the city for all cost resulting from the disconnection.
I. Cost Of Repair To A Public Sewer: Any person, who unlawfully obstructs, damages, destroys, or removes any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof,
shall be liable for the reconstruction of the sewer and associated structures and/or the reasonable cost of necessary flushing, cleaning, and inspection.
J. Discharges Of Water On Streets Prohibited: No person shall negligently, wilfully or maliciously discharge, throw or deposit water on any street or alley in
such a manner as to obstruct or damage the street or alley, or to create a nuisance or hazard to persons or property, or to prevent or interfere with the
free and uninterrupted use of the street by the public.
K. Unlawful Discharge Or Pollution: No person shall discharge any waste or sewage into any watercourse, flood control channel or tributaries or into the
ground by percolation or injection.
1. No person shall discharge or deposit waste or sewage which creates a public nuisance, a menace to the public safety, pollution or contamination of
underground or surface waters, or impairs the use of any public sewer, storm drain channel, or public or private property.
2. Any person who unlawfully discharges or causes wastewater to be discharged into the public sewer or storm drain systems is in violation of this
article and shall be deemed to be liable for all damages, costs, fines or charges incurred. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-308: SEWER CONNECTION REGULATIONS:
A. Permit: No person shall connect to or tap a public sewer of the city or maintain a connection or tap to such sewer without obtaining a permit from the
transportation and engineering department.
B. Easement Requirements: No permit shall be issued to connect a house sewer or house connection sewer to a public sewer if the connection or any
portion thereof is in, under, or on a lot not owned by the person whose house is to be connected and no recorded easements exists authorizing the
connection of such lot.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 245/797
C. Capacity Requirements For Discharge Of Sewage: No permit shall be issued to connect to or tap a public sewer unless said sewer has sufficient
sewage capacity to receive the intended discharge. The director of transportation and engineering may require the discharger to restrict the discharge
until sufficient capacity is available, or to construct a public sewer to provide sufficient capacity. The director of transportation and engineering may
refuse service to persons locating facilities in areas where their proposed quantity or quality of sewage or industrial wastewater is unacceptable to the
available treatment facility.
D. Tapping Public Sewer: When, in the opinion of the director of transportation and engineering, a house connection sewer should be connected to a
public sewer at a point where there is no connection facility, application for a public sewer tap shall be submitted and upon approval by the director of
transportation and engineering a permit will be issued for construction of the house connection sewer.
E. Tapping To Be Performed In The Presence Of A City Employee: All tapping of public sewers shall be made by a licensed sewer contractor in the
presence of and to the satisfaction of an inspector acting under the authority of the director of transportation and engineering.
F. Specifications And Grades: Connections to public sewers shall comply with the following:
1. House connection sewers shall be made with pipe of cast iron, clay or other material, approved by the city building official;
2. The pipe of the house connection sewer shall be laid in conformity with city specifications for public sewers as determined by the director of
transportation and engineering;
3. The pipe shall be laid in a straight alignment and at a uniform slope, and shall have a fall of at least one foot (1') in fifty feet (50') unless the director
of transportation and engineering determines that an exception is warranted;
4. The pipe must be at least three and one-half feet (31/2') below an established street or alley grade where it crosses the property line on the date of
installation unless the director of transportation and engineering determines that an exception is warranted;
5. A collar wye or tee saddle shall be installed in tapped public sewers by cutting a property proportioned hole in the public sewer and fitting the saddle
tightly in place. Wye saddles shall be placed in the side of the public sewer with the wye branch so pointed as to direct the flow from the house
connection sewer downstream at approximately a forty five degree (45°) angle with the public sewer, and tilted upward at approximately forty five
degrees (45°) from the horizontal. Tee saddles shall be used for connections to twelve inches (12") diameter and larger public sewers and tilted
upward at approximately forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal or as approved by the director of transportation and engineering;
6. No house or industrial waste connection to a public sewer shall be made, except through a wye or tee branch, without written permission from the
director of transportation and engineering;
7. The city building official may require the installation of a backwater valve by the property owner under conditions specified in the uniform plumbing
code, section 409, or under other conditions that warrant installation as determined by the city building official.
G. Opening Manhole: No person shall open, enter, or allow to remain open, any manhole in any public sewer without a permit from the director of
transportation and engineering.
H. Disposal Of Effluent In Manhole; Prohibition: No person shall deposit cesspool effluent or any waste or sewage into a manhole. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01
et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-309: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE:
A. Purpose: The highest and best use of the city's wastewater system is the conveyance of domestic wastewater. The use of the city's wastewater system
for the conveyance of industrial wastewater is subject to additional regulation and permits.
B. Industrial Waste Permit: No person shall discharge any industrial waste into any city sewer without first obtaining an industrial waste permit from the
public works administrator.
C. Industrial Waste Disposal, Off Site: If a person chooses to dispose of industrial waste material by hauling said material to an authorized disposal site, he
shall apply for an industrial waste permit as provided herein.
D. Industrial Waste Disposal, On Site: If a person chooses to operate a pretreatment facility for the disposal of industrial waste, he shall apply for an
industrial waste permit as provided herein.
E. Application For Industrial Waste Permit: Applications for industrial waste permits shall be filed in writing with the public works administrator or his duly
authorized representative and shall be supplemented by such additional information as he may require.
F. Permit Fee: Applications for industrial waste permits shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in section 6-1.310 of this article.
G. Review Of Applications: The public works administrator shall review all applications for industrial waste permits to determine that the proposed
discharge of waste will not violate any provision of this article or state and federal laws.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 246/797
1. Within thirty (30) days after the public works administrator receives an application for an industrial waste permit he shall, pursuant to this article,
grant or deny the permit and notify the applicant of the action taken. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the public works
administrator and the applicant.
H. Permit Conditions: The public works administrator, in granting a permit, may impose conditions consistent with the purpose of this article, including, but
not limited to, pretreatment of wastewater before discharge, installation of clarifiers or grease traps, restriction of peak flow discharges or of discharge
of certain substances, limitation of discharge to certain hours, and payment of additional charges to defray increased costs to the city created by the
discharge. The public works administrator may establish a maximum permissible rate of discharge for each permittee.
1. Whenever the operators of the treatment facilities, through which effluent from the city's wastewater system is discharged, require any modification
of the conditions or composition of the effluent, the public works administrator may impose conditions upon any industrial waste permit in order to
conform with such requirements.
I. Permit Expiration: The public works administrator shall have the authority to impose a permit expiration date not to exceed a term of five (5) years, where
he determines such a date is necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations governing the disposal of industrial wastes.
Application for renewal of such a permit shall be made not later than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit.
J. Permit Transfer Prohibited: Permits issued under this article are not transferable from one location to another.
K. Confidential Information; Public Access: Information and data concerning an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application,
permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works administrator that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, as exempted by the California public records act or
applicable federal regulations (40 CFR 403.14). Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. (1962
Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-310: INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE FEES:
A. Fees; General: The fees established in this article and subsequent amendments shall be set annually by council in the resolution of the council of the
city of Beverly Hills amending comprehensive schedule of municipal fees and charges. All fees established in this article shall be applicable to all sewer
connections within the city, except that, those portions of the city within the Los Angeles County sanitation district no. 4 shall not be subject to any of
the fees set forth in the foregoing sections where a fee for similar service is imposed by the Los Angeles County sanitation district no. 4.
B. Industrial Waste Permit Fees: Each applicant for an industrial waste permit shall pay a fee, at the time of application, that shall be separate and apart
from any fee or deposit collected for industrial waste plan review or imposed under any other provisions of this article, or other city ordinance or
regulation or by reason of any license, agreement or contract between the applicant and other public agency. Such application fee shall not be
refundable even though the application is denied.
C. Industrial Waste Plan Review Fee: A plan review fee shall be paid to the city, at the time of submittal, for each set of plans received for any single site or
location. Such fee shall be separate and apart from any fee or deposit collected for any permit or inspection or imposed by any other city ordinance or
regulation. Such plan review fee shall be applied to any submittal required by the public works administrator and shall not be refundable even though
the submittal may be rejected or project terminated.
1. The public works administrator may impose a reinstatement fee of one-half (1/2) of the plan review fee if the applicant fails to correct any plans or
submittal upon written notice of correction or request for additional information by the public works administrator after three (3) attempts have been
made to gain such correction.
D. Annual Inspection Fee: Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this article shall pay a fee to the city for inspection and control and such
fee shall be fixed and established from time to time by the city council.
1. Immediately upon issuance of a new permit, the permittee shall be billed a percentage of the inspection fee, determined by the days remaining in the
billing period, as scheduled below:
Days Remaining Fee Percentage
1 - 60 0%
61 - 120 25%
121 - 210 50%
211 - 300 75%
301 - 365 100%
E. Inspection Classifications: The public works administrator may establish a classification system based on the minimum number of inspections per year
which the public works administrator determines to be necessary for the property enforcement of this article and subsequent amendments.
F. Due Dates: The annual inspection fee shall be paid annually in advance of one of four (4) dates as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 247/797
Due Date
Of Annual Fee
If the permit is granted between:
January 1 and March 31, inclusive April 1
April 1 and June 30, inclusive July 1
July 1 and September 30, inclusive October 1
October 1 and December 31, inclusive January 1
G. Wastewater Sampling And Analysis Fee: The public works administrator may charge the discharger a fee for each analysis performed by or on behalf
of the city on wastewater samples taken from the discharger. Said fee shall be set by city council and reflect the city's cost for sampling. The sampling
and analysis fee shall be paid by the discharger within thirty (30) days of the statement date.
H. Quality Surcharge Fee: The city council may establish a charge for each pound of suspended solids and for each pound of biochemical oxygen
demand. Every person granted an industrial waste permit under this article shall pay an annual quality surcharge fee for wastes discharged into the
sanitary sewer system pursuant to the following formula:
C = V [a(SS - 250) + b(BOD - 230)] k
Where:
C is the quality surcharge fee.
V is the chargeable volume of waste discharged in gallons, based in: 1) the volume of water supplied to the premises less an amount determined
by the public works administrator to account for water not discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or 2) the metered volume of waste discharged
into the sanitary sewer system according to a measuring device approved by the public works administrator, or 3) a figure determined by the public
works administrator based on any other equitable method.
SS is the suspended solids in the waste discharged, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOD is the five (5) day biochemical oxygen demand of the waste discharged, expressed in milligrams per liter.
a is the cost assessed for each pound of suspended solids, and such cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the city council.
b is the cost assessed for each pound of biochemical oxygen demand, and such cost shall be fixed and established from time to time by the city
council.
k is a dimensional constant to convert C to dollars.
If the term containing SS or BOD is negative, a value of zero shall be used for that term.
SS and BOD analyses shall be made in accordance with "standard methods". In determining the quality surcharge fee, the public works administrator
may use industrial averages for SS and BOD values. The public works administrator may group permit holders into discharge volume ranges where
volume measurement at the premises of a permit holder is impractical for physical, economic or other reasons, these volume ranges may be used in
establishing the quality surcharge fee.
I. Appeal From Quality Surcharge Fee: Any permit holder whose quality surcharge fee has been determined in the manner provided may appeal the fee
amount by submission of engineering data to the public works administrator. If the public works administrator finds the discharge of the permit holder
differs significantly from the volume range which was applied, he may adjust the fee.
J. Due Date For Quality Surcharge Fee: The quality surcharge fee will be separate charge to be included in the bimonthly water/wastewater utility billing
and due in full on the day the notice is received. Water/wastewater utility bills not paid within fifteen (15) days of receipt are delinquent.
K. Penalty For Delinquency: All fees required by this article shall be due and payable on the billing date established by director of finance administration.
Fees not paid within thirty (30) calendar days from the billing date shall be subject to a ten percent (10%) penalty fee for each thirty (30) day period
beyond the billing date that the fee is due. Permits for which the inspection fee is delinquent for ninety (90) days or more are subject to suspension.
(1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-311: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE:
A. Unlawful Discharge Of Industrial Waste: No person shall directly or indirectly discharge industrial waste into the city sewer system unless the public
works administrator has determined that the substance to be discharged will not violate the provisions of this article or the water quality standard for
receiving waters established by other government agencies.
B. Facility Maintenance: The discharger shall maintain in good working order and operate as efficiently as possible any pretreatment or monitoring facility
or control system installed by the discharger to achieve compliance with the permit requirements.
1. Access to such pretreatment or monitoring facilities by authorized personnel will remain unobstructed at all times.
C. Facility Requirements: All permittees shall comply with the following regulations and restrictions:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 248/797
1. The industrial waste discharger shall provide, install and operate a clarifier or grease trap of adequate capacity and at a location, as determined by
the public works administrator, prior to connection with the public sewer, unless it is waived by the public works administrator. Approval for the size,
type and location of clarifier shall be obtained from the public works administrator and the building official prior to installation.
2. Sanitary wastes from rest rooms, lavatories, drinking fountains, showers, etc., shall be segregated from the process wastewaters, until necessary
pretreatment and/or clarification, flow, and quality monitoring steps are completed.
3. Cleansers utilized in wastes discharged into the public sewer shall be limited to soap, similarly acting biodegradable synthetic detergents, and/or
sodium or potassium compounds of phosphates, polyphosphates, silicates, sulfates, carbonate, bicarbonate, or hydroxide. No organic solvents shall
be discharged into the public sewers.
4. A copy of the industrial waste permit shall be maintained at the facility so as to be available at all times to operating personnel and inspectors.
5. Any change in the applicant's industrial process or an increase in volume of wastes to a level in excess of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons per
day shall require notification of the public works administrator before initiation of the proposed change in the waste discharge. The public works
administrator may require a new application for the issuance of an industrial discharge permit pursuant to section 6-1-309 of this article.
6. In the event of any change in name, ownership, or control of the company, or any change referred to in subsection C5 of this section, the discharger
shall notify the public works administrator of such change, and shall notify the succeeding owner or operator of the existence of this permit by letter,
copy of which shall be forwarded to the public works administrator, at least thirty (30) days prior to such change. The public works administrator may
require a new application to be submitted and compliance with all applicable sections of this article.
7. The top of the pretreatment facilities, clarifier and inspection chamber shall be at least one inch (1") above the ground level when provided in an
unroofed area. Provisions shall also be made to divert storm water away from the pretreatment facilities, clarifier and inspection chambers.
8. If changes should occur in plumbing layout subsequent to the issuance of an industrial waste permit, the discharger shall submit as built plumbing
plans of building showing clearly the origin of wastewater, identifying the process creating the wastewater, and listing accurately for each wastewater
discharge point the total daily flow in gallons and the peak flow rate in gallons per minute including location and details of pretreatment facilities,
clarifier and its connection to the public sewer system for approval by the public works administrator and the building official.
9. A means shall be provided to effect immediate cessation of discharge of liquid chemicals, process solutions, or spent process solutions into the city
sewer as a result of spills, overflows, leaks, failure of containers or inadvertent discharges. Such means of cessation shall include, but not be limited
to, installation of automatic valves, gates, or bypasses to impervious containers which when activated will stop water supply to and the discharge
from industrial processes. The discharger shall submit details of the proposed measures and drawings before installation and obtain approval from
the public works administrator and the building official.
D. Uncontrolled Discharge: In the event of an uncontrolled discharge, the discharger or permittee shall immediately notify the public works administrator of
the incident by telephone. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of material, concentration and volume, and corrective action.
1. Within ten (10) working days after the uncontrolled discharge, the discharger or permittee shall submit to the public works administrator a detailed
written report describing the cause of the discharge, the corrective action taken and the measures to be taken to prevent future incidents. Such
notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee of liability or fines that may result from the uncontrolled discharge. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et
seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-312: INDUSTRIAL WASTE AND DISCHARGE LIMITS:
A. List Of Allowable Concentrations Of Certain Wastes: The public works administrator shall from time to time prepare a list of allowable quantities or
concentrations of certain constituents in industrial wastewater flows and shall issue directions for meeting the requirements of this section.
B. Scope And Compliance: No person shall introduce wastewater in the sewer system or POTW that exceeds local limits which have been developed by
the treatment system NPDES permit holder. Said local limits shall not apply where more restrictive limitations are imposed by permit or NCPS
limitations. Except as provided above, dischargers tributary to the Hyperion POTW operated by the city of Los Angeles shall comply with the following
local limits:
Constituent
Value
Units Existing Sources
Arsenic mg/l 3
Cadmium mg/l 15
Chromium - total mg/l 10
Copper mg/l 15
Lead mg/l 5
Mercury mg/l Essentially none
Nickel mg/l 12
Zinc mg/l 25
Silver mg/l 5
Cyanide - total mg/l 10
Cyanide - free mg/l 2
Oil and grease - total
Dispersed mg/l 600
Floatable mg/l None visible
Phenol mg/l *
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 249/797
Chlorinated hydrocarbons mg/l Essentially none
Selenium mg/l *
Dissolved sulfides mg/l 0.1
pH ranges 5.5-11
Temperatures 140°F
*Values for phenol and selenium and other constituents not shown, such as fluoride, boron, aluminum, iron, tin, cobalt, etc., have been established for
general application. They are not critical constituents at this time for existing sources. The board of public works of the city of Los Angeles will impose such
limits as it may find necessary to ensure compliance with treatment plant discharge limits and more restrictive pretreatment standards for new sources
prescribed by the environmental protection agency (EPA).
The above limitations shall not apply where more restrictive limitations are imposed by permit or national categorical pretreatment standards.
1. In addition to the concentration limits for heavy metals and toxicants in this subsection B of this section, the discharge shall also comply with the
maximum allowable daily mass emission rate and the maximum allowable monthly mass emission rates.
C. Concentration Limits And Prohibitions: The total daily mass emission rate for effluent concentrations that are defined by this section shall be limited by
the following:
1. The daily mass emission rate for each constituent shall be calculated from the total waste flow occurring in each specific day, and the maximum
concentration limit. The mass emission rate of the discharge during any twenty four (24) hour period shall not exceed the product of the proposed
daily average discharge in million gallons per day, maximum concentration limit, and a constant 8.34.
2. The monthly mass emission rate for each constituent shall be calculated from the total waste flow occurring in each specific month, and the average
concentration limit or the maximum concentration limit, if average concentration limit is not prescribed. The mass emission rate of discharge during
any month shall not exceed the product of proposed monthly average discharge in million gallons per month, average concentration limit, or the
maximum concentration limit, if average concentration limit is not prescribed, and a constant 8.34.
3. The pH of wastes discharged shall at all times be within the range of 5.5 to 11. No person shall discharge acids or alkaline materials to the public
sewers until the pH has been controlled to a level not less than 5.5 nor higher than 11.0. No discharge shall have any corrosive or detrimental
characteristics that may cause injury to wastewater treatment, inspection or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures, equipment
or other physical facilities of the public sewer system.
4. The temperature of the wastes discharged shall not exceed one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) nor shall the temperature exceed one
hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104°F) at the point of entry into the POTW treatment facility.
5. Radioactivity in the effluent shall not exceed the limits specified in ordinance 17, chapter 5, subchapter 4, group 3, article 5, section 30287, of the
California Code of Regulations.
6. Discharge of the following wastes into public sewer system is prohibited:
a. Any solids or viscous substances of such size or in such quantity that may cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer or be detrimental to proper
wastewater treatment plant operations. These objectionable substances include, but are not limited to, asphalt, dead animals, offal, ashes, sand,
mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, plastics, wood, whole blood, bones, hair, coffee grounds, egg shells, seafood
shells, fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, paper cups, milk containers, grease or fats, or other similar paper products either whole or ground.
b. Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW.
c. Any nonbiodegradable cutting oil, commonly called soluble oil, which forms persistent water emulsions.
d. Any wastes with excessively high BOD, COD or decomposable organic contents.
e. Any strongly odorous waste or waste which can create odors in receiving waters of sewerage system.
f. Any excessive amounts of organic phosphorous type compounds.
g. Any excessive amounts of deionized water, steam condensate or distilled water.
h. Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify or become viscous at temperatures between fifty degrees Fahrenheit (50°F) and
one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F).
i. Any waste producing excessive discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant effluent.
j. Any blow down or bleed off water from cooling towers or other evaporation coolers exceeding one-third (1/3) of the makeup water.
k. Any single pass cooling water.
l. Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees centigrade (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
m. Any rainwater, storm water, ground water, street drainage, surface drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from the yard fountains,
swimming pools or lawn sprays, or any other uncontaminated water.
7. The discharge of any radiological, chemical, or biological warfare agent or radiological waste is prohibited.
D. Compliance With Standards: The discharger shall comply with applicable toxic and pretreatment standards promulgated in accordance with sections
307 and 308 of the federal water pollution control act, or amendments thereto. The discharger shall submit periodic notices (over intervals not to
exceed 3 months) of progress toward compliance with applicable toxic and pretreatment standards developed pursuant to the federal water pollution
control act, or amendments thereto.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 250/797
E. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS): Upon promulgation of mandatory NCPS for any industrial subcategory, the NCPS, if more
restrictive than limitations imposed by this section, shall apply. The public works administrator may impose a phased compliance schedule to ensure
that affected industries meet the NCPS. Failure to meet the phased compliance schedule may result in permit suspension or revocation. Those
dischargers subject to NCPS shall comply with all reporting requirements in accordance with the general pretreatment regulations for existing and new
sources of pollution (title 40, code of federal regulations, part 403).
F. Prohibited Material Disposal: All wastes which are prohibited from being discharged into public sewers, including, but not limited to, chemical solutions,
acids, caustic wastes, solvents, oil and grease, screenings, sludges, and other solids removed from liquid wastes, etc., shall be held in impervious
containers and disposed of at a legal point of disposal, and in accordance with the provisions of division 7.5 of the California Water Code. For the
purpose of this requirement, a "legal point of disposal" is defined as one for which waste discharge requirements have been prescribed by a regional
water quality control board, and which is in full compliance therewith.
G. Off Site Disposal; Reporting: The discharger shall submit a hazardous waste manifest, as required by the public works administrator, by the fifteenth
day of the month following the reporting period. A statement to that effect shall be submitted to the public works administrator.
H. New Standard Enforcement: If a toxic effluent standard or prohibition (including any schedule of compliance specified in such effluent standard or
prohibition) is established under section 307(a) of the federal water pollution control act, or amendments thereto, for a toxic pollutant which is present in
the discharge authorized by the permit, and such standard or pollutant in the permit, the public works administrator shall revise or modify the permit in
accordance with such toxic effluent standard or prohibition, and so notify the discharger. Compliance with the new standard or prohibition shall be in
accordance with the prescribed timetables stated in such regulation or within a reasonable time as determined by the public works administrator.
I. Dilution Prohibited: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water or other substance added for the purpose of diluting any industrial
waste to achieve compliance with limitations imposed by the provision of this section. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304; amd. Ord. 05-O-
2478, eff. 8-5-2005)
6-1-313: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT:
A. Requirements: No permit to connect to or tap a public sewer to discharge industrial wastes shall be issued if the proposed use of the public sewer may
have a significant effect on the environment unless the environmental review process has been completed pursuant to the requirements of the
California environmental quality act. (1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304)
6-1-314: SELF-MONITORING AND REPORTING:
A. Requirement For Reporting: Industrial waste permit holders must implement a self-monitoring and reporting program in compliance with 40 CFR section
403.12. The nature of sampling and frequency of analysis and reporting will be based on the size of discharge and type of industrial operation.
B. Requirement For Monitoring Equipment: The public works administrator may require the discharger to install, use and maintain, at user expense,
adequate continuous monitoring equipment or methods.
C. Record Maintenance By Discharger: The discharger shall retain for a minimum period of three (3) years records of monitoring activity and results
including all original strip charts, calibration, and maintenance records. The public works administrator may require the discharger to submit such
records for review.
D. Person Responsible To Report: Self-monitoring reports shall be signed by a duly authorized representative responsible for the overall operation of the
facility from which discharge originates. In the case of a partnership, by the general partner, in case of a sole proprietorship, by the proprietor.
Each report shall contain the following declaration:
I declare under penalty of perjury that the forgoing is true and correct.
Executed on the day of , at .
Signature
(1962 Code §§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304; amd. Ord. 05-O-2478, eff. 8-5-2005)
6-1-315: COMPLIANCE INSPECTION AND REPORTING:
A. Installation Of Control Manhole: The public works administrator may require a control manhole of a design approved by the public works administrator
to be furnished and installed by any industrial wastewater discharger to facilitate inspection and sampling by the city or other governmental agencies.
Such manholes shall be constructed at locations approved by the public works administrator and authorized city personnel shall have unrestricted
access thereto at all times consistent with the provisions of this article. Access of others to such manholes shall be restricted by appropriate security
measures.
B. Inspection: The public works administrator may, as herein provided, enter private property to exercise any power vested in the public works
administrator by this article, including the power to inspect and copy records, sample, and determine:
1. The size, depth and location of any connection with a public sewer or storm drain;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 251/797
2. The quantity, quality and nature of industrial waste, sewage, or surface waters being discharged into a public sewer, storm drain, or watercourse;
3. The effectiveness of any device used to prevent waste prohibited by this article from entering any sewer, storm drain or watercourse;
4. The location of roof, swimming pool, and surface drains, and whether they are connected to a street gutter, storm drain, or sewer;
5. The nature of liquids and the condition of processing equipment which are a potential hazard to the city sewer system;
6. Whether there is compliance with the provisions of this article.
C. Reporting Requirements: Dischargers shall furnish additional reports to the public works department concerning the disposal of industrial wastes as
required by the public works administrator.
D. Standard Methods: All wastewater constituents, including BOD and SS, shall be determined in accordance with the standard methods. (1962 Code
§§ 5-6.01 et seq., 6-1.301_6-1.304; amd. Ord. 05-O-2478, eff. 8-5-2005)
6-1-316: REMEDIAL ACTIONS, REVOCATIONS AND SUSPENSIONS:
A. Notice To Correct Violations: The public works administrator shall serve notice of violation upon the person owning, occupying or operating premises
which notice shall describe the conditions and require prompt correction thereof, when he finds that:
1. Industrial waste, effluent, or any other material is being maintained, discharged, or deposited in such a manner as to create one or more of the
following conditions:
a. A public nuisance;
b. A menace to public health and safety;
c. Pollution of underground or surface waters;
d. Adverse effect or damage to any public sewer, storm drain, channel or public or private property; or
2. The permittee had failed to conform with conditions or limitations of any permit issued in accordance with this article; or
3. The industrial waste permit was issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of ordinance, regulation, or law.
B. Injunctive Relief: The public works administrator may seek injunctive relief for noncompliance with any provision of this article or the conditions and
limitations of any permit issued pursuant to this article.
C. Suspension Of Permit: The public works administrator shall suspend the permit of any permit holder who fails to comply with the conditions of his permit
or any provision, rule, or regulation of this article, which failure creates an emergency condition that is a threat to the health, welfare and safety of the
community. Any person whose permit has been suspended shall immediately discontinue the discharge of industrial waste, until the public works
administrator verifies that the permit holder is in compliance.
1. The public works administrator shall reinstate a suspended permit when all violations have been corrected and all new conditions have been met to
alleviate the emergency. Before any revoked permit is reissued, all delinquent fees and additional charges due and owing to the city shall be paid.
Any discharger notified of a suspension of that discharger's industrial wastewater permit shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all
industrial wastewater to the sewer system.
2. In the event of a failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the public works administrator may take such steps as are
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance. These include, but are not limited to, immediate blockage or disconnection of the discharger's
connection to the sewer system.
D. Appeals To The Suspension Of Permit: Any discharger suspended or served with a notice of an intended order of suspension may file with the city clerk
a request for a city council hearing with respect thereto. Filing of such a request shall not stay a suspension. In the event of a suspension of a permit
due to imminent hazard related to continued discharge, the discharger may request a hearing, and the city council or a hearing examiner designated by
the city council for that purpose shall conduct a hearing within five (5) days of receipt of the request. In the event of hearing requests, for other than an
imminent hazard suspension, the city council shall hold a hearing on the suspension within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. At the close of the
hearing, the city council shall make its determination whether to terminate, or conditionally terminate the suspension imposed by the public works
administrator, or the city council may cause the permit to be revoked. Except in the case of a hearing within five (5) days being required as above
provided, reasonable notice of the hearing shall be given to the suspended discharger in the manner provided for in this article.
E. Reinstatement Of Permit: The public works administrator shall reinstate the industrial wastewater permit upon proof of compliance which ends the
emergency nature of the hazard created by the discharge that had been cause for the public works administrator to initiate the suspension, provided
that the public works administrator is satisfied that all discharge requirements of this article and any city council order will be implemented.
F. Revocation Of Industrial Wastewater Permit: The city council may revoke an industrial wastewater permit by the following procedures:
1. A finding that the discharger has violated any provision of this article. No revocation shall be ordered until a notice and hearing on the question has
been held by the council as provided in this section.
2. Any discharger whose industrial wastewater permit has been revoked shall immediately cease and desist all discharge of any wastewater covered
by the permit. The public works administrator may disconnect or permanently block the discharger's connection if such action is necessary to ensure
compliance with the order of revocation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 252/797
3. After revocation of a discharger's industrial waste permit, there shall be no further discharge of industrial wastewater by that discharger into the
sewer system, the storm drain system, or the waters of the state unless there has been a new application filed, all fees and charges that would be
required upon an initial application and all delinquent fees, charges, penalties and other sums owed by the discharger and/or the applicant to the city
have been paid to the city, and a new industrial wastewater permit has been issued. Any costs incurred by the city, including administrative costs and
investigative fees, in revoking the permit and disconnecting the connection, if necessary, shall also be paid for by the discharger before issuance of a
new industrial wastewater permit.
4. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the discharger at least ten (10) days prior to the date of hearing. Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice
required to be given by the public works administrator under this article shall be in writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail
addressed to the addressee's last known address with request for return receipt. Where no address is known, service may be made upon the owner
of record of the property upon which the alleged violation occurred or by posting the notice conspicuously on the property.
G. Emergency Remedial Measures: The public works administrator shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions in order to
protect life, protect property, or prevent further damage resulting from a condition that is likely to result in a discharge which presents an imminent
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare; or which either singularly or by interaction with other discharges, is an imminent hazard to the sewer
system. The public works administrator may order cessation of water service to the property on which the hazardous condition exists and may order
the sealing of the industrial sewer connection through which the hazardous discharge is conveyed. In the pursuit of such an operation, city personnel,
or duly authorized representative of another government agency shall have immediate access to the premises.
H. Public Notice Of Violation: The public works administrator shall provide annual public notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the
municipality in which the POTW is located, of industrial users of the POTW which during the previous twelve (12) months, were significantly violating
applicable standards or other pretreatment requirements, as provided in 40 CFR 403.8. (Ord. 90-O-2092, eff. 4-26-1990)
Article 3.5. Wastewater Capacity Charge
6-1-350: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a wastewater capacity charge for the cost of wastewater facilities in existence and for new wastewater facilities to
be acquired or constructed that are of proportional benefit to the person being charged, including supply or capacity contracts for rights or entitlements,
real property interests, and entitlements and other rights of the city involving capital expense relating to its use of existing or new wastewater facilities.
(Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-351: ESTABLISHMENT OF A WASTEWATER CAPACITY CHARGE:
The user of city wastewater service shall pay a wastewater capacity charge in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The wastewater
capacity charge is due upon the final inspection of a project. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-352: PROJECT AND FLOOR AREA DEFINED:
A. For the purposes of this article, "project" means the construction or addition of floor area (as defined in subsection B of this section), which requires a
building permit.
B. For the purposes of this article, "floor area" shall mean the following:
1. Nonresidential and multi-family residential zones: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all floors or levels included within the surrounding walls of a
building or structure. Space devoted only to the following shall not be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure:
a. Stair shafts;
b. Elevator and escalator shafts and elevator lobbies located in parking areas or on rooftops. The area of each elevator lobby at each floor shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet per elevator cab; provided, however, that any elevator lobby area in excess of one hundred (100) square
feet per elevator cab shall be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure;
c. Courts;
d. Parking spaces below the first floor and access thereto, including void spaces in parking areas below the first floor used exclusively for storage
related to operation of the building. Such void spaces may be enclosed and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet on each parking
floor or five percent (5%) of the floor area of the entire building, whichever is less;
e. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment or machinery;
f. Parking spaces at or above the first story and access thereto provided that in commercial zones:
(1) Not less than the front forty feet (40') of the ground floor shall be devoted to retail sales, offices, or financial uses; notwithstanding such
restriction, the director of planning and community development may reduce the amount of floor area required under this provision by up to ten
percent (10%) pursuant to the provisions of title 10, chapter 3, article 36 of this code regarding minor accommodations if the director finds that
the dimensions of the site do not provide adequate space for internal circulation for parking and such accommodation would not substantially
compromise pedestrian activity in the area; and
(2) At least one full level of parking below grade is provided;
g. Mall areas; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 253/797
h. Space used or provided within a building or structure for publicly owned off street parking facilities.
2. Single-family residential zone: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all portions of floors and levels, including basements, which have a roof or floor
level above and are enclosed by exterior walls by more than fifty percent (50%). Further, "floor area" shall include the area of that portion of an upper
level not separated from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly, but shall not include crawl spaces and up to four hundred (400) square feet of
garage area. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-353: COLLECTION OF WASTEWATER CAPACITY CHARGE:
The city may collect the wastewater capacity charge from the wastewater user with a bill for wastewater service charges, or by delivering a separate bill for
the wastewater capacity charge. The city may collect the wastewater capacity charge in two (2) or more installments. The city council may provide, by
resolution, for an alternative procedure for collection of the wastewater capacity charge. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-354: ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL FUND FOR CHARGE:
Pursuant to Government Code section 66013, there is hereby established a special fund entitled the "wastewater capital facilities fund". The city shall
place the revenues from the wastewater capacity charge into the wastewater capital facilities fund to be used solely for the purposes established by this
article. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-355: ANNUAL REPORT:
The city shall annually provide the information required by Government Code section 66013, as such law may be amended from time to time, in the
manner provided by such law. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
6-1-356: ADJUSTMENTS:
A person may apply to the director of public works services or his/her designee for an adjustment to the wastewater capacity charge for a project based
upon facts that show the person previously paid a wastewater capacity charge in an amount that reflects the proportional costs to serve the new or
expanded connection to the wastewater system for the property. (Ord. 15-O-2695, eff. 1-1-2016)
Article 4. Solid Waste Collection
6-1-401: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL WASTE: Solid waste which results from the operation of any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may do either of the following:
A. Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness.
B. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed.
MEDICAL WASTE: Means and includes, without limitation, biohazardous waste or sharps waste, waste that is generated or produced as a result
of the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of
biologicals. Medical waste may contain infectious agents. "Medical waste" does not include any of the following: waste containing microbiological
cultures used in food processing and biotechnology and any containers or devices used in the preparation or handling of these cultures that is not
considered to be an infectious agent; waste that is biohazardous such as paper towels, paper products, articles containing nonfluid blood and
other medical solid waste products commonly found in the facilities of medical waste generators, hazardous waste, radioactive waste, waste
generated from residential uses, or waste generated from normal and legal veterinarian, agricultural and animal livestock management practices
on a farm or ranch.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials which are capable of being reprocessed or being manufactured and diverted to reuse and include, without
limitation, office and higher grade paper, corrugated paper, newspaper, telephone books and cardboard, plastics, aluminum, ferrous metal, glass
and tin.
RECYCLING CONTAINER: Any container authorized or provided by the city or the city's authorized agent for the collection of recyclable materials.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, demolition and discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge, which is not
hazardous waste, and other discarded solid and semisolid waste.
Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or low level radioactive waste regulated under division 20, chapter 7.6 of the California Health and
Safety Code. Solid waste does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the medical waste management act, division 20, chapter
6.1 of the California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste which has
been treated and is deemed to be solid waste pursuant to the medical waste management act is considered solid waste.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: Any container authorized by or provided by the city or the city's authorized agent for the collection of solid waste.
(1962 Code § 5-3.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 254/797
6-1-402: CITY PROVIDED SOLID WASTE SERVICES:
A. Only the city shall be authorized and permitted to provide solid waste collection services to residential dwellings and commercial waste generators in
the city. As an alternative to directly providing such services to commercial waste generators, the city council may award one or more commercial
waste collection franchises pursuant to article 4.5 of this chapter.
B. The director of public works shall establish regulations relating to city provided solid waste collection services and such regulations shall become
effective upon approval of the city council. Any violation of the regulations shall be considered a violation of this code.
C. The city council shall, by resolution, establish fees for city provided residential solid waste and commercial waste services. (1962 Code § 5-3.101 et
seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-403: APPLICATIONS FOR CITY PROVIDED COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICES:
A. Applications for city provided commercial waste service shall be filed with the director of public works and shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Completion of an application on the form approved by the director of public works, providing the name of the customer, site address, billing address,
telephone number, service requirements and other information as may be required by the director of public works.
2. Applications shall be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the date requested for commencement of commercial waste collection services.
B. The application may be denied by the director of public works if the director finds that:
1. The applicant has provided the city with incomplete, inaccurate or incorrect information on the application.
2. The service needs of the customer are determined by the city to be outside the scope or capability of the city's service. (1962 Code § 5-3.101 et
seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-404: SOLID WASTE NUISANCE AND ABATEMENT:
No person shall cause, allow, or permit the accumulation or retention of solid waste for a period in excess of seven (7) consecutive days or in a manner
which creates a threat or danger to the public health, safety or welfare or which creates a fire hazard. In addition to any other remedies provided by law,
the city may abate a nuisance which creates a threat to the public health, safety or welfare or which creates a fire hazard in accordance with the
procedures set forth in title 5, chapter 7 of this code. (1962 Code § 5-3.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-405: TEMPORARY OR SPECIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE:
The city may render temporary or special commercial waste collection service in accordance with regulations promulgated by the director of public works.
The city shall not provide such service for more than sixty (60) days in any twelve (12) month period. The city council shall, by resolution, establish the
fees for such service. (1962 Code § 5-3.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-406: EMERGENCY PUBLIC DUMPING GROUNDS:
The city council may establish temporary public dumping grounds and impose by resolution fees for solid waste disposed at such locations. The director of
public works may establish rules and regulations governing the operations of any temporary public dumping grounds operated by the city. Any violation of
the regulations shall be considered a violation of this code. (1962 Code § 5-3.101 et seq.; amd. Ord. 93-O-2167, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-
1994)
6-1-407: PLACEMENT OF SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS:
In that area of the city located north of Santa Monica Boulevard, no solid waste container provided by the city shall be placed in the street. For singlefamily
residential properties located north of Santa Monica Boulevard and not served by an alley, the container shall be placed for pick up in the parkway,
as close as possible to the street. If there is no parkway space available for safe placement of the solid waste container, the director of public works may
authorize the placement of the container in an alternate location.
No solid waste container shall be placed in any parkway or street until the day preceding the designated trash pick up day. Furthermore, no solid waste
container shall remain in the parkway or street after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. of the day designated for trash pick up.
In addition to any other remedy available to the city for violation of this section, the city may collect any container located in the public right of way in
violation of this section. Return of the container will require payment of a service reactivation fee. (Ord. 98-O-2310, eff. 10-9-1998)
Article 4.5. Commercial Waste Collection Franchises
6-1-450: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL WASTE: Solid waste which results from the operation of any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 255/797
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may do either of the following:
A. Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness.
B. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise managed.
MEDICAL WASTE: Means and includes, without limitation, biohazardous waste or sharps waste, waste that is generated or produced as a result of the
diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or in the production or testing of biologicals. Medical
waste may contain infectious agents. "Medical waste" does not include any of the following: waste containing microbiological cultures used in food
processing and biotechnology and any containers or devices used in the preparation or handling of these cultures that is not considered to be an infectious
agent; waste that is biohazardous such as paper towels, paper products, articles containing nonfluid blood and other medical solid waste products
commonly found in the facilities of medical waste generators, hazardous waste, radioactive waste, waste generated from residential uses, or waste
generated from normal and legal veterinarian, agricultural and animal livestock management practices on a farm or ranch.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials which are capable of being reprocessed or being manufactured and diverted to reuse and include, without
limitation, office and higher grade paper, corrugated paper, newspaper, telephone books and cardboard, plastics, aluminum, ferrous metal, glass and tin.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and non putrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial
wastes, demolition and discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge, which is not hazardous waste,
and other discarded solid and semisolid waste.
Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or low level radioactive waste regulated under chapter 7.6 of division 20 of the California Health and Safety
Code. Solid waste does not include medical waste which is regulated pursuant to the medical waste management act, chapter 6.1 of division 20 of the
California Health and Safety Code, provided that the medical waste is not disposed of at a solid waste facility. Medical waste which has been treated and
is deemed to be solid waste pursuant to the medical waste management act is considered solid waste. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-451: FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT:
Except as provided in article 4 of this chapter, no person shall collect and/or dispose of commercial waste, commercial recyclable materials and/or medical
waste in the city without having first been awarded a franchise and entered into a franchise agreement with the city which shall include all of the terms and
conditions for the collection of such waste in the city. Such franchise shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by the city. All
such franchises shall comply with all of the requirements of this article. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-452: FRANCHISE AWARD:
The city council may award one or more franchises for the collection of commercial waste, commercial recyclable materials and/or medical waste within
the city. In the event one or more franchises are awarded, no person other than a franchisee shall collect and/or dispose of commercial waste, commercial
recyclable materials and/or medical waste in the city. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-453: FRANCHISE FEES:
Each franchise shall pay fees in an amount determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-454: FRANCHISE RATES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish rates to be charged to customers of a franchisee for the collection of commercial waste, commercial
recyclable materials and/or medical waste. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-455: FRANCHISE INSURANCE:
Each franchisee shall provide, at its own expense, insurance as required by the city in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-456: INDEMNIFICATION:
Each franchisee shall indemnity, defend and hold harmless the city, city council and each member thereof, its officers, employees and agents from any
liability or financial loss arising from operation of its franchise as required by the city in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-457: COLLECTION AND CONTAINERS:
The franchise agreement shall provide for the requirements relating to the frequency and hours of collection, the size, placement and care of containers
and special collections. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-458: FRANCHISE TERMS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 256/797
Any franchise awarded pursuant to this article shall be for a term of not more than five (5) years. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-459: TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE:
A franchise issued under this article shall not be transferred, sold, assigned, relinquished or delegated to another person without the approval of the city
council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership of the franchise or a majority of the ownership or control of the franchisee, or the conveyance of
a majority of the franchisee's stock to a new controlling interest. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-460: EXTENSION OF FRANCHISE:
The city and franchisee may mutually agree to extend the franchise term on such terms and conditions as the parties may agree. Nothing contained in this
provision or in this article shall obligate the city to extend the terms of any franchise. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-461: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
After a hearing, the city council may revoke or suspend any franchise if the council finds that the franchisee has violated a provision of this article, the
franchise agreement or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any public agency, or that continued operation by the franchisee will constitute
a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate under a franchise which has been revoked
or suspended. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-462: INTERIM SUSPENSION TO FRANCHISE:
The city manager, without a hearing, may suspend a franchise for not more than sixty (60) days, if the city manager finds that continued operation by the
franchisee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare of the city. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-463: NOTICE OF HEARING OF REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
The city manager or his agent shall serve a notice of hearing of revocation of franchise on the franchisee by first class certified mail not less than fifteen
(15) days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-464: REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
In the event of the revocation of a franchise, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons therefor. Such notification
may be made in person or by registered or certified mail. The notice of ruling shall include, without limitation, the effective date of any revocation of the
franchise. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
6-1-465: CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION OF REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE:
Upon revocation of a franchise by the city council, the franchisee shall cease operations in the city within the period of time determined by the council but
in no event shall the franchisee operate more than forty five (45) days after notice of revocation.
The franchisee shall provide each of its customers written notification of termination of service within ten (10) days of revocation of the franchise. Such
notice shall have attached a listing of all eligible franchisees in the city. (Ord. 93-O-2186, eff. 3-15-1994)
Article 5. Cross Connection Control Program
6-1-501: PROHIBITION OF CROSS CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation at any time to make or maintain or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently:
A. Any cross connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served by an approved water supply and plumbing pipes or fixtures being served
by any other source of water, or
B. To maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenance or fixture which, by reason of its construction, may cause or allow backflow of water or other
substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the water service of any consumer of the city. (1988 Code)
6-1-502: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 257/797
AWWA STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).
AIR GAP SEPARATION (AG): A physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, and in no case shall the air gap be less than one inch (1").
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing
organization which has demonstrated its competency to perform such tests to the California department of health services.
APPROVED WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved water supply.
BACKFLOW: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Back siphonage is one cause of
backflow. Back pressure is another cause.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health or which may
impair the usefulness or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and
any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be
considered to be cross connections.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DC): An assembly of at least two (2) independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves on
each side of the check valve assembly, and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
HEALTH AGENCY: The state of California department of health services or, if the state of California department of health services has relinquished its
authority to a local agency, then health agency shall mean the local agency to which the state of California department of health services has relinquished
its authority.
PERSON: A natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, organization,
municipality, public utility, or other public body or institution and any manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee thereof.
PREMISES: Any and all areas on a customer's property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM: The system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption.
RECLAIMED WATER: A wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable uses.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE (RP): A device that:
A. Incorporates two (2) or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two +checks;
B. Incorporates a tightly closing shutoff valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and
C. Is equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The point of connection between a user's piping and the water supplier's facilities.
WATER SUPPLIER: A person who owns or operates an approved water supply system.
WATER USER: A person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (1988 Code)
6-1-503: CROSS CONNECTION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
Unprotected cross connections are prohibited.
If backflow protection has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user's premises, then any and all water supply lines from the
public water system entering such premises shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The device installed shall be in accord with the
requirements of this article.
A. Cost: Whenever protection against backflow is required, the city will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device at the
user's expense.
B. Where Protection Is Required:
1. Each service connection from the public water system to a premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water
from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city and is approved by
the health agency.
2. For each premises on which a substance is handled so that it may enter the public water system, each service connection from the public water
system to such premises shall be protected against the backflow of water from that premises into the public water system. This requirement shall
apply to each premises on which persons handle process waters and waters originating from the public water system which have been subjected to
deterioration in sanitary quality.
3. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on a service connection to a premises having: a) internal cross connections that cannot be
permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the health agency and the city, or b) an intricate plumbing and piping arrangement which
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 258/797
make it impracticable to ascertain whether cross connections exist.
Backflow prevention devices shall also be installed on a service connection to a premises where all portions of the premises cannot be readily
accessed for inspection purposes, making it impracticable to ascertain whether cross connections exist.
4. If an interstreet main flow may occur through two (2) or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure, or
premises, then a standard check valve shall be installed adjacent to, and on the property side of, the respective meters. Such check valve shall not
be considered adequate if a backflow prevention device is deemed necessary to protect the public water system's mains from pollution or
contamination. In such cases the installation of approved backflow prevention devices shall be required.
C. Type Of Protection Required: The type of protection required to prevent backflow into an approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree
of hazard that exists on the water user's premises. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply are set
forth in table 6-1.5.1 of this section. However, the water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city.
Situations which are not covered in table 6-1.5.1 of this section shall be evaluated on a case by case basis and the required backflow protection shall
be determined by the city or health agency.
TABLE 6-1.5.1
Type Of Backflow Protection Required
1. Sewage And Hazardous Substances:
a. Premises where the public water system
is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply.
AG
b. Premises where wastewater pumping and/or
treatment plants are located, and where there is no
interconnection with the potable water system. This
does not include a single-family residence that has a
sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of
an AG if approved by the health agency and the city.
AG
c. Premises where reclaimed water is used
and there is no interconnection with the potable
water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an
AG if approved by the health agency and the city.
AG
d. Premises where hazardous substances are
handled in any manner in which the substances may
enter a potable water system. This does not include a
single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump.
An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved
by the health agency and the city.
AG
e. Premises where there is an irrigation system
into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or
can be, injected.
RP
2. Auxiliary Water Supplies:
a. Premises where there is an auxiliary water
supply which is not an approved water supply, and
which is interconnected with the public water system.
An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if
approved by the health agency and the city.
AG
b. Premises where there is an auxiliary water
supply which is not an approved water supply, and
there are no interconnections with the public water
system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if
approved by the health agency and the city.
RP
3. Fire Protection Systems:
a. Premises where the fire protection system
is directly supplied from the public water system and
there is an auxiliary water supply on or to the premises
which is not interconnected with the public water system
and which is not an approved water supply.
DC
b. Premises where the fire protection system
is supplied from the public water system and interconnected
with an auxiliary water supply which is not
an approved water supply. An RP may be provided in
lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the
city.
AG
Degree Of Hazard Minimum Type Of Backflow Prevention Device
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 259/797
c. Premises where the fire protection system is
supplied from the public water system and where either
elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which are supplied
by private reservoirs or tanks are used.
DC
4. Restricted Entry: Premises where entry is
restricted so that inspections for cross connections
cannot be made with sufficient frequency, or upon
sufficiently short notice, to assure that cross
connections do not exist.
RP
5. Cross Connection History: Premises where
there is a history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
RP
(1988 Code)
6-1-504: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE INSTALLATION:
A. Approval: Only approved backflow prevention devices shall be acceptable for installation by a water user. Upon request, the city will provide a list of
approved backflow prevention devices to any affected user.
B. Installation: Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed by section 7603 of title 17 of the California Code of Regulations.
Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user's service connection. However, the city shall have the authority to determine the
required location of a backflow prevention device. Installation shall also be consistent with the following requirements:
1. Air Gap Separation (AG): An air gap separation shall be located on the user's side of the service connection and as close to the service connection
as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be
provided from any point between the service connection and the air gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate at a distance of at least two
(2) pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch (1"), above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.
2. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP): The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be
installed on the user's side of the service connection and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum
of twelve inches (12") above grade and not more than thirty six inches (36") above grade measured from the bottom of the device and with a
minimum of twelve inches (12") side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water
supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the city.
3. Double Check Valve Assembly (DC): The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user's service
connection and shall be installed above grade, if practicable, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double
check valve assembly is installed below grade, it must be installed in a vault so that there is a minimum of twelve inches (12") between the bottom of
the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches (8") below grade, so that there is a
minimum of twenty four inches (24") of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so that there is a
minimum of twelve inches (12") clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Vaults which do not have an integrated
bottom must be placed on a three inch (3") layer of gravel.
Double check valve assemblies of the "Y" type must be installed on their "side" with tests cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may
be removed for service without removing the device. (1988 Code)
6-1-505: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTING AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Testing And Maintenance: The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the
devices tested by a person who has demonstrated to the city his competence in the testing of these devices. Backflow prevention devices must be
tested at least annually and must also be tested immediately after installation, relocation or repair. However, the city may require a more frequent
testing schedule.
No device shall be placed in service unless it is functioning as required. A report in a form acceptable to the city shall be filed with the city each time a
device is tested, relocated, or repaired. Devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of
testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.
B. Notice: The city shall give customers mailed notice of the need for annual testing of a device, and shall also supply customers with the necessary forms
which must be completed each time a device is tested or repaired. Failure to provide notice as provided by this section does not excuse the water
user's duty to test the backflow prevention device pursuant to this section. (1988 Code)
6-1-506: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE REMOVAL:
Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated, or replaced.
A. Removal: The use of a backflow prevention device may be discontinued, and the device removed from service, upon written permission by the city after
presentation to the city of sufficient evidence to verify that a hazard no longer exists and is not likely to be created in the future;
Degree Of Hazard Minimum Type Of Backflow Prevention Device
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 260/797
B. Relocation: A backflow prevention device may be relocated following written confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the
required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A device may not be removed for relocation unless water use is discontinued until the
relocation is complete or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city and sufficient to prevent backflow
during relocation. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device.
C. Repair: A backflow prevention device may be removed for repair, provided that water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device
is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city and sufficient to prevent backflow
during repair. A retest will be required following the repair of the device.
D. Replacement: A device may be removed and replaced provided that water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed, or the service
connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city and sufficient to prevent backflow during replacement. All replacement
devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. (1988 Code)
6-1-507: USER SUPERVISOR:
At each premises where the city deems necessary, a user supervisor shall be designated by, and at the expense of, the water user. This user supervisor
shall be responsible for monitoring backflow prevention devices and for avoiding cross connections. The user supervisor shall promptly notify the city in the
event of contamination or pollution of the public water system due to a cross connection on the premises. Such notice will allow the city to take appropriate
measures to mitigate the contamination. The water user shall inform the city annually of the user supervisor's identity and whenever a change in user
supervisors occurs. (1988 Code)
6-1-508: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
A. Water System Survey: The city shall review all requests for new water services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Upon request, plans and
specifications must be submitted to the city for review of possible cross connection hazards. Failure to provide plans and specifications upon request
will be grounds for denial of a new water service connection. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public
water system, the required device must be installed before service is initiated.
The city may require an on premises inspection to evaluate cross connection hazards. Such inspection shall be limited to reasonable times. Any
customer which cannot, or will not, allow an on premises inspection of the premises' piping system shall be required to install any backflow prevention
device deemed necessary by the city.
B. Customer Notification; Device Installation: The city shall notify a water user of any inspection or plan check findings, listing any corrective action to be
taken. The user must complete all required corrective action, including installation of backflow prevention devices, within sixty (60) days after receiving
notice of the need for corrective action. Notice shall be deemed received three (3) days after deposit within the United States mail service, postage
paid.
Upon failure to take the required action within sixty (60) days after receiving the notice of the need for corrective action, the city may terminate water
service to the affected water user until the required corrective action is taken and take any legal action to enforce compliance.
C. Customer Notification; Testing And Maintenance: The city will notify by mail, postage paid, each affected water user whenever there is a need for
testing the backflow prevention device installed on that user's service connection. This notice shall be in writing and shall give the water user thirty (30)
days to have the device tested and furnish the city with the results of the test on the form provided by the city. The notice shall also supply the water
user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city.
If no action is taken within the thirty (30) day period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested.
Failure to give notice as prescribed in this section does not excuse the user from the duty to test the backflow prevention device as set forth in other
sections of this chapter. However, water service may not be terminated for failure to test the backflow prevention device unless notice is given as
prescribed by this section. (1988 Code)
6-1-509: WATER SERVICE TERMINATION:
When the city encounters a water use that represents a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply, and when this use cannot be immediately
abated, the city shall institute the procedure described in section 6-1-510 of this article for discontinuing the public water service. Conditions or water uses
that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:
A. Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device,
B. Refusal to test a backflow prevention device,
C. Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device,
D. Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device,
E. Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 261/797
F. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or container containing contaminants,
G. Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system,
H. Any situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public. (1988 Code)
6-1-510: WATER SERVICE TERMINATION PROCEDURES:
A. With regard to conditions that do not present an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the city may only terminate service to a customer's
premises after written notice has been mailed, postage prepaid, specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If
action is not taken within the allowed time period, water service may be terminated.
B. With regard to conditions that present an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the city shall make a reasonable effort to advise the water user
of the city's intent to terminate water service; then the city shall terminate the user's water supply and lock the service valve. The water service will
remain inactive until correction of the violations has been approved by the city and reestablishment of the service connection will no longer threaten the
public health or safety. (1988 Code)
6-1-511: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish fees to reimburse the city for the cost of inspections and services provided pursuant to this article. (1988
Code)
6-1-512: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The public works administrator shall have the authority to prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations for implementation of the water system cross
connection control program established by this article. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 89-O-2058,
eff. 5-18-1989)
Chapter 2
CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
Article 1. General Provisions
6-2-101: TITLE:
This chapter is known and may be cited as the CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS ORDINANCE of the city of
Beverly Hills. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-102: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The city council finds and determines as follows:
1. The development of cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts
upon, the residents of the city.
2. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable, video, and telecommunications services and systems, the public
convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city.
3. This chapter adopts provisions that authorize the city to regulate cable, video, and telecommunications service providers to the extent authorized by
federal and state law, including, but not limited to, the federal cable communications policy act of 1984, the federal cable television consumer
protection and competition act of 1992, the federal telecommunications act of 1996, applicable regulations of the federal communications
commission, and applicable California statutes and regulations.
4. The cable, video, and telecommunications services that are addressed in this ordinance include services provided by cable television systems, open
video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite master antenna television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems, multichannel
multipoint distribution systems, local multipoint distribution systems, and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology, as well as
voice and data services provided by telephone corporations.
B. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for the attainment of the following objectives:
1. To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition,
and technological development.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 262/797
2. To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city's public rights of way and public property for cable, video, and telecommunications
purposes on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis.
3. To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights of way and public
property.
4. To promote competition in cable, video, and telecommunications services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video, and
telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced and competitive cable, video, and telecommunications services on
the broadest possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the city.
5. To establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable, video, and
telecommunications service providers.
6. To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video, and telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced
government services, and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving cable, video, and telecommunications marketplace. (Ord. 01-O-2372,
eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-103: DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES:
Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined in section 6-2-601 of this chapter. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
Article 2. Cable Television Systems
6-2-201: AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS:
A. In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct,
operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits.
B. The city council finds that the development of cable television and related telecommunications services may provide significant benefits for, and
substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city
council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by
the city. This article is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best possible cable television and related telecommunications
services, and every franchise issued in accordance with this article is intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this article to
adopt regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television and related telecommunications services to the maximum extent
authorized by federal and state law. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-202: FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Franchise Purposes: A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this article may authorize the grantee to do the following:
1. To engage in the business of providing cable service and such other telecommunications services as may be authorized by law and which grantee
elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service area.
2. To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures,
appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other
public places within the designated franchise service area.
3. To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio
signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be authorized by law.
B. Franchise Required: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way in the City
without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this article. This requirement does not apply to any cable television or video service system
constructed, installed, or operated by the City of Beverly Hills.
C. Term Of The Franchise:
1. A franchise granted under this article will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance
or resolution adopted by the City Council that authorizes the franchise.
2. A franchise granted under this article may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of State
and Federal law and this article.
D. Franchise Territory: A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the City, and within any area added to the City during the term of the franchise,
unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.
E. Federal Or State Jurisdiction: This article will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, and it applies to all
franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law.
F. Franchise Nontransferable:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 263/797
1. Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the City
Council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the City Council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or
delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign, or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the written consent of the City Council is null and
void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the
purposes of this subsection.
2. The requirements of subsection F1 of this section apply to any change in control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the
ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a partnership
or a corporation, prior authorization of the City Council is required where ownership or control of twenty five percent (25%) or more of the partnership
interests or of the voting stock of grantee, or any company in the tier of companies controlling the grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired
by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, owns or controls those partnership interests or that
voting stock of the grantee, or of grantee's upper tier of controlling companies, as of the effective date of the franchise.
3. Grantee must notify the City in writing of any foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property, or upon the
termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial part of that franchise property. That notification will be considered by the City as
notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require the prior written
consent of the City Council to that change in control of ownership will apply.
4. For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the City may inquire as to the qualifications of
the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee must assist the City in that inquiry. In seeking the City's consent to any change of
ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent.
This application must be submitted to the City not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee
must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all
franchise requirements during the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the proposed transferee are
determined to be satisfactory, then the City will consent to the transfer of the franchise.
5. Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise
property has the right to notify the City that it, or a designee satisfactory to the City, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon
grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety (90) days after
assuming control. The plan must ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial
institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen
(18) months unless authorized by the City, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the City to transfer the
franchise to another grantee.
6. Grantee must reimburse the City for the City's reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in
control of the franchise. These expenses may include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of
the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and
document preparation expenses. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be subject to maximum limits that are specified in the
franchise agreement between the City and the grantee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the City during the
term of the franchise.
G. Geographical Coverage:
1. Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee must design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to have the
capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the franchise service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements
or territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement.
2. After service has been established within all or any part of the franchise service area by activating trunk or distribution cables, grantee must provide
service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the service area within five (5) days from the date of request, provided that the
grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that five (5) day
period.
H. Nonexclusive Franchise: Every franchise granted is nonexclusive. The City specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate, subject to applicable State and Federal law. If an additional franchise is proposed to
be granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public hearing must first be held if required by the provisions of Government Code section 53066.3.
I. Multiple Franchises:
1. The City may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable State and Federal law. The City may limit the number of franchises granted,
based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and the following specific local considerations:
a. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility
systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage.
b. The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.
c. The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way.
2. The City may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the City's opinion, the
rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001; amd. Ord. 17-O-2732, eff.
6-16-2017)
6-2-203: FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS AND RENEWAL:
A. Filing Of Applications: Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system must file an application with the City. A reasonable
application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the City Council must accompany the application. That application fee deposit will
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 264/797
cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial,
legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by those experts), notice and
publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the applicant must pay the difference
to the City within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.
B. Applications; Contents: An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system must contain, as applicable:
1. A statement describing the proposed franchise service area.
2. A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry.
3. A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a
closely held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly owned partnership or corporation, each owner of ten percent (10%) or more of the partnership
interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be identified.
4. A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person.
5. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in
part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant.
6. A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct.
7. The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public,
educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities, and equipment.
8. Any additional information that the City deems to be reasonably necessary.
C. Consideration Of Initial Applications:
1. Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee must prepare a report and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning that application.
2. A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the City Council. Within thirty (30) days after the
close of the hearing, the City Council will make a decision, based upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing, as to whether the
franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The City Council may grant one (1) or more franchises, or may decline to
grant any franchise.
D. Franchise Renewal: Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance with then-applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise
agreement. The City and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. A renewal
application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the City Council must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request. That
renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application, including the review of
grantee's prior compliance with the franchise, the ascertainment of the community's cable related needs and interests, the engagement of technical
and legal consultants, and expenses related to negotiations and document preparation. If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the
grantee must pay the difference to the City within thirty (30) days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-
2001)
6-2-204: CONTENTS OF CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
A. The terms and provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable television system shall relate to or include, without limitation, the
following subject matters:
1. The nature, scope, geographical area, and duration of the franchise.
2. The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the percentage amount, the method of computation, and the time for payment.
3. Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable
television system.
4. Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable television system, as well as the provision of special services, such as
outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability, and parental control devices.
5. Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the performance
of the grantee's obligations under the franchise agreement.
6. Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance, workers' compensation insurance, and indemnification.
7. Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service standards, which requirements may include, without limitation, those set forth in
section 6-2-205 of this article.
8. Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local cable usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access
channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events, and financial support for the required access channels.
9. Requirements relating to construction, operation, and maintenance of the cable television system within the public rights of way, including
compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities, and
compliance with FCC technical standards.
10. Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits and performance reviews, the inspection of grantee's
books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and franchise fee audits under specified circumstances.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 265/797
11. Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for such
breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages, suspension, revocation, and termination.
12. Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer or change in control of the franchise.
13. The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city's operation and
management of the cable system.
14. Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and
that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.
B. If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a franchise agreement authorized by the city council and provisions of this article, the
provisions of the franchise agreement will control. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-205: CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS:
A. Operational Standards:
1. Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee must maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with
the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions:
a. Sufficient toll free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to ensure that telephone calls are answered before the fourth ring.
Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, may not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Callers who must be
transferred may not be required to wait more than thirty (30) seconds before being connected to a service representative.
b. Under normal operating conditions, a caller must receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
c. Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty four (24) hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the
telephone calls may be answered by an answering service in accordance with the telephone answering standards set forth in subsections A1a and
A1b of this section. Calls received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business
day.
d. A conveniently located local business and service or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight (8) hours daily on weekdays,
and at least four (4) hours weekly on evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept
subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints.
e. An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty four (24) hour
per day basis.
f. A trained installation staff must provide service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within five (5) days after receipt of a request, in all
areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" are those that are located up to one hundred twenty five feet
(125') from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in the franchise agreement.
g. The grantee must schedule, within a specified four (4) hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all appointments with
subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and other activities at the subscriber's location. The grantee may schedule installation and
service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a
subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is delayed in keeping an
appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to honor the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the
scheduled appointment, and the appointment must be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. The grantee must
use its best efforts to contact every customer within two (2) weeks after an installation or repair work is completed to ensure that the customer is
satisfied with the work.
h. Subscribers who have experienced one missed appointment due to the fault of the grantee will receive an installation free of charge if the
appointment was for an installation. If an installation was to have been provided free of charge, and for all other appointments, the subscriber will
receive one month of the subscribed to service tier, free of charge. Subscribers also will be entitled to receive a free installation, or one month free
service, as provided above if the grantee fails to complete a standard installation within five (5) days of receiving an installation request due to its
fault, its failure to schedule an appointment within a specified four (4) hour time period, or its failure to notify the subscriber that the grantee's
representative will be late for an appointment. Subscribers who have experienced two (2) missed appointments due to the fault of the grantee will
receive two (2) months of the subscribed to service tier, free of charge, in addition to the free installation or free month of service provided for the
first missed appointment.
i. Upon a subscriber's request, the grantee will arrange for pick up or replacement of converters or other equipment provided by the grantee at the
subscriber's address within fourteen (14) days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility limited.
2. Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections A1a, A1c, A1f and A1g of this section must be met not less than ninety five percent
(95%) of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
B. Service Standards:
1. The grantee will render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except
in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions will occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than two (2) hours and occurs between midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
(in which event 24 hours prior notice must be given to the city), forty eight (48) hours prior notice must be given to subscribers.
2. The grantee will maintain a repair force of technicians who will respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames:
a. For a system outage: Within two (2) hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a
system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting five (5) or more subscribers of the system.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 266/797
b. For an isolated outage: Within twenty four (24) hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound
or picture for one or more channels.
c. For inferior signal quality: No later than the following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, after a request for service identifying a
problem concerning picture or sound quality.
3. The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection B when a technician arrives at the
service location and begins work on the problem. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written
notification of arrival.
4. The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to subscribers, unless
the defect or malfunction was caused by the subscriber.
5. The grantee must determine the nature of the problem within twenty four (24) hours after commencing work and resolve all cable system related
problems within three (3) business days, unless technically infeasible.
C. Billing And Information Standards:
1. Subscriber bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates, and credits.
2. The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change must be prorated based upon when the new or changed service
commenced. Subscribers must not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure attributable to the grantee, including the failure to
timely or correctly bill the subscriber.
3. In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within ten (10) days after receiving the
complaint at the office specified on the billing statement for receiving that complaint.
4. Credits or refunds must be provided by grantee to subscribers who experience an outage, interruption, or disconnection of service of four (4) or more
consecutive hours, provided that such loss of service is neither caused by the subscriber nor attributable to scheduled repairs, maintenance, or
construction in circumstances where grantee has provided advance written notice to subscriber, and the loss of service does not exceed the time
period specified by grantee. Subject to these exceptions, credits or refunds must be provided under the following circumstances:
a. The outage, interruption, or disconnection is "isolated" and involves the sound or picture of one or more channels, or the reception of other
services, and affects one to four (4) subscribers.
b. The outage, interruption, or disconnection is of a "systemwide" nature that involves the sound or picture of one or more channels, or the reception
of other services, and affects five (5) or more subscribers.
If the grantee's cable system is equipped with monitoring equipment that enables the grantee to identify an "isolated" or "systemwide" loss of service,
then the credit or refund referenced in the following paragraph will be provided to subscribers without the necessity for any prior written or verbal
notice or request from the affected subscribers. If the grantee's cable system has no such monitoring equipment, then prior written or verbal notice or
request must be given by the affected subscribers, and grantee must maintain a record of such notices or requests. The existence of monitoring
equipment for grantee's cable system will be determined at the time of the grant or renewal of a cable television franchise agreement, or at such
other times as may be agreed upon.
For each day that an "isolated" or "systemwide" loss of service has continued for four (4) consecutive hours or more, the credit or refund must equal
a pro rata share of the monthly billing for one full day. The credits or refunds for such loss of service must be issued no later than the subscriber's
next billing cycle following grantee's determination that a credit or refund is due. For subscribers terminating service, credits or refunds must be
issued promptly, but no later than thirty (30) days after the return of any grantee supplied equipment.
5. Subject to prior review by the city, the grantee must provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of the installation of
service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
a. Products and services offered.
b. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.
c. Installation and service maintenance policies.
d. Instructions on the use of the cable service.
e. Channel positions of programming carried on the system.
f. Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city's office designated for dealing with cable related issues.
g. Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance.
6. Subscribers must be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on
the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of those changes if the change is
within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee must notify subscribers through announcements on the cable system and in writing thirty
(30) days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection B5 of this section.
7. The grantee must maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all
promotional offers made by grantee to subscribers. These documents must be maintained for a minimum period of four (4) years.
D. Verification Of Compliance With Standards:
1. Upon fifteen (15) days' prior written notice, the city may require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with any of the
consumer service standards specified in this section. The grantee must provide sufficient documentation to enable the city to verify compliance.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 267/797
2. A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the grantee's receipt of
written notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.
E. Subscriber Complaints And Disputes:
1. The grantee must establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The
written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber's
grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee must file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures must include a requirement that the
grantee respond in writing to any written complaint from a subscriber within ten (10) days after receiving the complaint at the office specified on the
billing statement for receiving that complaint.
2. The city has the right to review the grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the grantee's compliance with the franchise
requirements.
3. All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee
elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee must act so as to
ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force.
4. Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee must cooperate with the city, the new
grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, the grantee is entitled to the
revenues derived from its operation of the cable system.
F. Disconnection/Downgrades:
1. A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time, and the grantee must promptly comply with the subscriber's request within five (5)
days or at any later time requested by the subscriber. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required of
subscribers. Grantee will impose no charges for the voluntary termination or downgrade of service unless a visit to the subscriber's premises is
required to remove a converter box or other equipment or property owned by grantee.
2. The grantee may disconnect a subscriber's service if the subscriber fails to pay a monthly fee or charge, but such disconnection must not occur prior
to forty five (45) days after the fee or charge is due, plus ten (10) days' prior written notice to the subscriber of the grantee's intent to disconnect
service. If the subscriber pays all past due amounts, including late charges, before the scheduled disconnection date, the grantee may not
disconnect service. If service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the grantee must promptly reinstate service upon
payment in full by the subscriber of all such fees and charges, including late charges.
3. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection F2 of this section, the grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber
is damaging or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment. In the event of disconnection on such grounds, the grantee will resume service
to the subscriber upon receiving adequate assurances that the subscriber has ceased the practices or conduct that resulted in disconnection and has
paid all proper fees and charges, including any amounts reasonably owed the grantee for the damage caused by the subscriber.
4. The grantee may also disconnect service to a subscriber when it causes signal leakage exceeding federal limits. If service is disconnected, the
grantee will immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem.
5. Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee will remove its equipment from the subscriber's premises within thirty (30) days. The
equipment will be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within such time period unless the grantee has been denied access to the subscriber's
premises.
G. Changes In Service: Except as otherwise provided by federal or state law, subscribers must not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other
than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected (such as upgrade or downgrade charges). No charge may be imposed for any
service or product that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill will not by itself constitute an affirmative
selection.
H. Deposits: The grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits must be placed in an
interest bearing account. The deposit must be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within thirty (30) days after the equipment is
returned to the grantee.
I. Parental Control Option: The grantee must provide parental control devices to all subscribers who desire to block the video or audio portion of any
programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices will be provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless otherwise required by federal
law or unless a converter box is required to be installed for the purpose of providing the parental control device.
J. Requirements:
1. If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without the city's prior approval or subsequent ratification, the city may, at its
sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city, or until a
permanent operator is selected. If the city satisfies this obligation on behalf of the grantee, then during that time period the city is entitled to collect all
revenues derived from the system, and the grantee will indemnify the city against any damages that the city may suffer as a result of the grantee's
failure to operate the system.
2. All officers, agents, and employees of the grantee, or of its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with
members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers' premises, must carry a photo identification card in a form approved by the city. The
grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors must be clearly identified as vehicles
engaged in providing services for the grantee.
3. Additional standards relating to service, consumer protection, and response by the grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in
this section may be set forth in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance, and the grantee must comply with those standards in the
operation of the cable television system. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise
agreement, provided that the grantee receives written notice and an opportunity to cure before any penalty or other remedy is imposed.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 268/797
K. Penalties For Noncompliance:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to authorize the imposition of penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by
this section in accordance with the video customer service act (Government Code sections 53088 et seq.). These penalties are in addition to any
other remedies provided by this chapter, the franchise agreement, or any other law, and the city has the discretion to elect the remedy that it will
apply. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection will not prevent the city or any other affected party from exercising any other remedy
to the extent permitted by law, including, but not limited to, any judicial remedy as provided below in subsection K2d of this section.
2. Administration And Appeals:
a. Authorization: The city manager or the city manager's designee is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to
assess penalties against the grantee must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are
final, unless appealed to the city council.
b. Appeal: If the grantee or any interested person is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten (10) days of the
written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council
for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager.
c. Schedule Of Penalties: The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for the material breach of the
provisions of the customer service standards set forth in this section, provided that the breach is within the reasonable control of the grantee:
(1) The maximum penalty is two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each day of material breach, but not to exceed six hundred dollars ($600.00) for
each occurrence of the material breach.
(2) For a second material breach of the same nature within a twelve (12) month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has
been assessed, the maximum penalty is four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed one thousand two
hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
(3) For a third material breach of the same nature within a twelve (12) month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been
assessed, the maximum penalty is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of the material breach, but not to exceed three thousand
dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
(4) The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by any additional amount authorized by state law.
d. Judicial Remedy: This subsection K does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard
to this subsection K.
e. Notification Of Breach: The city must give the grantee written notice of any alleged breach of the consumer service standards and allow the
grantee at least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material
breach is deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period for cure specified herein, that any breach has not been
remedied by the grantee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected.
L. Free Service For Noncompliance: Notwithstanding any other penalties or remedies provided by this section, the franchise agreement, or any other law,
the grantee must provide the following months of free service to subscribers affected by the grantee's failure to comply with the specified consumer
protection and service standard:
1. One Month Free Service: The grantee will provide one month of free service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the grantee to timely and
satisfactorily comply with any of the following requirements:
a. The pick up or replacement of converters or other equipment within fourteen (14) days after subscriber request1.
b. Forty eight (48) hour notice of service interruption2.
c. Response time for system outages and inferior signal quality3.
d. Resolution of cable system related problems within three (3) business days4. One additional month of free service will be provided for each seven
(7) day period that the problem remains unresolved.
e. Written response to billing complaints5.
f. Credits and refunds6.
g. Provision of all required information to subscribers7.
h. Notification of rate, service, or channel changes8.
i. Completion of termination or downgrade of service9.
j. Provision of parental control devices10.
2. Three Months' Free Service: The grantee will provide three (3) months of free service to each subscriber affected by the grantee's disconnection of
subscriber service without just cause, provided that grantee fails to restore service within four (4) hours after the disconnection11.
3. Definition Of Free Service: The free service required by this subsection L relates to the service tier subscribed to by the affected subscriber. (Ord.
01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
Article 3. Open Video Systems
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 269/797
6-2-301: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this article apply to an "open video system operator", as defined in section 6-2-601 of this chapter, that intends to deliver video
programming to consumers in the city over an open video system. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-302: APPLICATION REQUIRED:
A. Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator
must file an application with the city. That application must include or be accompanied by the following, as applicable:
1. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
2. Copies of FCC form 1275, all "notices of intent" filed under 47 CFR 76.1503(b)(1), and the order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification of the
applicant to operate an open video system in the city in accordance with section 653(a)(1) of the communications act and the FCC's rules.
3. The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve.
4. A description of the open video system services that will be offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities.
5. A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to deliver the open video system services.
6. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and operation of
the open video system described in the application.
7. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's financial ability to:
a. Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant that is proposed to be constructed in the city.
b. Comply with the city's public, educational, and governmental access requirements as specified in subsection 6-2-304B4 of this article.
c. Comply with the city's requirement that gross revenue fees be paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law, as specified below in
subsection 6-2-304B2 of this article.
8. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to purchase, or to
lease.
9. If the applicant's operation of the open video system will require the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the following
additional information must be provided:
a. A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
b. Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to identify:
(1) The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed facilities.
(2) The locations, if any, for interconnection with the facilities of other telecommunications service providers.
(3) The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add, remove, or relocate on a
temporary or permanent basis.
c. The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new physical plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and processing fees.
10. The information and documentation that is required to be submitted to the city by a video provider, as specified in subsection 6-2-402B of this
chapter.
11. Such additional information as may be requested by the city manager.
12. An application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council.
B. If any item of information specified in subsection A of this section is determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city manager is
authorized to waive the requirement that such information be included in the application. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-303: REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION:
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application filed under section 6-2-302 of this article that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give
written notice to the applicant of the city's intent to negotiate an agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the
proposed open video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the
city and to the applicant. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-304: AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
A. No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written
agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video
system will be authorized by the city.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 270/797
B. The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may contain terms and conditions that relate to the following subject matters, to
the extent that such terms, conditions, and subject matters are not preempted by federal law or regulations:
1. The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including provisions for its renewal or extension.
2. The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under section 622 of
the communications act, fees on the gross revenue received by the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with the following
standards and procedures:
a. The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the maximum amount authorized by section 653(c)2)(B) of the communications act, which is
the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator.
b. The term "gross revenue" has the meaning set forth in 47 CFR 76.1511, and includes: 1) all gross revenue received by an open video system
operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming
providers; and 2) all advertising revenue received by the operator or its affiliates in connection with the provision of video programming, where
such revenue is included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the franchised cable operator. The term "gross revenue"
does not include revenue, such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video programming providers.
3. The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with requirements relating to information collection and record keeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records in order to ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue that are required to
be paid as specified in subsection B2 of this section.
4. The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city's requirements with respect to public, educational, and governmental access
channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47 CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are
applicable:
a. The open video system operator is subject to the same public, educational, and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable
television franchise service area with which its system overlaps.
b. The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the
franchise service area in which the city's subscribers are located.
c. The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to establish the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational, and
governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment. These negotiations may include the city's franchised cable operator if
the city, the open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire.
d. If the open video system operator and the city are unable to reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with respect to public,
educational, and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment within the city's jurisdiction, then the following
obligations will be imposed:
(1) The open video system operator must satisfy the same public, educational, and governmental access obligations as the city's franchised cable
operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public, educational, and governmental access and by matching the city's
franchised cable operator's annual financial contributions in support of public, educational, and governmental access services, facilities, and
equipment that are actually used by the city. For in-kind contributions, such as cameras or production studios, the open video system operator
may satisfy its statutory obligation by negotiating mutually agreeable terms with the city's franchised cable operator, so that public, educational,
and governmental access services to the city are improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video system operator
must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised cable operator's depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of facilities, the
annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under
section 611 of the communications act.
(2) The city will impose upon the open video system operator the same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator
with regard to the open video system operator's use of channel capacity designated for public, educational, and governmental access use when
that capacity is not being used for such purposes.
e. The city's franchised cable operator is required under federal law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public, educational,
and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this
connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the franchised
cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city
may require that the connection occur on city owned property or on public rights of way.
f. All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator's public, educational, and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the open
video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video system operator's matching financial contributions set forth in
subsection B4d(1) of this section.
g. The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than
those imposed upon the franchised cable operator.
h. If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the obligations of the
open video system operator.
i. The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply with new public, educational, and access obligations imposed on the city's
franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be
required to displace other programmers using its open video system to accommodate public, educational, and governmental access channels. The
open video system operator must comply with such new public, educational, and governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is
or becomes available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased demand for channel capacity.
5. If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system operator's
obligations to provide public, educational, and governmental access under the provisions set forth in subsection B4 of this section, then either party
may file a complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed
by the city until the dispute has been finally resolved.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 271/797
6. If the open video system operator intends to maintain an institutional network, as defined in section 611(f) of the communications act, the city will
require that educational and governmental access channels be designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels are
designated on the institutional network of the city's franchised cable operator.
7. The authority of an open video system operator to exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel capacity
will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505(f).
8. The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes, ordinances, and regulations relating
to customer service standards, including the cable television and video customer service and information act (Government Code section 53054 et
seq.), the video customer service act (Government Code section 53088 et seq.), and section 6-2-205 of this chapter.
9. If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the following rights
of way use and management responsibilities that are also imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service providers
in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:
a. Compliance with all applicable city codes, including applications for excavation, encroachment, and construction permits and the payment of all
required permit and inspection fees.
b. The coordination of construction activities.
c. Compliance with established standards and procedures for constructing lines across private property.
d. Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification requirements.
e. The repair and resurfacing of construction damaged streets.
f. Compliance with all public safety requirements that are applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using public
property or public rights of way.
10. Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies,
including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the agreement.
11. Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of the open video system.
12. Requirements relating to the open video system operator's compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules, and regulations
pertaining to the operation of the open video system.
13. Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies, and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system
operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 01-O-
2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
Article 4. Other Video And Telecommunications Services And Systems
6-2-401: OTHER MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTORS:
The term "cable system," as defined in federal law and as set forth in section 6-2-601 of this chapter, does not include a facility that serves subscribers
without using any public rights of way. Consequently, the categories of multichannel video programming distributors identified below are not deemed to be
"cable systems" and are therefore exempt from the city's franchise requirements and from certain other local regulatory provisions authorized by federal
law, provided that their distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the city's public rights of way.
A. Multichannel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS"), also known as "wireless cable," which typically involves the transmission by an FCC licensed
operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line of sight technology.
B. Local multipoint distribution service ("LMDS"), another form of over the air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and
which offers video programming, telephony, and data networking services.
C. Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as "direct to home satellite services", which involves the distribution or broadcasting of programming
or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber's
premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local regulation of direct to home satellite services is further proscribed by the following federal
statutory provisions:
1. 47 USC section 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to regulate the provision of direct to home satellite services.
2. Section 602 of the telecommunications act of 1996 states that a provider of direct to home satellite service is exempt from the collection or
remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction on direct to home satellite service. The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined
by federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross
receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing
business, regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-402: VIDEO PROVIDERS; REGISTRATION; CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS:
A. Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a "video provider", as that term is defined in section 6-2-601 of this chapter, are
specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the
following state statutes:
1. The cable television and video customer service and information act (Government Code section 53054 et seq.).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 272/797
2. The video customer service act (Government Code section 53088 et seq.).
B. All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the effective date of this
chapter, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a
franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:
1. The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers.
2. The names of the officers of the video provider.
3. A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as
required by Government Code section 53054 et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the
following:
a. Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling.
b. Customer telephone and office hours.
c. Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.
d. Procedures for termination of service.
e. Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.
f. Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution.
g. The video provider's written commitment to distribute annually to the City, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the customer
service standards specified in subsections B3a through B3f of this section. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its
performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by Government Code section 53055.2.
4. Unless a video provider is exempt under Federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council
to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the City in reviewing and processing the registration form.
5. In addition to the registration fee specified in subsection B4 of this section, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the City, when due,
all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the City in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute
resolution is mandated by Government Code section 53088.2(o).
C. The City Council may establish by ordinance a schedule of monetary penalties for the material breach by a video provider of its obligations under
subsections (a) through (n) of Government Code section 53088.2. As used herein, the term "material breach" means any substantial and repeated
failure to comply with the consumer service standards set forth in Government Code section 53088.2. The provisions of that ordinance must be
consistent with the provisions of Government Code section 53088.2. The schedule of monetary penalties may also impose a penalty, as authorized by
Government Code section 53056(a), for the failure of a video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code section 53055.1,
which penalty may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each year in which the notice is not distributed as required by State Statute. (Ord. 01-
O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-403: ANTENNAS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES:
A. Title 10, chapter 3, article 45 of this Code sets forth the regulatory requirements that apply to telephone corporations and other utility service providers
with regard to the siting and construction of various categories of antennas, including wireless telecommunications antenna facilities, that are
commonly used in transmitting or receiving telecommunications services.
B. Notwithstanding any provisions in title 10, chapter 3, article 45 of this Code to the contrary, all small wireless facilities as defined by the FCC in 47 CFR
section 1.60002(l), as may be amended or superseded, shall comply with the "City Wide Policy Regarding Permitting Requirements and Development
Standards for Small Wireless Facilities" adopted by City Council resolution, and all small wireless facilities on private property must comply with that
policy. (Ord. 19-O-2779, eff. 5-17-2019)
6-2-404: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDED BY TELEPHONE CORPORATIONS:
A. The City Council finds and determines as follows:
1. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares invalid all State rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local and
long distance telephone service.
2. The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is primarily responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it issues
certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and
related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or the facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone
corporations.
3. Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a "telephone corporation" as "every corporation or person owning, controlling, operating,
or managing any telephone line for compensation within this State".
4. Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a telephone corporation "may condemn any property necessary for the construction
and maintenance of its telephone line".
5. Section 2902 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes Municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and regulate the
relationships between a public utility and the general public in matters affecting the health, convenience, and safety of the general public, including
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 273/797
matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public utility on,
under, or above any public streets.
6. Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines along
and upon any public road or highway, along or across any of the waters or lands within this state, and to erect poles, posts, piers, or abutments for
supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines, in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of
the road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.
7. Section 7901.1 of the California Public Utilities Code confirms the right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place, and
manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, which control must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in
section 7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities have with respect to the imposition of fees.
8. Section 50030 of the California Government Code provides that any permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or upgrading
of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas, by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from the
CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is
charged, and must not be levied for general revenue purposes.
B. In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations and requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, the following regulatory
provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be
constructed within the city's public rights of way:
1. The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a building permit
("ministerial permit").
2. In addition to the information required by this code in connection with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must submit to
the city the following supplemental information:
a. A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that
authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city's public rights
of way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the
CPUC may submit copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and necessity.
b. If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a "competitive local carrier", the
following additional requirements are applicable:
(1) As required by decision no. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly report that
describes the type of construction and the location of each construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar quarter
in which the application is filed, so that the city can coordinate multiple projects, as may be necessary.
(2) If the applicant's proposed construction project will extend beyond the utility rights of way into undisturbed areas or other rights of way, the
applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the
proposed construction project has been subjected to a full scale environmental analysis by the CPUC, as required by decision no. 95-12-057 of
the CPUC.
(3) The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures specified in the
negative declaration ("Competitive Local Carriers (CLCs) Projects For Local Exchange Communication Service Throughout California") or to the
mitigation monitoring plan adopted in connection with decision no. 95-12-057 of the CPUC. The city's issuance of a ministerial permit will be
conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable mitigation measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon
telephone corporations that are designated as "competitive local carriers".
C. The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications service that is
provided, or proposed to be provided, by a telephone corporation. These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of reasonable
conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation for use of
public rights of way, and related matters; provided, however, that such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state law that
is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by telephone corporations. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
Article 5. State Franchised Video Service Providers
6-2-500: AUTHORITY AND FINDINGS:
A. Assembly bill 2987 (Nunez), formally called the digital infrastructure and video competition act of 2006 (the "act"), became effective on January 1, 2007.
B. The act establishes a state franchising system administered by the public utilities commission for video service providers.
C. The intent of this article is to exercise the city's regulatory authority pursuant to the act and other state and federal law. (Ord. 07-O-2536, eff. 12-14-
2007)
6-2-501: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS AND PENALTIES FOR MATERIAL BREACH:
A. Pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5900, video service providers that have been issued a state franchise pursuant to California Public
Utilities Code section 5840 must comply with the provisions of sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2, and 53088.2 of the California Government Code, and
any other customer service standards pertaining to the provision of video service established by federal law or regulation and any laws subsequently
enacted by the California legislature (the "customer service standards").
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 274/797
B. The customer service standards also include California Penal Code section 637.5 and the privacy standards contained in the federal cable act, at 47
USC section 551 et seq.
C. The city shall enforce the customer service standards within the city's jurisdiction, pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5900(c).
D. Prior to imposing the penalties provided by this section, the city shall notify video service providers in writing of any material breach of these customer
service standards. The video service provider shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
E. A material breach of the customer service standards is punishable by a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach,
not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of a material breach.
F. If a subsequent material breach of the same standard occurs within twelve (12) months, the repeat material breach is punishable by a penalty of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the
material breach.
G. If a third or further material breach of the same standard occurs within twelve (12) months of the first breach, the repeat material breach or breaches
are punishable by a penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed seven thousand five
hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each occurrence of the material breach.
H. Acts or omissions of a video service provider that result in breaches of two (2) or more different customer service standards will be treated and
penalized as separate material breaches of each violated standard.
I. This section shall not apply to any video service provider providing video services pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city. (Ord. 07-O-2536, eff.
12-14-2007)
6-2-502: PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL (PEG) ACCESS FEE:
A. Pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5870(n), the city of Beverly Hills hereby establishes a public, educational, and governmental (PEG)
access fee.
B. Video service providers that have been issued a state franchise pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5840, shall designate a sufficient
amount of capacity on their networks to allow the provision of the same number of PEG channels as are provided by the incumbent cable operator, as
defined in California Public Utilities Code section 5830(i). Notwithstanding the foregoing, such video service providers shall provide an additional PEG
channel when the nonduplicated locally produced video programming televised on a given channel exceeds fifty six (56) hours per week as measured
on a quarterly basis.
C. Video service providers that have been issued a state franchise must pay to the city of Beverly Hills a PEG access fee of one percent (1%) of the video
service provider's gross revenues to support PEG channels consistent with federal law. The fee shall be remitted to the city quarterly, within forty five
(45) days after the close of each quarter, at the same time as the video service provider remits its franchise fee pursuant to California Public Utilities
Code section 5860(h).
D. If the video service provider does not pay the PEG access fee when due, the video service provider shall pay interest at a rate per year equal to the
prime interest rate published from time to time in the "Wall Street Journal", plus one percentage point, from the date such amount was due, to and
including the date of payment.
E. Pursuant to California Public Utilities Code section 5860(i), the video service provider must keep records of its gross revenues for at least four (4) years
after those revenues are recognized in its books. The city may review the business records of the video service provider to ensure that the PEG access
fee is being paid properly. If an audit of the video service provider indicates that the PEG access fee has been underpaid by more than five percent
(5%), the video service provider must pay the reasonable and actual costs of the audit, plus the interest as set forth in subsection D of this section.
F. This section shall not apply to any video service provider providing video services pursuant to a franchise agreement with the city. (Ord. 07-O-2536, eff.
12-14-2007)
Article 6. Definitions
6-2-601: DEFINED TERMS AND PHRASES:
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular include the plural number.
CFR: The code of federal regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to title 47, part 80, section 1, of the code of federal regulations.
CABLE SERVICE: The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction, if
any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, "video
programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 275/797
"other programming service" means information that a cable system operator makes available to all subscribers generally.
CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons:
1. Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
2. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
CABLE SYSTEM OR CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM: A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video programming
and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. The term "cable system" does not include:
1. A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
2. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right of way;
3. A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the communications act, except that such facility will
be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified in section 621(c) of the communications act) to the extent such facility is used
in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
4. An open video system that complies with section 653 of the communications act; or
5. Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating its electric utility system.
CITY: The city of Beverly Hills as represented by its city council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT: The communications act of 1934 (47 USC section 153 et seq.), as amended by the cable communications policy act of
1984, the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act of 1996.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate
telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a national level.
FRANCHISE: An initial authorization, or the renewal of an initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether such authorization is designated
as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable
system or an open video system.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as
compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights of way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
1. Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantees or their
services);
2. Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
3. Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
4. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States code.
FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA OR SERVICE AREA: The entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be
constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.
GRANTEE: Any person that is awarded a franchise in accordance with this chapter, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee.
GROSS ANNUAL CABLE SERVICE REVENUES: The annual gross revenues derived from the grantee's operations of its cable television system to
provide cable services within the city, excluding uncollected bad debt, refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales,
excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct pass through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues
identified and collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a grantee's gross annual cable service revenues.
MULTICHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR OR VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR: A person such as, but not limited to, a
cable system operator, an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a
television receive only satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video programming for purchase by subscribers or
customers.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM: A facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service, including video programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, provided that the FCC
has certified that such system is authorized to operate in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 et seq., entitled "Open Video Systems".
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system, or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation
of that open video system.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES OR PEG ACCESS FACILITIES: The total of the following:
1. Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and
2. Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
STREET OR PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way, and similar
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 276/797
public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included within the definition of a street.
SUBSCRIBER OR CUSTOMER OR CONSUMER: Any person who, for any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video
programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT: Equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to
provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be
effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: Any provider of telecommunications service.
USC §: The United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47 USC § 153" refers to title 47, section 153, of the United States Code.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER: Any person or group of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract
for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video system.
VIDEO PROVIDER OR VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER: Any person, company, or entity that provides video programming to a residence, including,
without limitation, a home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate living complex, condominium, apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is
paid for that service, whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights of way are used in the delivery of that
video programming. A "video provider" or "video service provider" includes, without limitation, providers of video programming service, cable
television service, open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint
distribution services, and other providers of video programming, whatever the technology, including, without limitation, internet protocol and other
technologies defined as video service provider or video provider in state and federal law.
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not defined in this chapter will be given their meaning as used in title 47 of the United
States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in title 47 of the code of federal regulations. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-
30-2001; amd. Ord. 07-O-2536, eff. 12-14-2007)
Article 7. Violations; Severability
6-2-701: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
B. The misdemeanor penalty specified in subsection A of this section is not applicable to a violation of any provision of this chapter for which another
sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video
programming distributor or telecommunications service provider.
C. The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
6-2-702: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its subject
matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency
to require modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent part of this chapter, and such determination will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal
or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision of this chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no
longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the city and any affected
telecommunications service provider; provided, however, that the city must give the affected telecommunications service provider thirty (30) days' written
notice of that change before requiring compliance with that provision, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the
telecommunications service provider to comply with that provision. (Ord. 01-O-2372, eff. 3-30-2001)
Footnote 1: See also subsection A1i of this section.
Footnote 2: See also subsection B1 of this section.
Footnote 3: See also subsection B2 of this section.
Footnote 4: See also subsection B5 of this section.
Footnote 5: See also subsection C3 of this section.
Footnote 6: See also subsection C4 of this section.
Footnote 7: See also subsection C5 of this section.
Footnote 8: See also subsection C6 of this section.
Footnote 9: See also subsection F1 of this section.
Footnote 10: See also subsection I of this section.
Footnote 11: See also subsection F2 of this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 277/797
Chapter 3
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
6-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for the city to underground public utilities in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state
public utilities commission. (1988 Code)
6-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES, AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: That area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are
required to be underground pursuant to council resolution.
UTILITY: Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(1962 Code § 7-7.01)
6-3-3: PUBLIC HEARING:
Prior to ordering the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground
installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service, the council shall hold a public hearing. At least ten
(10) days prior to the date set for the hearing, the city clerk shall mail notices of the time and place of the hearing to all owners of affected property whose
names appear on the latest equalized assessment roll. All interested persons shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard at the public hearing. (1962
Code § 7-7.02)
6-3-4: REPORT OF DEPUTY CITY MANAGER OF CAPITAL ASSETS:
The deputy city manager of capital assets shall present to council for consideration at the public hearing a report containing information on the proposed
undergrounding, including, but not limited to, the extent of such utilities' participation, estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners,
and an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
6-3-5: DESIGNATION OF UTILITY DISTRICT:
During the public hearing, the council shall consider the report of the deputy city manager of capital assets, and the testimony and evidence of any
interested party. At the conclusion of the hearing, if the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order
such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall have underground service
available. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of the underground facilities. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
6-3-6: NOTIFICATION OF UNDERGROUNDING:
Within ten (10) days after council adoption of a resolution pursuant to section 6-3-5 of this chapter, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution to each
of the affected utilities and to each of the property owners whose names appeared on the latest equalized assessment roll. The city clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric,
communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises to receive such
service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the public utilities commission. (1962 Code § 7-7.05)
6-3-7: RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, the supplying
utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations,
and tariffs on file with the public utilities commission. (1962 Code § 7-7.09)
6-3-8: RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
A. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the
service connection on their property, and to the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, subject to the applicable rules,
regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the public utilities commission.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 278/797
B. In the event that any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this
section within the time provided for in the resolution adopted by the council, the deputy city manager of capital assets shall post written notice on the
property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. (1962 Code § 7-7.10; amd. Ord. 95-O-2233, eff. 3-24-1995; Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-
2013)
6-3-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY:
The city will remove, at its expense, all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in sufficient time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove such poles within the time specified by council resolution. (1962 Code § 7-7.11)
6-3-10: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter cannot be performed
within the time designated by the council, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished may be extended by the council. (1962 Code § 7-
7.12)
6-3-11: OVERHEAD UTILITIES PROHIBITED:
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein
as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service, and for such reasonable time
required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed. (1962 Code § 7-7.05)
Title 7
TRAFFIC, PARKING, AND PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
Chapter 1
AUTHORITY, ENFORCEMENT, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
7-1-1: LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY:
Provisions of this title governing traffic, parking, and public transportation are enacted under the authority of the state constitution, the city's police powers,
and provisions of the state Vehicle Code. (1962 Code § 3-4.101)
7-1-2: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
Council action shall be required to implement any traffic regulation only when an ordinance or resolution is specifically required by state law, with the
following exceptions:
A. The designation of any street or alley as one way only, or any change in the direction of an existing one-way street or alley shall require approval by the
city council prior to implementation.
B. The designation of any street, other than those streets specified in section 7-2-203 of this title, for use by vehicles having a gross weight, including the
vehicle and its load, in excess of three (3) tons shall require approval by city council prior to implementation. (1988 Code)
7-1-3: AUTHORITY OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
The traffic and parking commission shall have the authority and responsibility as set forth in title 2, chapter 2, article 7 ofthis code, and shall perform the
following specific functions:
A. The designation of any intersection requiring a vehicle to come to a full stop, or the installation or removal of any existing stop sign within the city, shall
require approval by the traffic and parking commission prior to implementation;
B. Hear appeals from any decision of the transportation/engineering official in granting or denying a permit under this title, where an appeal from such
decision is appealable to the traffic and parking commission; and
C. Perform such other functions and duties as set forth in this title. (1988 Code)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 279/797
7-1-4: AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE TRANSPORTATION OFFICIAL:
A. The transportation official shall have the authority and duty to implement such traffic and parking regulations as necessary or appropriate to facilitate
traffic and parking within the city, and to install, modify or remove any traffic devices; provided, further, that where council approval is required by
section 7-1-2 of this chapter, or traffic and parking commission approval is required prior to implementation, such approval shall be given prior to
implementation and enforcement. Traffic and parking regulations implemented by the transportation official shall be consistent with governing federal
and state laws, provisions of this code, and consistent with any direction of the city council or the city manager.
B. The transportation official shall have authority to issue parking permits as authorized by this title.
C. The transportation official shall be responsible for posting such signs as required by the city, or by the state Vehicle Code, and traffic or parking
regulations shall not be implemented or enforced until such signs are properly posted.
D. For purposes of this title, "transportation official" shall mean the director of transportation. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.103, 3-6.701, 3-6.901, amd. Ord. 99-O-
2340, eff. 1-7-2000)
7-1-5: AUTHORITY OF POLICE:
A. Police officers shall have the power and authority at all times in cases of emergency or the sudden or unusual temporary use of streets or traffic
congestion to close, open, reroute, or otherwise regulate the traffic or parking on all or any portion of any public street or alley.
B. Whenever the police chief shall determine that any emergency congestion may result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or
functions, or for other reasons, the police chief shall have the power and authority to ordertemporary signs posted prohibiting the operation, parking, or
stopping of vehicles on such streets or alleys.
C. Whenever the police chief determines that the holding of a private assemblage, gathering, or function necessitates the parking of automobiles
associated with such event in a residential zone with restricted parking requirements, written parking authorization, not exceeding six (6) hours may be
granted for such event, subject to such conditions as appropriate to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.103, 3-6.1013)
7-1-6: AUTHORITY OF FIRE PERSONNEL:
Authorized fire personnel shall have the power and authority in any situation involving an emergency response by the fire department to close, open, or
regulate traffic and parking on all or any portion of any public street or alley. (1962 Code § 3-6.301)
7-1-7: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
Whenever the city manager determines that the holding of a public or private assemblage, gathering, or function necessitates the parking of automobiles
associated with such event in a parking zone with restricted parking requirements, temporary parking authorization may be granted by the city manager for
such event, without regard to the parking restrictions, subject to appropriate conditions to protect the public health, welfare and safety. (1962 Code § 3-
4.114; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-8: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Police officers and such other personnel as authorized by the city shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this title. (1962 Code § 3-4.114; amd.
Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-9: DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC RESTRICTED TO DESIGNATED OFFICIALS:
No person, unless authorized pursuant to this chapter, or otherwise authorized by state law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, or other
signal. (1962 Code § 3-6.302; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-10: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The operator of any vehicle, including any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, and any county or city shall
be subject to the traffic regulations of this title, unless specifically exempted by the state Vehicle Code or other governing law. (1962 Code § 3-6.306;amd.
Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-11: APPLICATION OF PARKING, STANDING, AND STOPPING REGULATIONS:
All vehicles shall be subject to the standing, stopping, and parking provisions of chapter 3 of this title, with the following exceptions:
A. City police or fire vehicles.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 280/797
B. Private ambulance responding to an emergency situation.
C. City vehicles and public utility vehicles when necessary for use in construction, repair, or maintenance functions.
D. Any vehicle owned or operated by the United States postal service while in use for the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail. (1962
Code § 3-6.307; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-12: COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND DEVICES AND AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT
PERSONNEL:
A. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the parking or traffic regulations, or any traffic device installed under the provisions of this title.
B. No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the order, signal, or direction of police, fire, or other personnel authorized to enforce the provisions of this
title. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.403, 3-6.303; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-13: OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other person authorized to enforce the provisions of this title. The removal,
obliteration, or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other person authorized by the city to enforce the
parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. (1962 Code
§ 3-6.305; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
7-1-14: INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC SIGNS AND DEVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, remove, tamper with, or destroy any traffic or parking sign or device unless such action is authorized by the
city. (1962 Code § 3-6.806; amd. Ord. 97-O-2279, eff. 5-9-1997)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Article 1. Special Speed Zones
7-2-101: INCREASE OF STATE SPEED LIMIT IN CERTAIN ZONES:
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey pursuant to Vehicle Code 22357 that a speed greater than twenty five (25)
miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe upon the streets set forth in this section, and it
is further determined that the speeds designated herein are appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic in a reasonable and safe manner.
A. Thirty (30) miles per hour on:
Beverly Boulevard.
Coldwater Canyon Drive.
Wilshire Boulevard, that portion between the west City boundary and North Santa Monica Boulevard.
B. Thirty five (35) miles per hour on:
Benedict Canyon Drive.
Doheny Drive, that portion between Phyllis Street and Santa Monica Boulevard.
La Cienega Boulevard.
Olympic Boulevard.
San Vicente Boulevard, that portion within the boundaries of the city of Beverly Hills.
Santa Monica Boulevard.
Sunset Boulevard. (1962 Code § 3-6.1501; amd. Ord. 90-O-2094, eff. 7-19-1990; Ord. 04-O-2450, eff. 8-20-2004)
7-2-102: DECREASE OF STATE SPEED LIMIT ON CERTAIN GRADES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 281/797
It is hereby determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the prima facie speed limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour is more than is
reasonable and safe on the streets set forth in this section, and whereas such streets have grades in excess of ten percent (10%), it is determined and
declared that a maximum speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour is found appropriate, reasonable and safe to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic on
those portions of the streets designated herein:
Carla Ridge between Loma Vista Drive and Schuyler Road.
Hillcrest Road from Doheny Road to the north terminus of Hillcrest Road.
Loma Vista Drive between Castle Place and Evelyn Place.
Summit Drive between San Ysidro Drive and Benedict Canyon Drive. (1962 Code § 3-6.1602)
Article 2. Commercial Vehicle Restrictions
7-2-201: HEAVY VEHICLES RESTRICTED TO CERTAIN STREETS:
A. No person shall operate any vehicle having a gross weight, including the vehicle and its load, of three (3) tons or more on any street in the city except
on those streets designated in section 7-2-203 of this chapter or unless authorized by permit issued pursuant to subsection 8-2-3D of this code.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following:
1. Any passenger stage corporation, regulated by sections 1031 through 1046 of the California Public Utilities Code, whose certificate from the
California public utilities commission specifically provides for travel on the streets prohibited by subsection A of this section;
2. Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility;
3. Any vehicle operated by the city, or any employee thereof, in the course of regular or official city business;
4. Any vehicle of the military or naval forces of the United States or the duly authorized militia of the state in the proper performance of their duties.
(Ord. 16-O-2711, eff. 10-21-2016)
7-2-202: EMERGENCY OR NECESSARY USE OF RESTRICTED STREETS:
The following vehicles may use a street other than designated in section 7-2-203 of this chapter under the circumstances herein below:
A. Any passenger vehicle while operated, engaged, and used for the sole and exclusive purpose of picking up or discharging a passenger or passengers
at an origin or destination on any street in which the vehicle is prohibited;
B. Except as otherwise provided by title 9, chapter 8 of this code, any vehicle when necessary, for the purpose of making pick ups and deliveries of goods,
wares, or merchandise from or to any premises located on any prohibited street, or for the purpose of delivering materials on a prohibited street to be
used in the repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure for which a building permit has previously been obtained;
C. Whenever it is necessary for a vehicle to deviate from the streets designated in section 7-2-203 of this chapter for the purposes specified in subsection
A or B of this section, the vehicle shall travel from a street authorized by section 7-2-203 of this chapter to the destination by a route so that the point of
travel is the shortest possible distance over prohibited streets; provided however, if the additional distance of travel to reach the shortest route would
exceed two (2) miles, the vehicle may take the most direct route to its destination. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.1306, 3-6.1306.1; amd. Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-
29-2015)
7-2-203: STREETS DESIGNATED FOR HEAVY VEHICLE USAGE:
A. The following streets are designated for use by vehicles having a gross weight, including the vehicle and its load, of three (3) tons or more:
Alden Drive;
Beverly Boulevard;
Beverly Drive from the south city limits to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
Burton Way;
Camden Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
Civic Center Drive from Burton Way to Santa Monica Boulevard (south);
Crescent Drive between the north and south roadways of Santa Monica Boulevard;
Doheny Drive;
Foothill Road from Burton Way to Santa Monica Boulevard (south);
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 282/797
La Cienega Boulevard;
Linden Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (south);
Maple Drive from Burton Way to Santa Monica Boulevard (south);
Olympic Boulevard;
Rexford Drive from Santa Monica Boulevard (north) to Burton Way;
Robertson Boulevard;
Roxbury Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
San Vicente Boulevard;
Santa Monica Boulevard (north roadway);
Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway except from Wilshire Boulevard to Beverly Drive);
Third Street;
Wilshire Boulevard.
B. The following streets are designated for use by vehicles having a gross weight, including the vehicle and its load, of three (3) tons or more, but not
exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds:
Bedford Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
Brighton Way from Canon Drive to Wilshire Boulevard;
Canon Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
Dayton Way from Canon Drive to Wilshire Boulevard;
Rodeo Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard (north);
Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway from Wilshire Boulevard to Beverly Drive). (Ord. 15-O-2694, eff. 12-18-2015; amd. Ord. 16-O-2711, eff. 10-21-
2016)
7-2-204: CONSTRUCTION HAULING PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any truck required to have a class D permit under subsection 8-2-3D of this code to travel on any street within the city not
designated on the route prescribed on the permit. (Ord. 90-O-2088, eff. 2-8-1990)
7-2-205: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS WITHOUT PERMISSION:
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on, or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area without the consent of the owner
or occupant of such property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. For the purposes of this section, a
commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half (1/2) ton. (1962 Code § 3-6.803)
7-2-206: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of sections 7-2-207, 7-2-208, 7-2-209, 7-2-210, and 7-2-211 of this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:
LIMOUSINE: A motor propelled sedan or sport utility vehicle of either standard or extended length, with a lawful seating capacity of not more than ten (10)
passengers, including the driver, and used in the transportation of passengers for hire on a prearranged basis.
STAGE OR STAGING: Parking a tour bus as authorized by sections 7-2-207 through 7-2-209 of this chapter, and waiting until loading passengers as
authorized by sections 7-2-207 through 7-2-209 of this chapter.
TAXICAB: Any motor propelled vehicle which, for compensation fixed by a "taximeter" as defined in section 7-4-101 of this title, is used for the
transportation of passengers and which is not operated over a fixed route.
TOUR BUS: Any motor propelled vehicle that is used for the transportation of passengers over the streets of the City for the purpose of showing points of
interest or showing or exhibiting lands, houses, property, or any other thing or object for consideration or compensation and licensed for such use by the
Public Utilities Commission, except taxicabs and limousines. (Ord. 18-O-2747, 2-9-2018)
7-2-207: TOUR BUS LOADING ZONES ESTABLISHMENT AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in the spaces identified as tour bus loading
zones during the time period posted.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 283/797
B. The transportation official is authorized to establish tour bus loading zones for any day and period of time on any nonresidential street for a distance of
up to twelve (12) metered parking spaces or two hundred forty feet (240'), whichever is less, when the transportation official finds that it is necessary to
provide tour buses a safe and convenient location from which to load and unload passengers so as not to interfere with other traffic in the business
districts of the City. Prior to establishing a tour bus loading zone, the transportation official shall consult with the Traffic and Parking Commission as to
whether a tour bus loading zone should be established. In all other circumstances, tour bus loading zones may be established by resolution of the City
Council.
C. Tour buses shall not load and unload passengers in any location other than a designated tour bus loading zone.
D. Tour buses shall not utilize the tour bus loading zone except for the active loading or unloading of passengers. All other stopping, parking or standing of
tour buses shall take place in the tour bus staging zones as set forth in section 7-2-208 of this chapter.
E. A decision of the transportation official may be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 99-O-2323, eff. 3-19-1999; amd. Ord. 02-O-2397, eff. 6-7-2002)
7-2-208: TOUR BUS STAGING ZONES ESTABLISHMENT AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided for in this section, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in the spaces identified as tour bus staging
zones during the time period posted.
B. The transportation official is authorized to establish tour bus staging zones for any day and period of time on any nonresidential street for a distance of
up to twelve (12) metered parking spaces or two hundred forty feet (240'), whichever is less, when the transportation official finds that it is necessary to
provide tour buses a safe and convenient location from which tour buses may stage their tour bus operations so as not to interfere with other traffic in
the business districts of the City. Prior to establishing a tour bus staging zone, the transportation official shall consult with the Traffic and Parking
Commission as to whether a tour bus staging zone should be established. In all other circumstances, tour bus staging zones may be established by
resolution of the City Council.
C. Tour bus operators shall utilize staging zones to park their tour bus and to wait, as authorized in this section and section 7-2-209 of this chapter.
D. Tour bus operators shall not stage their vehicles in any location except designated tour bus staging zones.
E. No tour buses shall park in the tour bus staging zones for a period in excess of the time posted.
F. A decision of the transportation official may be appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 99-O-2323, eff. 3-19-1999; amd. Ord. 02-O-2397, eff. 6-7-2002)
7-2-209: TOUR BUS ENGINE OPERATION IN LOADING AND STAGING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the engine of a tour bus to operate while the tour bus is parked in a tour bus loading or staging zone. (Ord. 99-O-2323, eff. 3-19-
1999)
7-2-210: SIGHTSEEING VEHICLE PROHIBITED FROM PICK UP OR DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
No tour bus shall stop, park, pick up or discharge any passenger in any residential zoned area in the City. For purposes of this section, "tour bus" is
defined in section 7-2-206 of this Code. (1962 Code § 3-6.1018; amd. Ord. 99-O-2323, eff. 3-19-1999)
7-2-211: RESTRICTIONS ON MODIFIED ROOF TOUR BUSES:
All persons presenting information or entertainment to passengers on a tour bus which has had its roof substantially modified or removed, must do so
through a system requiring passenger use of headphones or earphones. No person shall use a loudspeaker, public address system or other voice
amplification device, other than those requiring passenger use of headphones or earphones, on a tour bus which has had its roof substantially modified or
removed. (Ord. 18-O-2747, eff. 2-9-2018)
Article 3. Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations
7-2-301: OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMISSION PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any motor vehicle, motorcycle, minibike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter,
jeep, or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine upon the private property of another or upon public property which is
not held open to the public for vehicular use, unless such person has in their possession at the time of such operation, the written permission of the
occupant or owner of such property.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the occupant, owner, employees, agents, and leasees of such property, and to authorized governmental
personnel. (1962 Code § 3-6.2101-4)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 284/797
7-2-302: WAITING PROHIBITED AT PARKING FACILITY ENTRANCE:
When a parking facility displays signs required by section 4-4-203 of this Code stating "Lot Full" or "Entrance Closed", it shall be unlawful for any person to
stop a vehicle on public property in front of the facility for purposes of ingressing to such parking facility. (1962 Code § 3-6.1017)
7-2-303: DRIVING THROUGH PARADES AND FUNERAL PROCESSIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle between those vehicles comprising a funeral procession, or those vehicles comprising a parade where
such funeral or parade vehicles are conspicuously designated. (1962 Code § 3-6.801)
7-2-304: VEHICLES RESTRICTED TO APPROVED INGRESS OR EGRESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as approved by the City.
(1962 Code § 3-6.807)
7-2-305: STOP REQUIRED FOR VEHICLES EMERGING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS, OR BUILDINGS:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk
area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (1962 Code § 3-6.703)
7-2-306: DRIVING CERTAIN EQUIPMENT ON PUBLIC STREETS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to move, or cause to be moved, upon any street, alley or public thoroughfare any equipment which causes scratching,
cutting, breaking or other injury to the surface of such street, alley, or thoroughfare without written authorization from the City. (1962 Code § 3-6.810)
7-2-307: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
Any person operating a bicycle shall comply with the provisions of sections 5-5-8 and 5-6-801 of this Code. (1988 Code)
7-2-308: DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, ride, or propel any vehicle upon any sidewalk, except over a permanently constructed driveway; provided
further when there are unusual circumstances necessitating driving a vehicle across a sidewalk at a point other than a permanent driveway for purposes of
loading or unloading such vehicle, written authorization may be granted by the transportation/engineering official. (1962 Code § 3-6.804)
7-2-309: REPORT REQUIRED WHEN DAMAGE CAUSED TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. It shall be the responsibility of the operator of any vehicle which is involved in any accident involving any damage to any property owned by the city, any
public agency, or any public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole,
tree, traffic control device, or other property of a like nature located in or along any street or alley, to file a written report with the city police department
within twenty four (24) hours of such accident.
B. Such report shall state the time and place where the accident occurred, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in
charge of any vehicle involved, the license number of such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damaged in such accident.
C. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section during such time as physically
incapable of making a report; however, such report shall be made within twenty four (24) hours after such person regains the ability to make such
report. (1962 Code § 3-6.308)
Article 4. Solicitation Prohibited
7-2-401: SOLICITATION AND DISTRIBUTION IN THE PUBLIC ROADWAY:
No person may, while in the roadway of any street, offer for sale, solicit the sale of, sell, distribute, or announce by any means the availability of, any
goods, merchandise, printed material, or other item. (Ord. 89-O-2071, eff. 9-5-1989)
7-2-402: SOLICITATION OF PERSONS TRAVELING BY VEHICLE:
A. No person may use any portion of the public right of way to offer for sale, solicit the sale of, sell, distribute, or announce by any means the availability of,
any goods, merchandise, printed material, or other item to any person traveling by vehicle along the following streets or in the following areas:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 285/797
1. Sunset Boulevard;
2. Santa Monica Boulevard;
3. Wilshire Boulevard;
4. Olympic Boulevard;
5. Robertson Boulevard;
6. Doheny Drive;
7. That portion of Beverly Drive South of Wilshire Boulevard;
8. Any portion of the public right of way within one hundred feet (100') of any intersection involving any street listed in subsections A1 through A7 of this
section; or
9. Any portion of the public right of way in the area bounded by, and including, Wilshire Boulevard to the south, Santa Monica Boulevard to the north,
and Crescent Drive to the east. (Ord. 89-O-2071, eff. 9-5-1989)
Article 5. Mobile Billboard Advertising Displays And Advertising On Vehicles
7-2-501: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to eliminate mobile billboard advertising displays and advertising on vehicles within the city to promote the safe movement of
vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and to improve the aesthetic appearance of the city. This article is adopted pursuant to California Vehicle Code
sections 21100(m) and (p). (Ord. 15-O-2684, eff. 9-4-2015)
7-2-502: DEFINITION:
"Mobile billboard advertising display" means an advertising display that is attached to a mobile, nonmotorized vehicle, device, or bicycle, that carries, pulls,
or transports a sign or billboard, and is for the primary purpose of advertising. (Ord. 15-O-2684, eff. 9-4-2015)
7-2-503: PROHIBITION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, cause to be transported, park or leave standing any mobile billboard advertising display upon any public
street, or other public place within the city in which the public has the right of travel.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing upon a public street any motor vehicle with an advertising sign on the motor vehicle, except
for: 1) advertising signs that are permanently affixed to the body of, an integral part of, or a mixture of the motor vehicle for permanent decoration,
identification, or display and that do not extend beyond the overall length, width, or height of the vehicle; or 2) paper advertisements issued by a dealer
contained within a license plate frame or any advertisements on a license plate frame, if the license plate frame is properly installed in compliance with
section 5201 of the Vehicle Code.
1. As used in this subsection B, "permanently affixed" means any of the following:
a. Painted directly on the body of a motor vehicle;
b. Applied as a decal on the body of a motor vehicle; or
c. Placed in a location on the body of a motor vehicle that was specifically designed by a licensed vehicle manufacturer, in compliance with both state
and federal law or guidelines, for the express purpose of containing an advertising sign. (Ord. 15-O-2684, eff. 9-4-2015)
7-2-504: PENALTIES:
A. Any peace officer, or any regularly employed and salaried city employee who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations,
may remove a mobile billboard advertising display or a vehicle with an advertising sign on it if:
1. The mobile billboard advertising display or vehicle is parked or left standing upon any public street or public property within the city in violation of this
article; and
2. The registered owner of the mobile billboard advertising display or vehicle was previously issued a warning citation for a previous violation of this
article that notified such registered owner that he or she may be subject to penalties that may include removal of the mobile billboard advertising
display or vehicle upon a subsequent violation of this article.
B. A violation of this article is a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2684, eff. 9-4-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 286/797
Chapter 3
STANDING, STOPPING, PARKING
Article 1. General Standing, Stopping, And Parking Provisions
7-3-101: COLOR DESIGNATION FOR RESTRICTED PARKING AND STOPPING AREAS:
No vehicle shall be stopped or parked in violation of designated curb markings which shall have the following restrictions and prohibitions:
A. Red shall prohibit stopping at all times, except a bus may stop in a red zone which is designated as a bus stop.
B. Yellow shall prohibit parking on each day Monday through Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of each day. During such
time, stopping shall be permitted as follows:
1. For a period not to exceed three (3) minutes for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or baggage or for the purpose of commercial pick
up or delivery.
2. For a period not to exceed twenty (20) minutes for commercial vehicles while loading or unloading materials for commercial purposes.
C. Yellow with distinguishing signage shall prohibit parking each day during the hours as posted. During such time, stopping shall be permitted, for a
period not to exceed the time limit as posted, for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers and baggage or customer loading and unloading of
goods, including pick up and delivery and other customer needs. These zones shall be identified by signage indicating that customer loading is
permitted for the prescribed time period.
D. White shall prohibit stopping at all times except for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, or for
the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox.
E. Green shall prohibit parking in excess of twenty (20) minutes each day Monday through Saturday from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
P.M.
F. Blue shall prohibit parking except for vehicles of physically handicapped persons as defined in sections 22511.5 and 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code and
which have prominently displayed while parked a handicapped license plate or placard issued by the state.
G. White with distinguishing signage shall prohibit parking each day during the days and hours as posted. During such time, stopping shall be permitted for
a prescribed time period, not to exceed twenty (20) minutes, for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in
an adjacent mailbox. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.1202, 3-6.1203, 3-6.1204, 3-6.1205; amd. Ord. 97-O-2284, eff. 11-17-1997; Ord. 03-O-2435, eff. 1-2-2004)
7-3-102: PARKING OR STOPPING IN VIOLATION OF POSTED SIGNS:
A. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped in violation of posted signs which restrict or prohibit the parking or stopping of such vehicle.
B. No vehicle shall be parked for a period in excess of the time permitted by the posted sign.
C. In order to facilitate street cleaning, no vehicle shall be parked or left standing during the hours and on the day or days indicated by the posted sign.
D. No vehicle shall be stopped in violation of the posted signs which prohibit the stopping of such vehicle. (1962 Code § 3-6.1003; amd. Ord. 88-O-2043,
eff. 11-10-1988; Ord. 04-O-2442, eff. 2-6-2004)
7-3-103: PARKING ON GRADES:
No vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on any street where the grade exceeds three percent (3%) unless the wheels of such vehicle are blocked by
turning the wheels against the curb. (1962 Code § 3-6.1011)
7-3-104: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NONPAVED SURFACE:
It shall be unlawful to park or stand any vehicle on any surface which is not improved to the minimum surfacing standards set forth in this code; except for
construction activities pursuant to a grading or building permit issued by the city, or for an activity performed for or on behalf of the city. (1962 Code § 3-
6.1014)
7-3-105: PARKING PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 287/797
A. It shall be unlawful to stop or park a vehicle on private property without the express or implied consent of the owner or the person in lawful possession
of such property where appropriate signs are posted which prohibit parking on such property.
B. The owner or lessee of any vacant lot with a unimproved surface shall post clearly visible signs that parking thereon is prohibited, and violators will be
cited pursuant to this section. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.1014, 3-6.1015)
7-3-106: UNAUTHORIZED PARKING ON PUBLIC PREMISES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park or leave standing a motor vehicle in or upon any parkway, public park, public school site, or other off street property of the city, or of
the Beverly Hills Unified School District, or of any public utility, except as otherwise provided in this code, unless such person first shall have obtained
permission for use of such property. Such permission may be evidenced in writing or by a sign or other physical evidence of invitation or permission to
park thereon. (1962 Code § 3-6.2201)
7-3-107: UNAUTHORIZED PARKING IN PUBLIC PARKING FACILITIES:
When council has designated certain property as a public parking facility, or has restricted parking space for parking by permit only, or where parking
meters, signs, lines, or other physical evidence indicates the manner in which motor vehicles must be parked thereon, or restricts the time of day or period
of time during which motor vehicles may be left standing thereon, any violation of any such signs, lines, parking meters, directions, or notices shall
constitute a violation of this code. (1962 Code § 3-6.2201)
7-3-108: MOVEMENT OF VEHICLES TO CIRCUMVENT POSTED PARKING RESTRICTIONS PROHIBITED:
A. Where a vehicle has been parked in an area which restricts parking to a specific time interval, regardless of the time parked in such area, such vehicle
shall not be reparked within a distance of five hundred feet (500') of the place initially parked within a period of four (4) hours thereafter.
B. Vehicles used for vending or peddling purposes shall also comply with the parking restrictions of section 4-2-705 of this code. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.1012,
3-6.1101(d))
7-3-109: PARKING WITHIN DESIGNATED MARKINGS:
Where any parking space has pavement markings designating the allotted parking space, vehicles shall be parked entirely within the designated limits of
such parking space, unless the length of the vehicle precludes compliance with this section. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.1104, 3-4.104)
7-3-110: SUCCESSIVE PARKING VIOLATIONS FOR EXTENDED ILLEGAL PARKING:
Where a vehicle is cited for a parking violation and remains illegally parked for a successive interval of time which again exceeds the maximum allowable
parking interval, this extended parking constitutes a second and separate parking violation subject to the following limitations:
A. The vehicle has been parked a minimum of two (2) hours since issuance of the initial citation; and
B. Not more than two (2) citations may be issued for continuous illegal parking within any twenty four (24) hour period. (1962 Code § 3-6.311)
7-3-111: CLASS 1 PARKING PERMITS:
A. A vehicle which bears a Class 1 parking permit and is being used for City business may park:
1. In a parking meter space without the deposit of any coin in the adjacent parking meter.
2. In a parking meter space or in a nonmetered parking space for a period of time in excess of the posted maximum parking time permitted, but not
during posted peak hour parking restriction periods.
3. In any preferential parking zone.
4. In any parking lot or structure owned by the City without payment of the required fees and in excess of the maximum permitted time for parking.
B. A Class 1 permit shall be issued by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee only as follows:
1. One permit for each vehicle legally registered to each current and former member of the City Council and each current and former City Treasurer.
2. One permit for each vehicle legally registered to each current member of the Planning, Architectural, Design Review, Traffic and Parking, Human
Relations, Public Works, Recreation and Parks, Fine Art, Health and Safety, Charitable Solicitations and Cultural Heritage Commissions. When a
Commissioner ceases to be on a commission, the permit issued to the holder under this subsection B2 is deemed void and is invalid for the uses set
forth in this section. The permit holder shall return the permit(s) to the City Manager.
3. One permit to the current City Manager, current City Attorney, current City Clerk, current City Auditor, and each current executive management
employee designated in the City's executive compensation plan. When such persons cease to be an employee of the City or are no longer in the
position of City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk, or City Auditor, or are no longer an executive management employee, the permit issued to the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 288/797
holder under this subsection B3 is deemed void and is invalid for the uses set forth in this section. The permit holder shall return the permit(s) to the
City Manager.
4. Notwithstanding any other provision in this subsection B, no more than two (2) permits shall be issued per household. For the purposes of this
section, "household" shall be defined as all persons who dwell within the same dwelling unit.
C. Class 1 permits shall be displayed in the lower left corner of the front windshield of the vehicle. (1962 Code § 3-4.107; amd. Ord. 88-O-2023, eff. 6-2-
1988; Ord. 89-O-2064, eff. 7-6-1989; Ord. 90-O-2108, eff. 1-11-1991; Ord. 91-O-2112, eff. 4-19-1991; Ord. 92-O-2148, eff. 9-11-1992; Ord. 98-O-2303,
eff. 7-2-1998; Ord. 01-O-2364, eff. 2-2-2001; Ord. 01-O-2385, eff. 11-23-2001; Ord. 09-O-2575, eff. 1-15-2010; Ord. 10-O-2595, eff. 12-5-2010; Ord.
12-O-2620, eff. 3-23-2012; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014; Ord. 18-O-2764, eff. 12-7-2018)
7-3-112: STOPPING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall stop a vehicle in any alley except as provided in this section.
A. Commercial Alleys: In those alleys that are bordered on one or both sides by commercial property, a person may stop a vehicle as provided in this
subsection where there are yellow alley edge markings.
1. Stopping shall be allowed only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday. Stopping
shall not be allowed on Sundays.
2. Stopping shall only be permitted for the purposes of loading or unloading of passengers or baggage, making a commercial delivery or pick up, or
loading or unloading materials for commercial purposes.
3. Stopping shall be restricted to a period not to exceed three (3) minutes except that commercial vehicles may stop for a period not to exceed twenty
(20) minutes while loading or unloading materials for commercial purposes.
B. Residential Alleys: In those alleys bordered on one or both sides by residential property, a person may stop a vehicle as provided in this subsection
where there are no alley edge markings.
1. Stopping shall be allowed only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
2. Stopping shall only be permitted for the purposes of loading or unloading of passengers, baggage or materials to serve adjacent residential property.
3. Stopping shall be restricted to a period not to exceed three (3) minutes, unless the driver is actively loading or unloading the vehicle as provided in
subsection B4 of this section.
4. Stopping shall be restricted to a period not to exceed twenty (20) minutes while the driver is actively loading or unloading a vehicle. For the purposes
of this subsection, a driver shall not be considered to be "actively loading or unloading" a vehicle if the driver is away from the vehicle for a period of
more than three (3) minutes.
5. Stopping shall only be permitted on the portion of the alley bordering residential property.
C. Obstruction Or Hazard Prohibited: In no event shall any vehicle be stopped in a manner that obstructs traffic or creates a hazard, nor shall this section
be construed to limit the authority of the city to remove a vehicle which creates an obstruction or hazard as set forth in Vehicle Code section 22651(b).
(Ord. 88-O-2043, eff. 11-10-1988; amd. Ord. 00-O-2344, eff. 2-18-2000; Ord. 01-O-2369, eff. 3-8-2001)
7-3-113: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
A. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing in violation of this code upon a street for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours from the issuance of a
written warning or citation for the violation of this code shall be subject to removal.
B. Any vehicle which is stopped, parked or left standing in an "antigridlock zone" as defined in section 7-3-121 of this chapter during peak hours in violation
of this code shall be subject to removal. (Ord. 06-O-2509, eff. 12-22-2006)
7-3-114: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; SPACES USED BY AUTHORIZED AUTOMOBILE PARKING SERVICE:
In addition to the grounds for removal specified in the California Vehicle Code, and pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22651(n), vehicles parked
in a space lawfully used by an automobile parking service pursuant to a valid valet parking permit issued pursuant to title 4, chapter 2, article 15 of this
code during any time when such automobile parking service is authorized to operate valet parking operations, shall be subject to removal by the city or its
authorized agent. (Ord. 92-O-2158, eff. 12-18-1992)
7-3-114.1: REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; TOUR BUS LOADING AND STAGING ZONES:
In addition to the grounds for removal specified in the California Vehicle Code, and pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22651(n), vehicles
unlawfully parked, stopped or standing, in a designated tour bus loading or staging zone are subject to removal by the city. (Ord. 99-O-2323, eff. 2-16-
1999; amd. Ord. 02-O-2397, eff. 6-7-2002)
7-3-115: VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS DENIED IF OUTSTANDING PARKING PENALTIES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 289/797
Parking permits issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall not be issued to any applicant unless all outstanding parking penalties and other related
fees are paid in full pursuant to the provisions set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993)
7-3-116: REQUIREMENT OF PAYING POSTED RATE IN MUNICIPAL PARKING FACILITIES:
No vehicle shall be parked in a municipal parking facility and thereafter removed from the facility without paying the parking attendant the posted parking
facility rate at the time the vehicle is removed. (Ord. 98-O-2312, eff. 10-23-1998)
7-3-117: UNLAWFUL USE OF INVALID DISABLED PLACARD:
A. No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon any street, highway or in a parking stall or space of an off street parking facility when the vehicle displays,
in order to obtain special parking privileges, a disabled placard and: 1) the department of motor vehicles record for the identification number assigned
to such placard indicates that such placard either: a) has been reported as lost, stolen, surrendered, canceled, revoked or expired; or b) was issued to
a person who has been reported as being deceased for a period exceeding sixty (60) days; 2) the placard is displayed on a vehicle that is not being
used to transport, and is not in the reasonable proximity of, the person to whom the license plate or placard was issued or a person who is authorized
to be transported in the vehicle displaying that placard or license plate; or 3) the placard is counterfeit, forged, altered or mutilated.
B. For purposes of this section, "disabled placard" means a distinguishing placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22511.55.
C. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by California Vehicle Code section 22511.57. (Ord. 99-O-2334, eff. 10-22-1999; amd. Ord.
05-O-2475, eff. 7-22-2005; Ord. 13-O-2645, eff. 10-11-2013)
7-3-118: PARKING OF LIMOUSINES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any limousine on any street within a residential zone, except for the immediate loading and unloading of
passengers. For purposes of this section and section 7-3-119 of this chapter, "limousine" shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 7-2-206 of
this title. (Ord. 02-O-2418, eff. 1-3-2003)
7-3-119: LIMOUSINE STAGING ZONES ESTABLISHMENT AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section for limousines, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle in the spaces identified as
limousine staging zones during the time period posted.
B. The transportation official is authorized to establish limousine staging zones for any day and period of time on any nonresidential street for a distance of
up to twelve (12) metered parking spaces or two hundred forty feet (240'), whichever is less, when the transportation official finds that it is necessary to
provide limousines a safe and convenient location from which limousines may stage their limousine operations so as not to interfere with other traffic in
the business and residential zones of the city. In all other circumstances, limousine staging zones may be established by resolution of the city council.
C. Limousine operators may utilize staging zones to park their limousines and to wait, as authorized in this section.
D. No limousines shall park in the limousine staging zones for a period in excess of the time posted.
E. A decision of the transportation official may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 02-O-2418, eff. 1-3-2003)
7-3-120: TEMPORARY PARKING RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED:
A. For purposes of this section, the following words have the following meanings:
NATURAL DISASTER: Any fire, flood, storm, earthquake or other similar public calamity resulting from natural causes.
PEAK HOUR: The hours in which weekday traffic flow is the heaviest for the day as established by the resolution adopted by the city council restricting
the stopping, parking and standing of vehicles during peak hours on certain streets in the city.
B. The transportation official is authorized to temporarily modify the existing peak hour stopping, parking and standing restriction on any street to any
period of time and on any day, whenever the transportation official finds that traffic congestion on the street with the peak hour restriction is likely to
result from the stopping, parking or standing of vehicles during the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of that street or any street within the
vicinity, or as a result of a natural disaster and the modification is necessary in order to facilitate the proper movement of traffic. In all other
circumstances, modifications to existing peak hour stopping, parking and standing restrictions may be established by resolution of the city council.
C. The transportation official shall place or cause to be placed signs on such street giving notice of the modified restriction during the existence of the
condition set forth in subsection B of this section. Once the condition ceases to exist, the previous peak hour restriction shall continue to be in effect.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 290/797
D. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle
during the time and day period posted on such signs.
E. The transportation official shall provide notice of the modification of the peak hour stopping, parking and standing restriction to the city council within
thirty (30) days of taking action. If the modification remains in place for one hundred twenty (120) days, the transportation official shall provide a report
to the city council on or before the one hundred twentieth day regarding the existence of the condition of the street with the modified peak hour
restriction. This report shall be provided to the council for every subsequent one hundred twenty (120) day period until the transportation official or the
city council determines that the condition set forth in subsection B of this section ceases to exist. (Ord. 03-O-2433, eff. 12-6-2003)
7-3-121: PARKING PROHIBITED IN ANTIGRIDLOCK ZONES:
A. For purposes of this section, the following words have the following meanings:
ANTIGRIDLOCK ZONE: Arterial streets designated by the transportation official on which the stopping, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited
during peak hours to ensure that the curb lane is available as an additional, continuous lane for through traffic in order to avoid gridlock during peak
hours.
PEAK HOURS: The hours in which weekday traffic flow is the heaviest for the day as designated by the transportation official.
B. The transportation official is authorized to establish antigridlock zones on any arterial streets in the city during peak hours.
C. The transportation official shall place or cause to be placed signs on such streets giving notice of the antigridlock zone and that any vehicle stopped,
parked or left standing in violation thereof may be removed.
D. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice of an antigridlock zone, no person shall stop, park or leave standing
any vehicle during the time and day period posted on such signs. Vehicles stopped, parked or left standing may be removed. (Ord. 06-O-2509, eff. 12-
22-2006)
7-3-122: PARKING PROHIBITED IN VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE AND REMOVAL OF VEHICLES:
A. For purposes of this section, the following phrase has the following meaning:
VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE: An area included within the boundaries described and set forth in a map prepared and maintained by
the fire chief and on file in the office of the fire marshal, 445 North Rexford Drive.
B. When the on duty city battalion chief ("battalion chief") determines there is an increased fire danger, the on duty battalion chief may restrict parking on
streets in areas designated a very high fire hazard severity zone for the duration of the projected threat.
C. The on duty battalion chief is authorized to conspicuously post signs on such streets giving notice of "severe fire conditions" and that parking is
restricted as set forth in this section.
D. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are posted, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle during the period that the
signs indicate "Severe Fire Conditions". Any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing shall be subject to removal.
E. In the event of any major conflagration or other fire related emergency requiring police action, the city may remove any vehicle that is stopped, parked
or left standing in such a way as to prevent the mobility of fire apparatus or whose removal is necessary to ensure public safety whether or not signs
are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 09-O-2562, eff. 2-6-2009)
7-3-123: PARKING OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
A. No person shall stop, park or leave standing upon any street that is designated by the director of community development within a residential zone a
vehicle having any of the following:
1. A manufacturer's rated load capacity greater than three-fourths (3/4) of a ton;
2. A length in excess of twenty one feet (21').
Any vehicle stopped, parked or left standing shall be subject to removal.
B. The following vehicles are hereby exempt from the provisions of this section:
1. Any authorized emergency vehicle, any authorized highway work vehicle or any vehicle used in the construction, installation, or repair of a utility or a
public utility in accordance with sections 22512 and 35704 of the California Vehicle Code;
2. Any vehicle engaged in loading or unloading adjacent to the residence;
3. Any vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise adjacent to the residence;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 291/797
4. Any vehicle picking up or delivering materials used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or
structure for which an encroachment permit or construction permit has been obtained adjacent to the residence;
5. Any vehicle operated by the city, or any employee thereof, in the course of regular or official city business.
C. The director of community development is authorized to designate the streets subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section. Upon
such designation, the director of community development shall place or cause to be placed signs on said streets giving notice of the restriction. (Ord.
09-O-2569, eff. 11-6-2009; amd. Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
7-3-124: SP PARKING PERMITS:
A. For purposes of this section, "street block" is defined as the portion of a street that lies between two (2) immediately intersecting streets, and includes
both the side of the street immediately adjacent to a school property and the opposite side of the street.
B. A vehicle which bears an SP parking permit may park as follows while being used for official Beverly Hills unified school district business:
1. In a nonmetered parking space for a period of time in excess of the posted maximum parking time permitted on a street block adjacent to Beverly
Vista School, El Rodeo School, Hawthorne School and Horace Mann School, except as follows:
a. During posted peak hour parking restriction periods.
b. The SP parking permit may not be used on a street block adjacent to Horace Mann School after construction of the underground parking facility on
the Horace Mann School campus is completed.
2. In any preferential parking permit zone on a street block adjacent to Beverly Vista School, El Rodeo School, Hawthorne School and Horace Mann
School, except as follows:
a. The SP parking permit may not be used on a street block adjacent to Horace Mann School after construction of the underground parking facility on
the Horace Mann School campus is completed.
3. In the city operated parking structure, located at 450 North Rexford Drive, without payment of the required fees and in excess of the maximum
permitted time for parking.
C. An SP parking permit shall be issued by the director of public works services only as follows:
1. One permit to each current member of the Beverly Hills unified school district board of education. When such persons cease to be on the Beverly
Hills unified school district board of education, the SP parking permit issued to the holder under this subsection C1 is deemed void and is invalid for
the uses set forth in this section. The permit holder shall return the permit to the director of public works services.
2. One permit each to the following employees of the Beverly Hills unified school district: a) superintendent of schools; b) chief academic officer; c)
director of student services and special projects; and d) chief administrative officer. When such persons cease to be an employee of the Beverly Hills
unified school district or are no longer in the position listed herein, the SP parking permit issued to the holder under this subsection C2 is deemed
void and is invalid for the uses set forth in this section. The permit holder shall return the permit to the director of public works services.
D. SP parking permits shall be displayed in the lower left corner of the front windshield of a vehicle legally registered to a person issued a permit under this
section. (Ord. 15-O-2685, eff. 9-18-2015)
Article 2. Preferential Parking
7-3-201: TITLE:
This article of the Beverly Hills municipal code may be referred to as the PREFERENTIAL PARKING MASTER PLAN ORDINANCE of the city of Beverly
Hills. (1962 Code § 3-6.2203; amd. Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-202: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to create a preferential parking program which is necessary in order to alleviate the severe lack of on street parking on certain
residential streets in the city caused primarily by commuter vehicle traffic and to provide reasonably available and convenient parking for the adjacent
residents. The preferential parking program consists of a preferential parking district within which zones are established which are aimed at reducing
noise, traffic hazards, and environmental pollution and encouraging car pooling, telecommuting and mass transit. (1962 Code § 3-6.2203; amd. Ord. 90-O-
2095, eff. 8-9-1990; Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-203: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
COMMUTER: A motor vehicle parked in a residential area which is not owned, leased or otherwise controlled by a resident who lives in the area
designated as a preferential parking zone.
DWELLING UNIT: Any single-family residence or any multiple residential unit. "Dwelling unit" shall also include any congregate care facility, as defined in
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 292/797
section 10-3-1260 or 10-3-1286 of this code, that is not ineligible for participation in a preferential parking zone pursuant to section 7-3-205.5 of this
chapter. "Dwelling unit" shall not include hotel guestrooms or suites.
EXISTING ZONE: A preferential parking zone established by resolution of the city council on or before July 2, 1993.
GUEST: A person who visits or is employed by an occupant of a dwelling unit located in a preferential parking zone.
PARKING RESTRICTION: The amount of time and/or time of day vehicles may park on the street in a preferential parking zone. Such restrictions may
include, without limitation, "one hour parking except by permit", "two hour parking except by permit", "no parking except by permit", and "no parking 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m. except by permit".
PREFERENTIAL PARKING: A street block or group of street blocks where vehicles displaying a valid permit shall be exempt from certain daytime and
nighttime parking restrictions.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT: A group of street blocks having similar land use designations and which are eligible for inclusion in a preferential
parking zone upon approval of the city council.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING MASTER PLAN AREA: The residentially zoned area of the city south of North Santa Monica Boulevard.
PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONE: A street block or group of street blocks that are designated for preferential parking by the city council.
RESIDENT: A person who lives in a dwelling unit located in a preferential parking zone.
STREET: The same as set forth in title 1 of this code, except that street shall not include alleys.
STREET BLOCK: The portion of a street that lies between two (2) immediately intersecting streets. If a street block has two (2) residential land use
designations and an alley is intersecting that street block, a street block shall mean that portion of the street that lies between the alley and the nearest
intersecting street. (1962 Code § 3-6.2204; amd. Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 94-O-2198, eff. 4-22-1994; Ord. 02-O-2405, eff. 9-20-2002; Ord. 03-
O-2432, eff. 11-21-2003)
7-3-204: PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICT:
A preferential parking district is hereby established and shall be comprised of certain residential street blocks that are located within the preferential
parking master plan area. A map designating such street blocks shall be prepared and maintained on file in the office of the director of transportation.
Street blocks included in this district are eligible for inclusion into an existing or new preferential parking zone in accordance with the procedure set forth in
section 7-3-206 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 3-6.2204; amd. Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-205: CERTAIN AREAS WHERE PREFERENTIAL PARKING IS NOT ALLOWED:
No preferential parking zone shall be established on any of the following types of street blocks:
A. Street blocks on an arterial street as designated in the city's general plan.
B. Street blocks with land zoned or used for commercial purposes on both sides of the street. (1962 Code § 3-6.2204; amd. Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993;
Ord. 94-O-2199, eff. 6-17-1994)
7-3-205.5: CERTAIN PROPERTY INELIGIBLE FOR PARTICIPATION IN PREFERENTIAL PARKING:
Any property which receives a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for each dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-
1260 or 10-3-1286 of this code, and all residents of such property, shall be ineligible to participate in a preferential parking zone. (Ord. 03-O-2432, eff. 11-
21-2003)
7-3-206: STANDARD CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING ZONES:
A. A preferential parking zone may be established by either of the following two (2) methods: 1) a petition signed by more than fifty percent (50%) of the
residents residing on property abutting a street within the proposed zone requesting the creation of the zone; or 2) a director of transportation initiated
proposal with notice sent to abutting residents if not more than forty percent (40%) of such residents have sent to the city a return form objecting to the
creation of the zone.
B. Whether initiated by petition or by the director of transportation, in order to establish a preferential parking zone, the director of transportation shall do
the following: 1) prepare a study on the need for preferential parking restrictions, and 2) make a recommendation to the traffic and parking commission
as to whether a preferential parking zone should be established and the maximum parking restriction that may be imposed for vehicles parking in a
preferential parking zone.
C. Whether initiated by petition or by the director of transportation, in order to establish a preferential parking zone, the traffic and parking commission
shall, based on the criteria set forth in subsection D of this section, make a recommendation to the city council as to whether a preferential parking
zone should be established and the maximum parking restriction that may be imposed for vehicles parking in a preferential parking zone.
D. Whether initiated by petition or by the director of transportation, in order to establish a preferential parking zone, the city council must find that there is
sufficient evidence to conclude that the following criteria are satisfied:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 293/797
1. Commuter vehicles regularly interfere with the available public street parking adjacent to residential property within the proposed zone and cause or
are the source of unreasonable noise, traffic hazards, environmental pollution, or other similar interference with the residential environment.
2. There is no reasonable alternative which is feasible or practical to reduce the identified street parking problem to acceptable levels, and displaced
commuter vehicles will not unduly impact surrounding residential areas.
The city council shall determine the maximum parking restriction that may be imposed for vehicles parking in a preferential parking zone as it deems
appropriate. (1962 Code § 3-6.2205; amd. Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993; Ord. 98-O-2311, eff. 10-23-1998)
7-3-207: MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING ZONE:
A preferential parking zone once established may be modified as follows:
A. The director of community development, at the request of the traffic and parking commission or the city council, may initiate a modification to an existing
preferential permit zone. If a request is initiated by the city council, the modification shall be heard by the city council and approved by resolution. If the
request is initiated by the traffic and parking commission, the traffic and parking commission shall provide a recommendation to the city council and the
modification shall be approved by resolution of the city council.
B. Sixty percent (60%) of the residents within the existing zone sign a petition requesting a modification to the parking restrictions in that zone. The traffic
and parking commission shall provide a recommendation to the city council. The modification shall be approved by resolution of the city council.
The city council shall determine the maximum parking restriction that may be imposed for vehicles parking in a preferential parking zone as it deems
appropriate. (Ord. 09-O-2571, eff. 12-6-2009; amd. Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-2013)
7-3-208: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING PERMITS:
Permits authorizing vehicle parking in a preferential parking zone may be issued by the department of finance administration to residents occupying
property within a preferential parking zone, subject to the following requirements and restrictions:
A. Furnishing satisfactory proof of residency on the street in the zone;
B. Completion of an application on the form designated by the department of finance administration;
C. Payment of the preferential parking permit fee designated by council resolution. (Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-209: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PERMITS:
A. The maximum number of preferential parking permits that may be issued to the inhabitants of a single dwelling unit that has vehicles registered to that
address or that has vehicles used on a full time basis by the occupants of that residence shall not exceed three (3), except as provided in subsection B
of this section. The maximum number of preferential parking permits which may be issued to the inhabitants of a single dwelling unit that has no
vehicles registered to that address shall not exceed two (2).
B. The traffic and parking commission has the authority to grant additional preferential parking permits upon application of a qualified applicant and proof
that more than three (3) vehicles are registered to the dwelling unit or used on a full time basis by the occupants of the dwelling unit, that sufficient off
street parking is not available to the applicant and that an undue hardship will result if the additional permit request is not granted. (Ord. 93-O-2169, eff.
7-2-1993)
7-3-210: TERM OF PREFERENTIAL PARKING PERMITS:
Preferential parking permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance or until such time as the applicant ceases to reside in the
preferential parking zone, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-211: USE OF PERMITS BY RESIDENTS AND GUESTS:
A. A resident who holds a valid preferential parking permit may use the permit for the purpose of parking on the street block adjacent to the dwelling unit of
such resident or adjacent to the dwelling unit of another resident who resides in the same preferential parking zone while they are visiting such
resident.
B. A resident who holds a valid preferential parking permit may allow a guest of such resident to use the permit for the purpose of parking on the street
adjacent to the dwelling unit of the resident while visiting with or working for the resident at the resident's dwelling unit. (Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993;
amd. Ord. 97-O-2280, eff. 6-6-1997; Ord. 98-O-2311, eff. 10-23-1998)
7-3-212: PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON PREFERENTIAL PARKING PERMITS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 294/797
A. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a preferential parking zone during the time preferential parking is in effect, unless such
vehicle shall have prominently displayed a preferential parking permit issued by the city, which permit shall be displayed hanging from the rear view
mirror of the vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, rent or lease, or cause to be sold, rented or leased, for any value or consideration any preferential parking
permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any preferential parking permit, except as provided for in this article.
(Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993; amd. Ord. 94-O-2198, eff. 4-22-1994; Ord. 94-O-2204, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 97-O-2280, eff. 6-6-1997)
7-3-213: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Where any permit issued under this article has been procured through fraud or misrepresentation, or where the permittee has violated provisions of this
article, the director of transportation shall hold a hearing, with notice of the time and place of such hearing mailed to the permittee at least ten (10) days
preceding the hearing. If the permit is revoked following the hearing, the permittee shall be mailed written notice of the revocation and the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
7-3-214: APPEAL OF DIRECTOR'S DECISION TO THE TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
Any decision of the department of finance administration in granting or denying a permit under this article on any decision of the director of transportation
revoking a permit under this article may be appealed to the traffic and parking commission. The appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the
commission within fourteen (14) days after the decision. The decision of the traffic and parking commission to uphold or reverse the decision of the
department of finance administration or the director of transportation, as the case may be, shall be final. (Ord. 93-O-2169, eff. 7-2-1993)
Article 3. Overnight Parking
7-3-301: OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED WITH CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS:
A. No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway in the city between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any day,
unless otherwise provided herein.
B. The following vehicles are exempt from the provision of subsection A of this section:
1. Any vehicle registered with the state department of motor vehicles to a disabled person as defined in section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code of the
state and bearing a distinguishable license plate or placard issued by the state department of motor vehicles, subject to the provisions of subsection
C of this section;
2. Any vehicle which cannot be parked off the roadway because of construction activity, and the department of transportation has been notified;
3. Any vehicle parked in a nonresidential zone for only such time as the person parking the vehicle shall be performing services pursuant to a valid city
business license;
4. Any vehicle parked for an existing emergency purpose;
5. Any vehicle which has a ladened or gross weight of less than six thousand (6,000) pounds and displays a permit issued under section 7-3-303 or 7-
3-306 of this article.
C. The exemption from the provision of subsection A of this section for vehicles registered to a disabled person shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
1. Vehicles registered to a nondisabled driver of a disabled person are not exempt.
2. Only vehicles registered to city residents are exempt.
3. Only one vehicle per disabled person is exempt.
4. Only vehicles parked on the street block adjacent to the registered owner's dwelling unit are exempt. (Ord. 96-O-2262, eff. 7-19-1996; amd. Ord. 99-
O-2334, eff. 10-22-1999)
7-3-302: APPLICATION FOR OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMIT FOR MULTIPLE-UNIT RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANT:
An application for overnight parking may be filed with the city by an occupant of a multi-family residential dwelling unit subject to the following
requirements:
A. Payment of the overnight parking fee established by council resolution.
B. Completion of an application on the form designated by the director of transportation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 295/797
C. Compliance with such rules and regulations governing overnight parking permits as issued by the director of transportation (1962 Code §§ 3-6.2304, 3-
6.2305, 3-6.2306, 3-6.2309, amd. Ord. 96-O-2262, eff. 7-19-1996)
7-3-303: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT TO MULTIPLE-UNIT RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANT:
A. An overnight parking permit may be issued by the director of transportation to an occupant of a multiple-unit residential dwelling only if the applicant
meets each of the following conditions:
1. There is no available parking space upon the premises which the applicant resides.
2. No former parking area on the premises has been converted to and is presently used for other purposes without approval of the city.
3. The vehicle for which the permit is requested is registered to the applicant, rented or leased by the applicant, or the owner of the vehicle has
otherwise authorized the applicant to use the vehicle. The applicant shall hold a current and valid driver's license to operate a vehicle.
4. There is insufficient off street parking facilities in the area of applicant's residence.
5. The applicant has diligently attempted to obtain off street parking and there is no usable off street parking available.
B. The maximum number of permits which may be issued shall not exceed three (3) for any dwelling unit, except as provided in subsection C of this
section.
C. The director of transportation has the authority to grant additional overnight parking permits upon application of qualified applicants and proof that more
than three (3) vehicles are registered to the legal occupants. The total number of parking permits issued for any dwelling unit shall not exceed the
number of legal occupants of the dwelling unit that hold a current and valid driver's license. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.2306, 3-6.2307; amd. Ord. 96-O-2262,
eff. 7-19-1996)
7-3-304: TERM OF PERMIT FOR MULTIPLE-UNIT RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANT:
Permits issued under this article to multiple-unit residential occupants shall be valid for a period of up to one year from date of issuance, or until the
permittee ceases to reside in the designated unit, whichever occurs first. Upon expiration of a permit, a new application for a permit must be filed as
provided in this article for any subsequent permit. (1962 Code §§ 3-6.2310, 3-6.2312; amd. Ord. 96-O-2262, eff. 7-19-1996)
7-3-305: APPLICATION FOR OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMIT FOR USE BY AN ON DUTY REGISTERED NURSE:
An application for a permit authorizing overnight parking may be filed by a registered nurse performing nursing services at night, subject to the following
requirements and restrictions:
A. Payment of the overnight parking fee established by council resolution.
B. Filing of an application on the form designated by the director of transportation.
C. The application shall be accompanied by a written statement from a licensed physician that the patient which the nurse is attending during the night is
seriously ill and requires twenty four (24) hour per day nursing care.
D. Compliance with any rules or regulations governing overnight parking permits as issued by the director of transportation. (Ord. 96-O-2262, eff. 7-19-
1996)
7-3-306: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT TO REGISTERED NURSE:
An overnight parking permit may be issued by the director of transportation to a registered nurse only if the following conditions are met:
A. There is no on site parking for the nurse on the patient's premises while attending the patient.
B. Use of a vehicle is reasonably necessary for commuting to the patient's premises.
C. The registered nurse applicant is engaged in rendering services to a seriously ill patient between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. (1962 Code § 3-6.2301)
7-3-307: TERM OF PERMIT FOR REGISTERED NURSE:
Permits issued under this article to a registered nurse shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days. Upon expiration of a permit, a new permit application
may be filed as provided in this article for issuance of a subsequent permit. (1988 Code)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 296/797
7-3-308: PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ON OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMITS:
A. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped between the hours of two thirty o'clock (2:30) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless such vehicle shall have
prominently displayed either hanging from the rear view mirror of the vehicle or affixed to the left side of the rear bumper of the vehicle an overnight
parking permit issued under this article.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, rent, or lease, or cause to be sold, rented, or leased, for any value or consideration any overnight parking
permit. Upon violation of this subsection, all overnight permits issued to, or for the benefit of, the dwelling unit for which the sold, rented, or leased
permit was authorized shall be void.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any overnight parking permit, except as provided for in this article. (1962
Code § 3-6.2315; amd. Ord. 96-O-2262, eff. 7-19-1996)
7-3-309: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Where any permit issued under this article has been procured through fraud or misrepresentation, or where the permittee has violated provisions of this
article, the transportation/engineering official shall hold a hearing, with notice of the time and place of such hearing mailed to the permittee at least five (5)
days preceding the hearing. If the permit is revoked following the hearing, the permittee shall be mailed written notice of the revocation and the reasons
therefor. (1962 Code § 3-6.2316)
7-3-310: APPEAL TO THE TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
Any decision of the director of transportation in granting, denying, or revoking a permit under this article may be appealed to the traffic and parking
commission. The appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the commission within fourteen (14) days of the decision. (1962 Code § 3-6.2317)
Article 4. Parking Meter Zones And Fees
7-3-401: PURPOSE:
This article establishes parking meter zones, parking fees applicable to each such zone, and regulations applicable to parking meters. (1962 Code §§ 3-
4.101, 3-4.103)
7-3-402: PARKING METER ZONE A:
There is hereby established parking meter zone A which includes the following provisions:
A. The director of public works services or his designee shall set the parking meter rates for each meter located in parking meter zone A in an amount not
to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per hour. If the meter is set for a time that is less than one hour, the meter rate shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00) for the
maximum time on such meter.
B. Except as otherwise set by the director of public works services as provided in this subsection, parking meters shall be in operation, and the deposit of
coins shall be required, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. of each day of the week. The director of
public works services shall have the authority to set the parking meter hours and days of operation within the time frame set forth herein as well as the
maximum legal parking time at each parking meter. The director of public works services shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city council, at a
public meeting, of any proposed change to parking meter hours or days of operation at any meter.
C. Parking time at any meter shall not exceed the posted maximum time limit.
D. The following area is included within parking meter zone A:
Almont Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard, and from the alley north of Olympic
Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Arnaz Drive, west side, from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to thirty four feet (34') south of the third lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard; and on the east side of Arnaz Drive from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to thirty four feet (34') south of the
second lot south of Wilshire Boulevard.
Beverly Boulevard, south side, from Civic Center Drive to Maple Drive.
Beverly Drive, both sides, from Olympic Boulevard to the south city limits.
Burton Way, north side, from Civic Center Drive to two hundred fifty five feet (255') east of Civic Center Drive.
Burton Way, south side, from Clark Drive to Robertson Boulevard.
Burton Way, south side, from Doheny Drive to Wetherly Drive.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 297/797
Canon Drive, west side, from Olympic Boulevard to Beverly Drive.
Carson Road, both sides, from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the south lot line of the first lot south of Wilshire Boulevard.
Charleville Boulevard, both sides, from the alley west of Robertson Boulevard to the east property line of the first lot east of Robertson Boulevard.
Charleville Boulevard, east side, from Santa Monica Boulevard, South Roadway, to Durant Drive and on both sides of Charleville Boulevard from
Durant Drive to Lasky Drive.
Charleville Boulevard, north side, from Lasky Drive to the alley east of Lasky Drive.
Charleville Boulevard, north side, from one hundred thirty feet (130') west of Stanley Drive to Le Doux Road.
Civic Center Drive, east side, from Third Street to the alley south of Third Street.
Clark Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Olympic Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Clark Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard.
Clark Drive, east side, from Burton Way to the alley south of Burton Way.
Clifton Way, north side, from one hundred ten feet (110') west of La Cienega Boulevard to San Vicente Boulevard.
Clifton Way, north side, from the alley west of Robertson Boulevard to one hundred thirty feet (130') east of Robertson Boulevard.
Clifton Way, south side, from La Cienega Boulevard to San Vicente Boulevard.
Clifton Way, south side, from Robertson Boulevard to one hundred thirty feet (130') east of Robertson Boulevard.
Dayton Way, both sides, from Robertson Boulevard to the alley west of Robertson Boulevard.
Doheny Drive, both sides, from the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard to Charleville Boulevard.
Durant Drive, both sides, from Charleville Boulevard to Lasky Drive.
Elm Drive, east side, from Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard.
Foothill Road, east side, from Alden Drive to Civic Center Drive.
Foothill Road, west side, from Burton Way to Third Street.
Foothill Road, west side, from Third Street to three hundred ninety feet (390') north thereof.
Gale Drive, both sides, from the northerly lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the second lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard.
Gale Drive, east side, from one hundred twenty feet (120') south of the prolongation of the south curb face of San Vicente Boulevard to three hundred
eight feet (308') south of the prolongation of the south curb face of San Vicente Boulevard.
Gregory Way, both sides, from the alley west of Robertson Boulevard to Robertson Boulevard.
Gregory Way, north side, from one hundred twenty feet (120') west of La Cienega Boulevard to one hundred thirty feet (130') east of La Cienega
Boulevard.
Gregory Way, north side, from Robertson Boulevard to one hundred thirty feet (130') easterly thereof.
Gregory Way, south side, from Le Doux Road to Tower Drive.
Hamel Drive, both sides, from the northerly lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the first lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard.
Hamilton Drive, east side, from one hundred thirty nine feet (139') south of the prolongation of the south curb face of San Vicente Boulevard to two
hundred eighty three feet (283') south of the prolongation of the south curb face of San Vicente Boulevard.
Hamilton Drive, east side, from the northerly lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the third lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard.
Hamilton Drive, west side, from the northerly lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the fourth lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard.
La Cienega Boulevard, both sides, from Clifton Way to Olympic Boulevard.
Lapeer Drive, both sides, from the alley south of Olympic Boulevard to Olympic Boulevard.
Lasky Drive, both sides, from Charleville Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard, South Roadway.
Lasky Drive, west side, between Moreno Drive and Young Drive.
Le Doux Road, both sides, from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to Charleville Boulevard.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 298/797
Maple Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard, and from the alley north of Olympic
Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Maple Drive, west side, from the alley north of Burton Way to Third Street and from Commercial Center Street, South Roadway, to Commercial Center
Street, North Roadway.
Oakhurst Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard.
Oakhurst Drive, both sides, from the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard.
Oakhurst Drive, west side, from Olympic Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Olympic Boulevard, both sides, from El Camino to Beverwil Drive.
Olympic Boulevard, both sides, from Robertson Boulevard to Rexford Drive.
Olympic Boulevard, south side, from Canon Drive to Beverly Drive.
Palm Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard and from the alley north of Olympic
Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Robertson Boulevard, east side, from the city limit line north of Clifton Way south to Whitworth Drive.
Robertson Boulevard, west side, from the alley south of Burton Way to Whitworth Drive.
San Vicente Boulevard, west side, from Hamilton Drive to Wilshire Boulevard.
Santa Monica Boulevard, South Roadway, both sides, from the west city limits to Wilshire Boulevard; and on both sides of that portion of Civic Center
Drive which is parallel to Santa Monica Boulevard.
Stanley Drive, both sides, from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to Charleville Boulevard.
Swall Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Wilshire Boulevard to the alley south of Wilshire Boulevard and from the alley north of Olympic
Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Tower Drive, east side, from Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the second lot south thereof.
Tower Drive, west side, from Wilshire Boulevard to the southerly lot line of the first lot south thereof.
Wetherly Drive, both sides, from the alley north of Olympic Boulevard to the alley south of Olympic Boulevard.
Wetherly Drive, both sides, from Wilshire Boulevard to the alley southerly thereof.
Whitworth Drive, both sides, from the alley west of Beverly Drive to Beverly Drive.
Willaman Drive, both sides, from the north lot line of the first lot north of Wilshire Boulevard to the south lot line of the first lot south of Wilshire
Boulevard.
Wilshire Boulevard, both sides, from Rexford Drive to San Vicente Boulevard. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.201-3-4.249; amd. Ord. 88-O-2046, eff. 12-15-1988;
Ord. 94-O-2227, eff. 1-13-1995; Ord. 95-O-2232, eff. 3-10-1995; Ord. 08-O-2548, eff. 6-6-2008; Ord. 10-O-2578, eff. 4-2-2010; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-
20-2014)
7-3-403: PARKING METER ZONE B:
There is hereby established a parking meter zone B which includes the following provisions:
A. The director of public works services or his designee shall set the parking meter rates for each meter located in parking meter zone B in an amount not
to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per hour. If the meter is set for a time that is less than one hour, the meter rate shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00) for the
maximum time on such meter.
B. Except as otherwise set by the director of public works services as provided in this subsection, parking meters shall be in operation, and the deposit of
coins shall be required, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. of each day of the week. The director of
public works services shall have the authority to set the parking meter hours and days of operation within the time frame set forth herein as well as the
maximum legal parking time at each parking meter. The director of public works services shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city council, at a
public meeting, of any proposed change to parking meter hours or days of operation at any meter.
C. Parking time at any meter shall not exceed the posted maximum time limit.
D. The following area is included within parking meter zone B:
Alden Drive, both sides, from Foothill Road to Maple Drive.
Civic Center Drive, north side, from the Civic Center Drive access road to Doheny Drive.
Commercial Center Street, both sides.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 299/797
Foothill Road, west side, from three hundred ninety feet (390') north of Third Street to Santa Monica Boulevard, south roadway.
Le Doux Road, east side, from Gregory Way to Olympic Boulevard.
Maple Drive, west side, from Third Street to Commercial Center Street, south roadway; from Commercial Center Street, north roadway, to Beverly
Boulevard; and on the east side of Maple Drive from Third Street to Alden Drive.
Olympic Boulevard, south side, from Roxbury Drive to one hundred thirty feet (130') east of Spalding Drive.
Roxbury Drive, west side, from Olympic Boulevard to the south city limits.
San Vicente Boulevard, west side, from Clifton Way to the northerly city limits.
The alley west of and adjacent to Roxbury Park in the recessed parking stalls between Roxbury Drive and Spalding Drive.
Third Street, north side, from Civic Center Drive to the alley east of Maple Drive; and on the south side of Third Street from Civic Center Drive to Maple
Drive. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.301-3-4.312; amd. Ord. 08-O-2548, eff. 6-6-2008; Ord. 10-O-2578, eff. 4-2-2010; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
7-3-404: PARKING METER ZONE C:
There is hereby established parking meter zone C which includes the following provisions:
A. The director of public works services or his designee shall set the parking meter rates for each meter located in parking meter zone C in an amount not
to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per hour. If the meter is set for a time that is less than one hour, the meter rate shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00) for the
maximum time on such meter.
B. Except as otherwise set by the director of public works services as provided in this subsection, parking meters shall be in operation, and the deposit of
coins shall be required, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. of each day of the week. The director of
public works services shall have the authority to set the parking meter hours and days of operation within the time frame set forth herein as well as the
maximum legal parking time at each parking meter. The director of public works services shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city council, at a
public meeting, of any proposed change to parking meter hours or days of operation at any meter.
C. Parking time at any meter shall not exceed the posted maximum time limit.
D. The following area is included within parking meter zone C:
The east side of Bedford Drive from Olympic Boulevard northerly to the first alley.
The easterly two (2) metered spaces on the south side of Burton Way from Doheny Drive to Wetherly Drive.
The north side of Olympic Boulevard from Bedford Drive to the east end of the second parking space east of Bedford Drive.
The west side of Oakhurst Drive from the alley north of Olympic Boulevard to Olympic Boulevard.
The west side of Reeves Drive from the alley north of Olympic Boulevard to Olympic Boulevard. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.401-3-4.404; amd. Ord. 08-O-2548,
eff. 6-6-2008; Ord. 10-O-2578, eff. 4-2-2010; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
7-3-405: PARKING METER ZONE D:
(Rep. by Ord. 88-O-2046, eff. 12-15-1988)
7-3-406: PARKING METER ZONE E/F:
There is hereby established parking meter zone E/F which includes the following provisions:
A. The director of public works services or his designee shall set the parking meter rates for each meter located in parking meter zone E/F in an amount
not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per hour. If the meter is set for a time that is less than one hour, the meter rate shall not exceed two dollars ($2.00) for
the maximum time on such meter.
B. Except as otherwise set by the director of public works services as provided in this subsection, parking meters shall be in operation, and the deposit of
coins shall be required, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. of each day of the week. The director of
public works services shall have the authority to set the parking meter hours and days of operation within the time frame set forth herein as well as the
maximum legal parking time at each parking meter. The director of public works services shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city council, at a
public meeting, of any proposed change to parking meter hours or days of operation at any meter.
C. Parking time at any meter shall not exceed the posted maximum time limit.
D. There is included in parking meter zone E/F the area within the central business district bounded by the following streets:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 300/797
Beverly Drive, the prolongation of the alley east of, from Wilshire Boulevard to Olympic Boulevard.
Beverly Drive, the prolongation of the alley west of, from Olympic Boulevard to Charleville Boulevard.
Charleville Boulevard from the alley west of Beverly Drive to Spalding Drive.
Crescent Drive from Park Way to Wilshire Boulevard.
Olympic Boulevard from the prolongation of the alley east of Beverly Drive to the prolongation of the alley west of Beverly Drive.
Park Way from Rodeo Drive to Crescent Drive.
Rodeo Drive from Santa Monica Boulevard, north roadway, to Park Way.
Santa Monica Boulevard, north roadway, from Wilshire Boulevard to Rodeo Drive.
Spalding Drive from Charleville Boulevard to Wilshire Boulevard.
Wilshire Boulevard from Crescent Drive to the prolongation of the alley east of Beverly Drive.
Wilshire Boulevard from Spalding Drive to Santa Monica Boulevard, north roadway.
E. The following area is included within parking meter zone E/F:
From Wilshire Boulevard south to Charleville at South Spalding, South Linden, South Roxbury, South Bedford, South Peck, South Camden, South
Rodeo, South El Camino. (1962 Code §§ 3-4.701-3-4.802; amd. Ord. 08-O-2548, eff. 6-6-2008; Ord. 10-O-2578, eff. 4-2-2010; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-
20-2014)
7-3-407: MUNICIPAL OFF STREET PARKING METER ZONE:
There is established the municipal off street parking meter zone which includes the following provisions:
A. The director of public works services or his designee shall set the parking meter rates for each meter located in the municipal off street parking meter
zone in an amount not to exceed two dollars ($2.00) per hour. If the meter is set for a time less than one hour, the meter rate shall not exceed two
dollars ($2.00) for the maximum time on such meter.
B. Except as otherwise set by the director of public works services as provided in this subsection, parking meters shall be in operation, and the deposit of
coins shall be required, between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. of each day of the week. The director of
public works services shall have the authority to set the parking meter hours and days of operation within the time frame set forth herein as well as the
maximum legal parking time at each parking meter. The director of public works services shall provide thirty (30) days' notice to the city council, at a
public meeting, of any proposed change to parking meter hours or days of operation at any meter.
C. Parking time at any meter shall not exceed the posted maximum time limit.
D. The following area is included within the municipal off street parking meter zone:
La Cienega reservoir metered parking lot which is located in the La Cienega municipal park immediately south of Gregory Way and between Le Doux
Road and La Cienega Boulevard.
Metered parking lot B which is adjacent to South Santa Monica Boulevard between Crescent Drive and Canon Drive.
Metered parking lot D, which is north of block B, tract Beverly, between Beverly Drive and Rodeo Drive.
Metered parking lot E, which is north of block A, tract Beverly, between Rodeo Drive and Camden Drive.
Metered parking lot F, which is north of block H, tract Beverly, between Camden Drive and Bedford Drive.
Metered parking lot G, which is north of block I, tract Beverly, between Bedford Drive and Roxbury Drive.
Metered parking lot H, which is north of block J, tract Beverly, between Roxbury Drive and Linden Drive and that portion of Linden Drive north of South
Santa Monica Boulevard.
Post office metered parking lot which is located north of the city of Beverly Hills post office.
Roxbury municipal park parking lot which is located in the Roxbury municipal park south of Roxbury Park Recreation Center.
The alley west of and adjacent to Roxbury Park in the recessed parking stalls between Roxbury Drive and Spalding Drive (P-lot). (1962 Code §§ 3-
4.501-3-4.503; amd. Ord. 08-O-2548, eff. 6-6-2008; Ord. 10-O-2578, eff. 4-2-2010; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
7-3-408: EXCEPTION TO DEPOSIT OF COINS:
A vehicle may be parked and remain parked in a parking meter space without the deposit of any coin in the parking meter adjacent thereto during the
hours other than those designated by the director of public works services as hours during which such deposits are required. Notwithstanding, no vehicle
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 301/797
may be parked and remain parked in a parking meter space if parking in the meter space violates section 7-3-212 or 7-3-301 of this chapter. (Ord. 14-O-
2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
7-3-409: PARKING TIME:
No person parking a vehicle, except as otherwise provided by this article, shall permit such vehicle to remain parked in any parking meter space during
any time when the parking meter adjacent to such space indicates that no portion remains of the period of time for which coins had been deposited; or
beyond the time limited for parking in such space by virtue of the provisions of this article or other provisions of this code. (1962 Code § 3-4.106)
7-3-410: PARKING TIME; EXCEPTIONS:
A vehicle may be parked and remain parked in a parking meter space without the deposit of any coin in the parking meter adjacent thereto during hours
other than those designated by ordinance of the council as hours during which such deposits are required. (1962 Code § 3-4.107; amd. Ord. 88-O-2023,
eff. 6-2-1988)
7-3-411: MECHANICAL FAILURE OF METER:
Any person unintentionally violating any provision of this article by reason of a mechanical failure of a parking meter not caused by such person is not
guilty of a violation of this article upon establishing such fact. (1962 Code § 3-4.108)
7-3-412: TAMPERING WITH METERS UNLAWFUL:
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with, open, or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. (1962 Code § 3-4.109)
7-3-413: USE OF SLUGS UNLAWFUL:
No person shall deposit, or attempt to deposit, in any parking meter any slug or other substitute for a coin of the United States. (1962 Code § 3-4.110)
7-3-414: DEPOSIT OF COINS IN METERS FOR PROFIT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, a coin in any parking meter, or to request, solicit, or receive any fee, donation, or
remuneration therefor. (1962 Code § 3-4.110.1)
7-3-415: PARKING METER VIOLATION AND INFRACTION:
A violation of section 7-3-409 of this article is an infraction, and any violation of other provisions of this article is subject to the penalties of title 1, chapter 3,
article 1, of this code. (1962 Code § 3-4.115)
7-3-416: SALE OF PARKING OPPORTUNITIES PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to facilitate or participate in a transaction by any means (including, but not limited to, via a mobile application), in
which any form of compensation is paid for the purpose of facilitating a change in the occupancy of a publicly owned parking space or in which
compensation is contingent on the occupancy of a publicly owned parking space by a specified individual or vehicle.
B. This section shall not apply to any transaction that occurs in connection with an automobile parking and shuttle service operating pursuant to a valid
valet parking permit issued pursuant to title 4, chapter 2, article 15 of this code during any time when such service is authorized to operate valet parking
operations. (Ord. 14-O-2666, eff. 11-21-2014)
Article 5. Procedure For The Installation Of Speed Humps
7-3-501: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that installation of one or more speed humps on certain residential streets in the city is required to reduce vehicular speeds, traffic
volume, traffic hazards and accidents caused by excessive vehicular speed. The city council also finds that it is necessary to establish a procedure for
considering requests by residents for the installation of speed humps on their streets and to allow citizen input prior to such installation. (Ord. 93-O-2163,
eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-502: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, certain words are defined as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 302/797
ELIGIBLE APPLICANT: A property owner or tenant residing on a street block who proposes the installation of speed humps on the street block where the
property owner or tenant resides.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of a residential dwelling unit and/or complex on the street block proposed for installation of speed humps.
SPEED HUMP: A strip of raised pavement on a street running perpendicular to the flow of traffic, installed for purposes of reducing vehicular speed.
SURVEY: The form approved by the director of transportation for persons who own property or reside on streets where speed humps are proposed to be
installed to express their consent or objection to such installation pursuant to section 7-3-506 of this chapter. (Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-503: APPLICATION FOR INSTALLATION OF SPEED HUMPS:
An eligible applicant may submit an application, on a form approved by the city, to the director of transportation requesting installation of one or more
speed humps on the eligible applicant's street block. (Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-504: CRITERIA FOR DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION OF SPEED HUMPS:
A. The director of transportation shall review the application and determine whether the street block proposed for speed humps complies with technical
eligibility standards based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers standards and other relevant factors, such as, traffic volume, street width, accident
frequency, block length and curvature, and grade of street.
B. If the director of transportation determines that the street block specified in the application is technically eligible for installation of one or more speed
humps pursuant to subsection A of this section, the director of transportation shall identify in priority order the appropriate potential locations for
installing speed humps on such block. (Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-505: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING PROPERTY OWNER CONSENT FOR THE PLACEMENT OF SPEED HUMPS:
A. Upon a written determination by the director of transportation that the street block specified in the application satisfies the requirements of subsection 7-
3-504A of this article, the eligible applicant shall obtain written approval from the property owners whose property will abut the proposed speed hump
as shown in figure 1 of this section. A property owner is entitled to provide one consent or one objection to the proposed speed hump with respect to
that property.
1. If the property abutting the proposed speed hump is a condominium, the eligible applicant shall obtain written approval from the property owner(s)
whose window(s) face the street in which the proposed speed hump will be located. A property owner whose window(s) face the street in which the
proposed speed hump will be located is entitled to provide one consent or one objection to the proposed speed hump with respect to that
condominium.
2. If the property abutting the proposed speed hump is an apartment development, the eligible applicant shall obtain written approval from the owner
thereof. The owner of an apartment development is entitled to provide one consent or one objection to the proposed speed hump with respect to the
entire apartment development.
3. In cases where the dwelling unit is not occupied, the property owner or an authorized representative may consent or object to the proposed speed
hump.
B. The eligible applicant shall contact the property owners, described in subsection A of this section, in the priority order determined by the director of
transportation as the best suited locations for installation of speed humps on the street, pursuant to subsection 7-3-504B of this article.
C. Should any property owner on such list object to the installation, the eligible applicant shall obtain written approval from the property owners identified
by the director of transportation as the next best location for installation of speed humps pursuant to subsection 7-3-504B of this article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 303/797
921230 dd 1160289 (2)
(Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-506: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING APPROVAL FROM PERSONS OR ENTITIES TO INSTALL SPEED HUMPS:
A. Upon obtaining written approval from abutting property owners for installation of one or more speed humps at certain locations, as set forth in section 7-
3-505 of this article, the department of transportation shall mail to the persons or entities listed below an informational brochure describing the
proposed installation of speed humps and a survey requesting such persons or entities to identify whether they approve of or oppose the installation at
the specified location. The following persons or entities shall receive an informational brochure:
1. The property owner or tenant residing in a single-family residence located on the block proposed for installation of speed humps.
2. The property owner or manager of an apartment development located on the block proposed for installation of speed humps.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 304/797
3. The president of the homeowners' association for any condominium development located on the block proposed for installation of speed humps.
B. The persons or entities entitled to receive surveys shall return the surveys to the department of transportation within sixty (60) days of the date the
notices are mailed by the city.
C. At least sixty percent (60%) of the persons or entities entitled to receive surveys must approve installation of one or more speed humps at the specified
location before the humps may be installed. If less than sixty percent (60%) of such persons approve the installation, the application process shall
terminate.
D. In determining the percentage of persons or entities who approve of or oppose installation of one or more speed humps, the department of
transportation shall consider the returned surveys in the following manner:
1. A property owner or tenant residing in a single-family residence shall be entitled to one consent or one objection for that residence.
2. Each apartment development and each condominium development shall be entitled to one consent or one objection for the entire development.
(Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-507: PERIOD FOR APPLICATION PROCESS:
A. An application shall remain active for a three (3) month period following the mailing of the survey by the department of transportation pursuant to
subsection 7-3-506A of this article. In the event that the required number of approvals are not received in accordance with section 7-3-506 of this article
in such three (3) month period, the application shall expire and have no further force or effect under this article.
B. An eligible applicant can reapply for installation of one or more speed humps on a block one year from the date that the original application expired.
(Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-508: REQUESTS TO REMOVE SPEED HUMP(S):
A. A resident may make a request to remove a speed hump(s) by filing an application therefor with the traffic and parking commission.
B. An application to request traffic and parking commission approval of the removal of a speed hump(s) shall only be considered if such hump(s) have
been installed for at least two (2) years, except as otherwise provided in subsection C of this section.
C. Under special circumstances, including, but not limited to, significant noise and safety problems, the traffic and parking commission may approve
removal of speed humps.
D. Any decision of the traffic and parking commission made under this section shall be appealable to and reviewable by the city council pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
7-3-509: CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit in any manner the city council's power to order the installation or removal of speed humps
without complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 93-O-2163, eff. 2-26-1993)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES
Article 1. Taxicab Franchises
7-4-101: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE: Any motor propelled vehicle, not otherwise defined in this section, used in the business of transporting
passengers over the streets of the city, irrespective of whether or not any fee, compensation, or consideration is paid for such transportation.
SIGHTSEEING VEHICLE: Any motor propelled vehicle used for the transportation of passengers over the streets of the city for the purpose of showing
points of interest or showing or exhibiting lands, houses, property, or any other thing or object for consideration.
TAXICAB: Any motor propelled vehicle which is designed to carry not more than eight (8) persons, excluding the driver, and is either equipped with a
taximeter or a top light or has the words "taxi", "cab" or "taxicab" displayed on the exterior of the vehicle, and is used for the transportation of passengers
for hire within and without the boundaries of the city, for which a fee is charged and that does not operate over a defined route.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 305/797
TAXIMETER: An instrument or device by which the charge for the hire of a taxicab is registered, calculated, or indicated by figures in accordance with the
distance traveled and/or the time elapsed.
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIAL: With respect to matters governing taxicabs and the taxicab franchise system, "transportation official" shall mean the
director of public works services or his or her designee. With respect to matters governing public transportation vehicles other than taxicabs,
"transportation official" shall mean the director of community development. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-102: FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS:
A. No person or corporation or membership organization shall operate a taxicab service without a franchise granted by the city. Franchises convey a
nonexclusive right to operate a taxicab service in the city. The city may issue additional franchises at any time for any reason at the city's sole
discretion.
B. Franchises shall be awarded by the city council through a competitive process initiated through a request for proposals issued by the city. Any taxicab
franchisee whose franchise has been revoked shall thereafter be prohibited from competing for award of a franchise for a period of three (3) years
following the scheduled expiration of its franchise agreement.
C. Upon the award of a franchise, the franchisee shall enter into a franchise agreement with the city. The franchise agreement may impose obligations on
the franchisee that are additional to but do not conflict with those imposed pursuant to this chapter.
D. Franchises shall be valid for a three (3) year term. In accordance with subsection 7-4-103E of this chapter, the city may extend the term of the franchise
in writing for an additional two (2) year term, and thereafter, for five (5) additional one year terms, for a total term of up to ten (10) years. No later than
ten (10) years after award of the initial franchise by the city, the city will issue another request for proposals, and existing franchisees will be permitted
to present a proposal.
E. Each taxicab franchisee shall pay to the city an annual franchise fee, established by resolution of the city council, for the privilege of operating a taxicab
service in the city. The franchise fee shall be a fixed amount per franchise plus amounts per vehicle. Such franchise fee shall be in addition to any other
prescribed fees, including, but not limited to, business license and permit fees. The franchise fee shall be due upon execution of the franchise
agreement and on each anniversary date thereafter, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. Failure to pay the full franchise fee when
due shall be cause for revocation of the franchise. In the event that a franchisee adds to its total number of vehicles or drivers during a franchise year, a
fee, prorated on a monthly basis, per vehicle or driver shall be due upon issuance of the vehicle or driver permit.
F. Each taxicab franchisee shall maintain in operation in the city at all times a minimum number of properly permitted taxicabs as determined by the
transportation official or such higher number as specified in its franchise agreement.
G. Franchisees shall provide and maintain a physical location for holding of vehicles and operation of the business, including maintenance of records and
retrieval of lost property, within twenty (20) miles, by the most direct street route, of Beverly Hills City Hall.
H. Franchisees shall operate a computer dispatch service providing for the ability to obtain taxi service by telephone twenty four (24) hours a day,
everyday of the year from anywhere in the city. Franchisees shall provide and maintain a telephone number for ordering taxi service which is toll free
from every location in the city.
I. Franchisees shall maintain the infrastructure needed to enable its taxicabs to accept payment by major credit cards, debit cards, and the Beverly Hills
senior taxi swipe card complying with detailed requirements established in the applicable rules and regulations.
J. Franchisees shall comply with all provisions of the Americans with disabilities act and its implementing regulations regarding vehicles and provision of
service. Franchisees shall ensure that customers with disabilities, including those using wheelchairs, can request service and be transported in an
appropriate vehicle, with the same response time as customers without disabilities.
K. If, at any time, the city determines that there is a need for additional taxicabs in the city, it may conduct a competitive procurement for one or more
additional franchises; alternatively, it may increase the authorized number of taxicabs of existing franchisees, in which case preference for additional
authorized permits may be given to those companies with the highest scores in the most recent annual evaluation conducted pursuant to section 7-4-
103 of this chapter. In the event that the city reduces a franchisee's authorized number of taxicabs or revokes its franchise, the city may elect to
conduct procurement for additional franchisees or the reduced or eliminated permits may be retired or redistributed to other franchises and preference
may be given to those companies with the highest scores in the most recent annual evaluation.
L. A franchise, or any interest in a franchise, shall not be sold, leased, assigned, hypothecated, or otherwise transferred or disposed of without the prior
written consent of the city, and then only under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city. The sale, assignment, transfer or other
disposition of any of the issued and outstanding capital stock or ownership interest of the franchisee or of any general partner or joint venture or
member of the franchisee, if a partnership or joint venture or membership exists, which shall result in changing the control of franchisee, shall be
construed as an assignment of the franchise. Change of control shall mean a transaction whereby a transferee acquires a beneficial ownership interest
in the franchisee or any general partner or joint venturer or member of franchisee, such that after such transaction there is a change of identity of the
person or entity that has the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of the franchisee, whether through the ownership of
voting securities, by contract, or otherwise.
M. Franchisees shall not conduct or authorize any marketing that has the intent or effect of confusing the public about the identity of the franchisee or that
describes service policies that do not comply with city rules.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 306/797
N. Franchisees shall, as required by the transportation official, maintain written and electronic records of its operations at the location required by
subsection G of this section, and provide access to these records to the city. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015; amd. Ord. 16-O-2705, eff. 8-5-2016)
7-4-103: EVALUATION OF FRANCHISES; GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR SANCTIONS:
A. Franchisees shall at least annually compile and submit periodic reports of service provided, service quality, compliance with city rules and requirements
of the franchise agreement, and other matters. The transportation official shall promulgate rules defining the frequency, content, and format of the
required reports.
B. Franchisees shall be evaluated annually on the basis of service quality; compliance by the franchisee, its affiliated vehicle owners, and its drivers with
the city's taxicab rules and codes; compliance with terms of the franchisee agreement; and other matters as determined by the transportation official.
Franchisees that fail to meet the city's standards may be placed on probation, be assessed monetary penalties, may have their franchise suspended or
revoked, may have their number of authorized vehicles reduced, or may not have their franchise extended. The transportation official shall establish
service quality standards and other measures and criteria to be used in the annual evaluations. On the basis of the annual evaluation, the
transportation official shall recommend to the traffic and parking commission any action to be taken. Each franchisee shall be notified in writing of the
outcome of its evaluation and the recommended action.
C. No sooner than fourteen (14) days after notice in writing to a franchisee of a recommended action based on an annual evaluation, the traffic and
parking commission shall hold a public hearing. At least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be provided to the franchisee. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the commission may accept, reject or modify the transportation official's recommendation and impose probation, assess monetary
penalties, suspend or revoke the franchise, reduce the number of authorized vehicles, or elect not to extend the franchise. If a franchisee is placed on
probation, it shall be notified of the terms of the probation and shall be subject to reevaluation no later than six (6) months after being placed on
probation.
D. If the traffic and parking commission puts a franchisee on probation, assesses monetary penalties, suspends, revokes, reduces the number of
authorized vehicles, or elects not to extend the franchise, the effect of the decision shall be stayed for fourteen (14) days during which time franchisee
may appeal the decision to the city council. In the event the franchisee provides written notice of appeal within fourteen (14) days of the decision, the
effect of the decision shall be further stayed until the city council has heard the appeal and rendered a decision.
E. In the case of a franchisee whose evaluation indicates that it has met the city's standards for services provided and has a good record of compliance
with city rules and the requirements of the franchise agreement and any other matter that is the subject of the evaluation, the transportation official may
recommend that the term of the franchise agreement be extended. The traffic and parking commission shall review the recommendation of the
transportation official and shall recommend to the city council whether the franchise agreement should be extended, and if so, by how much and
subject to what conditions. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-104: REDUCTION OF NUMBER OF VEHICLES OF FRANCHISEE:
A. Where the holder of a franchise fails in any year to procure public transportation vehicle permits for the total number of taxis authorized under the
franchise agreement, the number of taxis authorized by the franchise shall be automatically reduced to the number of vehicles for which public
transportation vehicle permits have been issued for that year. If a taxi is out of service, the taxi owner shall report that fact to the city within two (2)
business days. If a taxi is out of service for forty five (45) consecutive calendar days during the term of the public transportation vehicle permit issued
for such vehicle, then the permit shall automatically expire and the total number of taxis authorized by the franchise governing such vehicle shall be
automatically reduced by one. Provided, however, the city may extend the period that a taxi may be out of service for up to thirty one (31) days, for a
total maximum period of seventy five (75) consecutive days, upon a determination by the city that there is good cause, beyond the reasonable control
of the taxi owner, that such vehicle is out of service for more than forty five (45) days. Upon reduction of the number of taxis authorized by a franchise
pursuant to this section, the number of vehicles authorized by such franchise may be subsequently increased only through the process described in
subsection 7-4-102K of this chapter.
B. If the city revokes a public transportation operator's permit pursuant to article 3 of this chapter, and if, after giving notice to the franchisee and
conducting a hearing in the manner set forth in this article, the city determines that the underlying conduct that resulted in the revocation decision
occurred within the course and scope of operations pursuant to a taxi franchise, then the city shall reduce the total number of taxis authorized to the
corresponding franchisee by one taxicab for each revocation. Upon each such reduction, a franchisee must wait one year before being eligible for
possible reallotment of additional taxis pursuant to subsection 7-4-102K of this chapter; provided, however, if all franchisees have had a reduction in
the number of taxis and the city decides there is a need to increase the number of taxis in service, the city may increase the number of authorized taxis
of the franchisee with the least amount of time left in such one year waiting period. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-105: ENVIRONMENTAL GOALS:
It is a goal of the city to maximize the use of taxicab vehicles that exceed the state of California's standards for low emissions of pollutants including
greenhouse gases. The transportation official shall promulgate rules, and shall include provisions in any competition to award taxicab franchises and in the
franchise agreement, with the purpose of achieving this goal. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-106: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation official shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of
this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. The holder of a franchise and all taxi drivers shall
comply with such rules and regulations and any violation of such rules and regulations shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-
2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 307/797
Article 2. Taxis And Other Public Transportation Vehicles
7-4-201: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. No person shall operate any taxi, limousine, bus, sightseeing vehicle, or other public transportation vehicle without a public transportation vehicle permit
for each such vehicle issued under the provisions of this title; with the exception of those vehicles designated in subsection B of this section.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be applicable to the following:
1. Any vehicle for which a permit or certificate has been issued by the state public utilities commission or by the federal interstate commerce
commission.
2. Any school bus used by or under contract with, a public or private school.
3. Any vehicle transporting passengers from a point outside the city to a destination within the city, or proceeding through the city while en route to a
destination outside the city. This exemption allows a taxi without a public transportation vehicle permit to unload and reload particular passengers
with the intent to transport them to another location as long as: a) its taximeter continues to run; b) it does not leave the city; and c) it does not
provide transportation to any other persons while waiting for such passengers. This exemption shall not apply to any taxi that unloads passengers
within the city, departs the city, resets its taximeter and then returns to the city and reloads the same passengers. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-202: APPLICATION FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE PERMIT:
Applications for public transportation vehicle permits shall be filed with the city and shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Completion of an application on the form designated by the city, and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.
B. New applications shall be filed a minimum of forty five (45) days prior to the date requested for issuance of the permit. Any new application that is
rejected must be refiled a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the date requested for permit issuance. An application filed less than thirty (30) days prior
to the date requested for permit issuance shall not be accepted.
C. Payment of the fee as prescribed by council resolution.
D. An inspection and a certificate of the mechanical condition of the vehicle issued within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application.
E. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of the current registration issued by the state department of motor vehicles for the vehicle for which the
permit is requested.
F. Renewal permit applications shall be filed a minimum of forty five (45) days prior to expiration of any existing permit. Any renewal application that is
rejected must be refiled a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to expiration of any existing permit. A renewal application that is refiled less than thirty (30)
days prior to the date requested for permit renewal shall not be accepted.
G. Where the applicant is a corporation, association, partnership, or other legal entity, applicant shall mean each partner, officer, director, and each
shareholder owning or controlling more than ten percent (10%) of such entity.
H. Applications for taxis shall be made by, and the permit issued to, the holder of the taxicab franchise; provided further, if the holder of the franchise is an
association, the public transportation vehicle permit application shall be filed by the owner of the vehicle, and permit issued under this article shall be
issued to the owner of such vehicle working for a specific franchisee. All correspondence shall be conducted through the holder of the franchise. If the
holder of the franchise is an association, then such association shall be responsible for communicating city correspondence to the owner of the vehicle.
An "association", for purposes of this article, is defined as an organization which provides taxi service, and the taxi vehicles are owned and operated or
leased out by individual members of such organization.
I. Applications for taxis shall be accompanied by a taximeter inspection permit which has been issued by the county of Los Angeles department of weights
and measures within thirty (30) days of filing of the application. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-203: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
A. The public transportation vehicle permit will be issued by the transportation official unless there is a finding that:
1. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative
characteristics;
2. The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application;
3. The vehicle does not comply with the rules and regulations of the city including the limit on the number of vehicle permits to be issued to a
franchisee;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 308/797
4. If the application is for renewal of a permit, that the applicant has violated conditions of the previous permit, or ordinances or regulations of the city in
the conduct of the business or activity.
B. When one or more of the findings is negative to the applicant, a permit may be conditionally issued to the applicant, where unique circumstances exist
which justify issuance of the permit, and provided that appropriate conditions are imposed on the permit to protect the public health, welfare, and
safety. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-204: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Where the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code, of the denial and reasons
therefor. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-205: TERMS OF PERMITS:
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for a period of one year from date of issuance unless a shorter term is specified on the permit. A
separate permit is required for each vehicle. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-206: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT OR IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS:
A permit issued under this article may be revoked, suspended, or sanctions imposed by the transportation official for any of the following reasons:
A. A material false statement contained in the application;
B. Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations;
C. Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the permit;
D. Failure of permittee to comply with provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations as may be applicable;
E. Conduct of the business in a fraudulent or disorderly manner, or in a manner which endangers the public health, welfare, or safety. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff.
2-6-2015)
7-4-207: NOTICE OF PROPOSED DISCIPLINARY ACTION AND HEARING:
Prior to suspension or revocation of a public transportation vehicle permit, or the imposition of sanctions, a hearing shall be held thereon by the
transportation official. The permittee shall be notified in writing of the grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit or imposition of sanctions at least
ten (10) days prior to the scheduled hearing. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-208: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Where the conduct of the permittee or the mechanical condition of the vehicle creates an imminent peril to the public health, welfare, safety, or where the
permittee refuses to allow inspection of the vehicle pursuant to section 7-4-216 of this chapter, the permit may be summarily suspended by the
transportation official upon written notice to the permittee stating the basis for the suspension and without a hearing; provided further, any temporary
emergency suspension shall not exceed fifteen (15) days pending a hearing under section 7-4-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-209: DECISION ON SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR SANCTIONS:
The decision of the transportation official shall be rendered within five (5) days of the hearing. The decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the
findings and reasons for the decision, and the licensee shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-
2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-210: TRANSFER OF PERMITS:
A. Public transportation vehicle permits issued to one vehicle may be transferred to a replacement vehicle, provided that the transferee vehicle meets the
requirements of this chapter, and the applicant complies with regulations issued pursuant to section 7-4-217 of this chapter, and pays the transfer fee
as designated by council resolution.
B. A public transportation vehicle permit issued to one person for a vehicle may be transferred to another person, provided that the transferee applicant
files the transfer application form designated by the city, meets the criteria of section 7-4-203 of this chapter, complies with any regulations issued
pursuant to section 7-4-217 of this chapter, and pays the transfer fee as designated by council resolution. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-211: APPEAL TO TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 309/797
Any final decision of the transportation official denying a permit or imposing sanctions under this article may be appealed to the traffic and parking
commission. Any appeal shall be filed with the transportation official within fourteen (14) days of the decision by the transportation official. The traffic and
parking commission shall hold a hearing on the appeal, and the appellant shall be given at least ten (10) days' notice of such hearing. The hearing shall be
held under the rules of procedure adopted by the traffic and parking commission. The traffic and parking commission shall have the authority to sustain,
modify, or overrule the decision of the transportation official. The decision shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the decision and the appellant
shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. Any decision rendered by the traffic and parking commission under
this section shall be final and shall not be appealable to city council. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-212: RESERVED:
(Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-213: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES:
In addition to other regulatory provisions of this code, the following restrictions and prohibitions shall be applicable to public transportation vehicles:
A. The public transportation operator's permit shall be conspicuously displayed inside each vehicle at all times such vehicle is operated in the city. The
holder in which the permit is displayed shall contain a statement which is visible to passengers upon removal of the permit, and which states the public
transportation operator's permit is required by law to be displayed at all times the vehicle is in operation.
B. The rates charged for taxicab service shall be conspicuously displayed in both the front and rear seating compartments of each vehicle, in clearly
legible print and on a placard of a minimum size of four inches by six inches (4" x 6"); and such placard shall also state the name, business address,
and telephone number of the holder of the taxicab franchise.
C. The driver shall, upon receipt of full payment of the fare, issue a written receipt to any passenger requesting a receipt.
D. No owner, driver, or agent shall charge, collect, demand, receive, or arrange for any compensation for service in excess of the rates established by the
city council.
E. No owner, operator, or agent shall misrepresent by word, sign, hatband, insignia, or badge, or by any other means or device, the true identity of the
vehicle in soliciting patronage for such vehicle.
F. The operator of the vehicle shall not cruise streets for the purpose of soliciting passengers, shall not leave the vehicle for the purpose of soliciting
passengers, and shall not solicit passengers in a tone of voice louder than ordinarily used in conversation.
G. The operator of the vehicle shall be properly groomed and neatly dressed.
H. Each public transportation vehicle shall have the current public transportation vehicle permit issued by the city affixed on the vehicle as required by the
transportation official.
I. The vehicle, and all equipment therein, shall comply with all applicable requirements of the state Vehicle Code, the federal motor vehicle safety
standards, safety orders of the state division of industrial safety, the Americans with disabilities act, and any vehicle standards promulgated by the city.
J. Any person violating this section shall be subject to an administrative citation as provided by title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this code with such penalties
as specified in a resolution adopted by the city council or such other penalties as determined by the city prosecutor. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-214: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO TAXIS:
In addition to the other regulatory provisions of this code, and the regulatory provisions of section 7-4-213 of this chapter, the following restrictions and
prohibitions are specifically applicable to taxis:
A. No taxicab shall stand in a taxicab zone or taxicab stand unless the vehicle both: 1) is authorized by a franchise pursuant to this code; and 2) has been
issued a public transportation vehicle permit pursuant to this code. More than one taxicab from each franchisee may simultaneously stand in a queue in
any designated taxicab zone or taxicab stand unless one or more taxicabs from a franchisee or franchisees which are unrepresented in the taxicab
zone or taxicab stand approach to park at the taxicab zone or taxicab stand. In such event, the taxicab which is standing last in the queue in the taxicab
zone or taxicab stand and which is represented by the same franchisee shall relinquish its space to the taxicab which is not represented in the taxicab
zone or taxicab stand. Every driver shall remain inside their cab while waiting at a taxicab zone or taxicab stand.
B. Every taxicab shall be identified by marking on both sides of the vehicle the name and telephone number of the taxi company, and a number
designating the specific taxicab; and with the number designating the specific taxicab also placed on the rear of the vehicle. The numbering method
shall be approved by the city and shall allow easy determination that the taxicab is one permitted for operation in Beverly Hills. Lettering shall be not
less than two and one-fourth inches (21/4") in height and not less than five-sixteenths inch (5/16") in stroke.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 310/797
C. No sign shall be displayed upon any taxicab; except a sign identifying the vehicle as a taxi may be displayed on the top of such vehicles, and provided
that such sign does not exceed six inches (6") high and twenty four inches (24") in length.
D. Every taxi driver while transporting any passenger to a destination shall proceed with the most direct route which will deliver the passenger safely and
expeditiously to the destination.
E. Any person engaging a taxicab shall have the full and exclusive use of such vehicle, and the taxi driver shall not solicit or carry any additional
passenger without the consent of the person first engaging the taxi.
F. Taxi passengers shall be seated in the rear seat of the taxi, except when the rear seat of the taxicab is fully occupied, or except for student drivers,
supervisors, or aged, infirm, or handicapped persons who cannot readily enter the rear compartment of the taxicab.
G. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a computer dispatch system capable of two-way voice communication and two-way data communication with the
franchisee base computer dispatch system, from all locations within the city limits. Every driver of a taxicab shall monitor the computer dispatch system
at all times, and the computer dispatch system shall be in operation at all times that the vehicle is in service.
H. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter which shall at all times accurately reflect the taxi service charges. Taximeters shall be of a type and
design approved by the city. Taximeters shall be illuminated with charges readily discernible by any passenger in the taxicab. Where the approved
taximeter is capable of a setting to rates other than approved by the city, the taximeter shall by sign, or other device clearly indicate when the rates
authorized by this chapter are being charged when operating within the city.
I. The documents required by subsection 7-4-213A of this chapter shall be displayed in each taxicab, by placing in a holder permanently affixed to the
dash of the vehicle, and in full view of passengers. A taxicab service evaluation notice, identifying the telephone number to contact in the event of
passenger complaint or comment, in the form required by the city, shall be conspicuously displayed in the taxicab vehicle. Additional passenger notices
shall be displayed as requested by the city.
J. No vehicle shall be issued a public transportation vehicle permit for taxicab use where such vehicle is in excess of five (5) years of age from its model
year unless such vehicle passes a special inspection by a mechanic selected by the city and not affiliated with the taxicab operator before the end of
the vehicle's fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth years, as applicable, and obtains a certificate certifying that the vehicle meets the city's standards for
mechanical condition, appearance, and passenger comfort. This special vehicle inspection shall be in addition to the inspections required by
subsection 7-4-202D and section 7-4-216 of this chapter and shall be based upon standards established by the city. Notwithstanding any previously
issued public transportation vehicle permits, taxicab vehicles shall be removed from service by midnight on December 31 at the conclusion of the
vehicle's eighth model year; provided, however, vehicles that are wheelchair accessible under ADA standards may remain in operation until twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 at the conclusion of the vehicle's tenth model year.
K. Any vehicle operated as a taxi shall be equipped with functioning air conditioning.
L. No taxicab shall be operated without a distinctive name, monogram, uniform color scheme or other identification which designates the company
responsible for the taxicab and which has been approved by the city. No name, monogram, color scheme, or identification shall be in conflict with or
imitate those used by another taxicab company in the city or any jurisdiction within five (5) miles of the city limits in such a manner as to be misleading
or to tend to confuse or defraud the public, as determined solely by the city. Once an identifying name, monogram, color scheme or other identification
has been approved by the city, no change will be required based on adoption of a similar name, monogram, color scheme or other identification by a
company operating in another jurisdiction.
M. Each taxicab operated under a franchise shall be identified as a city of Beverly Hills authorized taxicab by decals or other suitable means as specified
by the city. Identifying decals shall be provided by the city for such purpose upon payment of the fee specified in section 7-4-202 of this chapter. No
person shall identify any vehicle by means of a city of Beverly Hills decal or facsimile thereof unless authorized to do so by the city.
N. Each taxicab shall be equipped with a terminal facing the back seat that provides passengers the ability to pay for any trip using a credit or debit card,
without providing prior notice of their intent to do so, without assistance from the driver. The amount charged shall be the amount displayed on the
taximeter plus any tip amount, or no tip, as chosen by the passenger.
O. Smoking is forbidden in taxicabs at all times. "Smoking" has the same meaning as defined in title 5, chapter 4 of this code.
P. A taxicab driver shall not refuse to transport any person except for the following reasons: 1) the driver has already been dispatched on another call; 2)
the passenger is acting in a disorderly or threatening manner, or otherwise causes the driver to reasonably believe that his/her health or safety, or that
of others, may be endangered; 3) the passenger requires the use of a litter or stretcher; or 4) the passenger indicates inability to pay fare. A driver shall
not refuse a request for service because of the driver's position in line at a taxicab zone or taxicab stand; a passenger may select any cab in line.
Q. The transportation official shall promulgate rules defining the requirements for taxi drivers to assist passengers, including passengers with disabilities.
Violations of such rules shall be considered a violation of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-215: METERED TAXICAB RATES:
A. The taxicab rates for any taxicab operating over any street in the city shall be as follows:
1. Drop charge: Two dollars forty five cents ($2.45) for the first one-seventh (1/7) mile or 47.5 seconds, or fraction thereof.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 311/797
2. Other charge:
a. Distance charge: Thirty five cents ($0.35) for each additional one-seventh (1/7) mile or fraction thereof ($2.45 per mile); or
b. Waiting/delay charge: Thirty five cents ($0.35) for each 47.5 seconds waiting time and/or traffic delay, or fraction thereof ($26.53 per hour).
B. The taxicab rate for taxicab trips originating in city of Beverly Hills that provides taxicab trips to the Los Angeles International Airport shall be thirty eight
dollars ($38.00) flat rate per trip.
C. The rates and fares set forth in subsections A and B of this section shall be collected only to the extent shown on the taxicab meter, regardless of the
number of persons occupying the taxicab. No rate or charge other than that specified in this section shall be placed in effect, charged, demanded, or
collected for taxicab service originating in the city, regardless of whether the destination of such service is within or beyond the corporate boundaries of
the city.
D. Each taxicab operating within the city shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of the city's senior taxi swipe card program, as adopted by city
council, and shall accept the use of the senior taxi swipe card as provided therein. No taxicab shall prevent the use of a senior taxi swipe card nor deny
service to any person using the senior taxi swipe card. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-216: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
The transportation official shall have authority at all reasonable times to inspect, or cause the inspection of any public transportation vehicle and the
records of any permittee regulated by this article.
A. Refusal to permit inspection shall be the basis for emergency suspension of the permit pursuant to section 7-4-208 of this chapter.
B. When an inspection reveals safety defects that in the opinion of the transportation official pose an imminent peril to the public health, welfare or safety,
or where the taximeter on any taxicab is inaccurate or has been tampered with to incorrectly reflect the rates authorized by city, the permit may be
suspended pursuant to section 7-4-208 of this chapter.
C. Failure to appear for a scheduled inspection shall constitute a violation of this code subject to an administrative citation pursuant to title 1, chapter 3 of
this code.
D. If a public transportation vehicle fails a scheduled inspection, the permittee shall arrange for a reinspection of the vehicle within fourteen (14) calendar
days. The permittee shall be responsible for paying the reinspection fee as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-217: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation official shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of
this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. The holder of the public transportation vehicle permit
shall comply with such rules and regulations and any violation shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-218: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE INSURANCE:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-4-2 of this code, every applicant for a taxicab transportation vehicle permit or permits shall obtain and maintain
in full force and effect commercial automobile liability insurance meeting the following requirements for each vehicle listed on the application:
A. The insurer must be a carrier licensed and admitted by the California department of insurance to sell commercial automobile liability insurance in the
state of California with an A.M. Best rating as required by the transportation official.
B. The policy shall be written with policy limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence. Such insurance
may include a property damage deductible not greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per occurrence.
C. The policy shall contain a condition that it cannot be modified or canceled without at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the city.
D. Each policy shall contain an endorsement naming the city as an additional insured and shall be primary to and not contributing with any other insurance
covering or maintained by the city.
E. A certificate of insurance shall be attached to the application for the taxicab public transportation vehicle permit or permits. Upon approval of the
application, a copy of the additional insured and cancellation endorsements required by subsections C and D of this section shall be filed with the city
within thirty (30) days of the date the application is approved. Certificates and endorsements shall be filed on the forms provided by the city and the
endorsement shall be notarized. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
Article 3. Operator's Permit
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 312/797
7-4-301: OPERATOR'S PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall drive or operate a public transportation vehicle regulated by this chapter without a valid public transportation operator's permit issued
under this article. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-302: APPLICATIONS FOR OPERATOR'S PERMIT:
Application for an operator's permit shall be filed with the transportation official and shall include:
A. Completion of an application on the form designated by the transportation official and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury.
B. A photograph and fingerprints of the applicant shall accompany the application.
C. Proof of a current valid California driver's license.
D. Proof applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
E. Proof that the applicant has passed an examination that shall be developed and administered by the transportation official in which the applicant
demonstrates the qualifications necessary for the operation of a public transportation vehicle. The examination shall determine whether the applicant
can perform the operator services authorized by the permit, including, but not limited to, whether the applicant knows the relevant city rules and
provisions of this code; has sufficient reading and speaking command of the English language to communicate with passengers in English without
translation assistance; and is familiar with key locations in Beverly Hills and greater Los Angeles and can find the way to these locations without use of
paper or electronic aids, and to other locations with the use of these aids.
F. Payment of the fees as prescribed by the city council.
G. Proof of employment. For purposes of this chapter, any person who drives a taxicab in affiliation with a taxicab franchisee is considered an employee of
the taxicab franchisee.
1. If the applicant will be operating a public transportation vehicle as an employee, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the employer
stating that the applicant will be employed upon issuance of the operator's permit. If the applicant will be operating a public transportation vehicle as
a member of an association, then the application shall be accompanied by a letter from the association stating that the applicant will be admitted
upon issuance of the operator's permit. If the applicant will drive a taxicab in any capacity, the application shall be accompanied by a letter from a
taxicab franchisee stating that the applicant will drive a taxicab for that franchisee.
2. An operator's permit will be valid only as long as the applicant continues to drive for the employer, association, or taxicab franchisee identified in
subsection G1 of this section. An operator's permit may be modified to allow the holder to drive for another entity provided the permit holder meets all
the requirements of this section, files a transfer application on forms provided by the city accompanied by a letter from the other entity stating that the
applicant will drive for that entity, and pays the transfer fee established by the city.
H. Proof of compliance with a controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program. That certification program, and compliance with it, must meet
the following requirements:
1. The applicant must test negative for each of the controlled substances specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of
federal regulations and for alcohol, before employment. For purposes of this subsection H, "employment" includes self-employment as an
independent driver. As used in this section, a "negative test for alcohol" means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of
less than 0.02 percent.
2. Procedures of the certification program must be substantially as in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of federal
regulations, except that the driver must show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of testing. Requirements for rehabilitation and for
return to duty and follow up testing and other requirements must be substantially as in part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of title 49 of the
code of federal regulations.
3. A test conducted in another California jurisdiction will be accepted as meeting the testing requirement of the city of Beverly Hills. Any negative test
result will be accepted for one year as meeting a requirement for periodic permit renewal testing in the city if the driver has not tested positive
subsequent to a negative result. However, an earlier negative result will not be accepted as meeting the preemployment testing requirement for any
subsequent employment, or any testing requirements under the program other than periodic testing.
4. If the permitted owner of the taxicab or taxicabs is an employer, and the applicant for an operator's permit is an employee or prospective employee,
then the following additional requirements are applicable:
a. The test results must be reported directly to the permitted owner that is the employer, or prospective employer, of the applicant for an operator's
permit. The permitted owner is required to notify the city of positive results with regard to any employee, or prospective employee, who is an
applicant for an operator's permit.
b. Permitted owners that employ taxicab drivers are responsible for compliance with, and must pay all costs of, this program with respect to their
employees and prospective employees, except that a permitted owner may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation
and of return to duty and follow up testing.
c. The permitted owner must notify the city upon termination of employment of a permitted taxicab driver. Upon termination, the operator's permit will
become void, and the taxicab driver must return the permit to the city.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 313/797
5. In the case of a self-employed independent driver, the following additional requirements are applicable:
a. Self-employed independent drivers are responsible for compliance with, and must pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves.
b. The test results must be reported directly to the city, and the city must then notify the taxicab leasing company of record, if any, of positive results.
c. Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, the city will give the driver a list of the consortia certified pursuant to part 382 (commencing with
section 382.101) of title 49 of the code of federal regulations that are known to offer tests in or near the city.
6. All test results are confidential and may not be released without the consent of the driver, except as authorized or required by law, including the
provisions of this code.
7. The city council, by resolution, may levy service charges, fees, or assessments in an amount sufficient to pay for the costs of implementing and
administering the procedures specified in this subsection H, which are implemented pursuant to California Government Code section 53075.5. (Ord.
15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-303: CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The permit will be issued by the transportation official unless there is a finding that:
A. The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, and has not subsequently demonstrated rehabilitative
characteristics.
B. The applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application.
C. Within the preceding seven (7) years, the applicant has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to reckless driving or driving under the influence of
intoxicating liquors or narcotics.
D. Within the preceding twelve (12) month period the applicant has been convicted or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more moving violations under the state
Vehicle Code or has been determined by the department of motor vehicles (or equivalent public entity) to be at fault in two (2) or more vehicular
accidents in any state.
E. The applicant fails to pass the examination required by subsection 7-4-302E of this chapter, or fails to meet other requirements of this article.
F. The applicant has tested positive for any of the controlled substances specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of
federal regulations or for alcohol. For the purposes of this subsection, a "positive test for alcohol" means an alcohol screening test showing a breath
alcohol concentration of more than 0.02 percent.
G. An applicant for a taxicab permit fails to meet the criteria established in the rules and regulations pertaining to the taxicab franchise system, or has
operated a taxicab during the last three (3) years in any jurisdiction without a valid driver's permit for such jurisdiction. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-304: DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Where the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code, of the denial and the
reasons therefor. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-305: TERMS OF PERMITS:
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be effective for a period of three (3) years from date of issuance. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-306: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMITS OR IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS:
A permit issued under this article may be revoked, suspended, or sanctions imposed by the transportation official for any of the following reasons:
A. A material false statement contained in the application.
B. Failure of permittee to comply with federal, state, or local laws.
C. Failure of permittee to comply with provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations promulgated by the transportation official.
D. The permittee has been convicted of a felony, reckless driving, pandering, the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics or illicit intoxicating
liquors, or for assault or battery, or for driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 314/797
E. Within the preceding twelve (12) month period, the permittee has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two (2) or more moving violations under the
state Vehicle Code or has been determined by the department of motor vehicles (or equivalent public entity) to be at fault in two (2) or more vehicular
accidents in any state.
F. The permittee has tested positive for any of the controlled substances specified in part 40 (commencing with section 40.1) of title 49 of the code of
federal regulations or for alcohol. For the purposes of this subsection, a "positive test for alcohol" means an alcohol screening test showing a breath
alcohol concentration of more than 0.02 percent. Procedures for random testing and requirements for rehabilitation and for return to duty and follow up
testing and other requirements shall be substantially as in part 382 (commencing with section 382.101) of title 49 of the code of federal regulations.
(Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-307: HEARING REQUIRED FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT OR IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS:
The process for suspending, revoking or imposing sanctions on a public transportation vehicle operator's permit shall substantially follow the provisions of
sections 7-4-207, 7-4-208, 7-4-209 and 7-4-211 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
7-4-308: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation official shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of provisions of
this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. The holder of an operator's permit shall comply with
such rules and regulations and any violation shall constitute a violation of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2671, eff. 2-6-2015)
Chapter 5
PARKING CITATION PROCESSING
Article 1. Parking Citation Processing Provisions
7-5-101: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PARKING CITATION PROCESSING ORDINANCE of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd.
Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-102: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.
AGENCY: See definition of Processing Agency.
CITY: At all times refers to the city of Beverly Hills.
CONTESTANT: Any "operator" or "registered owner" as defined in this section who contests a parking citation.
DEPARTMENT: The department of motor vehicles.
HEARING EXAMINER: Any qualified individual as set forth in Vehicle Code section 40215 appointed or contracted by the city to adjudicate parking citation
contests administratively.
ISSUING AGENCY: The city or its authorized agent that issues parking citations.
ISSUING OFFICER: A peace officer as defined in chapter 4.5 (commencing with section 830) of title 3 of the California Penal Code, or the successor
statutes thereto, or other issuing officer who is authorized to issue a parking citation.
OPERATOR: Any individual driving and/or in possession of a vehicle at the time a citation is issued or the registered owner.
PARKING CITATION: A notice that is personally given or mailed to the operator, or attached to the operator's vehicle, informing the operator of a parking,
equipment and/or other vehicle violation and the operator's right to elect to pay the fine for the violation or contest the citation.
PARKING PENALTY: Includes the fine authorized by law for the particular violation, any late payment penalties, administrative fees, assessments, costs of
collection as provided by law, and other related fees.
PROCESSING AGENCY: The city or its authorized agent that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking violations on behalf of
the city.
REGISTERED OWNER: The individual or entity whose name is recorded with the department of motor vehicles as having ownership of a particular
vehicle.
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS: Delinquent parking citations not paid within the time period established by resolution of the city council which are assigned to
the formal collections program conducted by the city's processing agency.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 315/797
VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle operated or suitable for operation on a highway.
VIOLATION: Parking, equipment or other vehicle violation as established pursuant to state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd.
Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996; Ord. 03-O-2426, eff. 8-1-2003)
7-5-103: AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT WITH OUTSIDE AGENCIES:
The city may issue and/or process parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations, or it may enter into a contract with a private parking
citation processing agency, or with another city, county, or other public issuing or processing agency.
Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except amounts payable
to the county pursuant to chapter 12 (commencing with section 76000) of title 8 of the California Government Code, or the successor statutes thereto, and
amounts payable to the department pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 4763 or the successor statute thereto. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993;
amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-104: AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCESS; HEARING OFFICER; PROCEDURES:
The processing agency may review appeals or other objections to a parking citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section.
A. For a period of twenty one (21) calendar days from the issuance of the parking citation, or fourteen (14) calendar days from the mailing of the notice of
delinquent parking citation, an operator may request initial review of the notice by the issuing agency. The request for initial review may be made in
writing, by telephone or in person.
B. The initial review by the processing agency shall consist of those procedures as outlined in of subsection 7-5-113A1 of this article.
C. If the operator is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the operator may contest the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation
through an administrative hearing review process as outlined in section 7-5-113 of this article.
In order to contest the parking citation, the operator must deposit with the processing agency the full amount of the parking penalty on or before the
twenty first calendar day following the mailing to that operator of the results of the processing agency's initial review. At the same time, the operator
must provide a written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation on a form provided by the processing agency. If the
operator is unable to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty, the operator must provide verifiable and substantial proof of an inability to deposit
the parking penalty. Upon presentation of such proof, the processing agency shall proceed with the contest procedure despite the operator's failure to
deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If it is ultimately determined that the operator is not liable for the parking violation, then the full amount of
the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.
The contestant may contest the parking citation either by written declaration, on forms provided by the processing agency, or by personal appearance
before a hearing examiner.
D. The processing agency shall provide, through an administrative policy, a procedure for contesting parking citations and notices of delinquent parking
violations. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-105: PROCESS BY WHICH PARKING CITATIONS MUST BE ISSUED:
Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:
A. If a vehicle is unattended at the time that the parking citation is issued for a parking violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle the
parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the California Vehicle Code, this code, or other parking regulation
violated; the date; the approximate time of the violation; the location of the violation; a statement indicating that payment is required to be made not
later than twenty one (21) calendar days from the date of the violation and the date by which the operator is to deposit the parking penalty or contest
the parking citation pursuant to section 7-5-113 of this article. The citation shall state the amount of the parking penalty and the address of the agent
authorized to receive deposit of the parking penalty. The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date,
if such date is visible; the last four (4) digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is readable through the windshield; the color of the
vehicle; and, if possible, the make of the vehicle.
B. The parking citation or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and the processing
agency, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.
C. Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle pursuant to subsection A of this section, the issuing officer shall file notice of the
parking violation with the processing agency.
D. If during issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to
attaching the parking citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within
fifteen (15) days of issuance of the parking citation, a copy of the parking citation to the registered owner.
E. If after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle, or personally given to the operator, the issuing agency or the issuing officer determines
that the issuing officer was in error in issuing the parking citation, the issuing officer or the issuing agency may recommend, in writing, that the parking
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 316/797
citation be canceled. The recommendation shall state the reason or reasons for cancellation and shall be filed with the processing agency.
If after a copy of the notice of parking violation is attached to the vehicle, the issuing officer determines that there is incorrect data on the notice,
including, but not limited to, the date or time, the issuing officer may indicate in writing, on a form attached to the original notice, the necessary
correction to allow for the timely entry of the notice on the processing agency's data system. A copy of the correction shall be mailed to the operator
receiving the notice of parking violation.
Under no circumstance shall a personal relationship with any public official, officer, issuing officer, or law enforcement agency be grounds for
cancellation.
F. If a processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation as set forth in the city's administrative policy, or pursuant to any other
basis provided by law, then the finding or findings shall be filed with the processing agency, and the parking citation shall be cancelled pursuant to
subsection 7-5-113A1 of this article. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-106: PARKING PENALTIES:
A. Each parking citation shall bear civil penalties as follows:
1. A parking fine established by resolution of the city council;
2. If no payment or request to contest is filed within the period provided by law after notice of delinquent parking violation is issued, a delinquent penalty
established by resolution of the city council;
3. The surcharges or assessments, if any, mandated by state law for a violation;
4. The administrative fee, if any, charged to the city by the California department of motor vehicles, as a result of any hold on registration filed by the
processing agency pursuant to section 4760 of the California Vehicle Code or any successor statute;
5. The fee, if any, charged to the city by the processing agency upon assignment of a delinquent account for special collection processing.
B. All parking penalties received by the processing agency shall accrue to the benefit of the city. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250,
eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996; Ord. 03-O-2426, eff. 8-1-2003)
7-5-107: PARKING PENALTIES RECEIVED BY DATE FIXED; NO CONTEST; REQUEST TO CONTEST:
If the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest by the date fixed on the parking citation, all proceedings as to that
parking citation shall terminate.
If the operator contests the parking citation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with section 7-5-113 of this article. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-
23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-108: PARKING PENALTIES NOT RECEIVED BY DATE FIXED:
If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to
the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to section 7-5-109 of this article.
Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation may be made by personal service or by first class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle
as shown on the records of the department. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-109: NOTICE OF DELINQUENT PARKING VIOLATION; CONTENTS:
The notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information required to be included in a parking citation pursuant to section 7-5-105 of this
article. The notice of delinquent parking violation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking
penalty or contests the citation within twenty one (21) calendar days after mailing the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an
affidavit of nonliability that complies with section 7-5-111 or 7-5-112 of this article, the vehicle registration shall not be renewed until the parking penalties
have been paid. In addition, the notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain, or be accompanied by, an affidavit of nonliability and information of
what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing an affidavit, and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency.
If the parking penalty is paid within twenty one (21) calendar days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, no late penalty or similar
fee shall be charged to the operator. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-110: COPY OF CITATION UPON REQUEST BY REGISTERED OWNER:
A. Within fifteen (15) days of request, made by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the
registered owner's agent, who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, a copy of the original parking citation. The issuing agency may
charge a fee sufficient to cover the actual cost of copying and/or locating the original parking citation, not to exceed two dollars ($2.00). Until the issuing
or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed to immobilize the
vehicle in question merely because the registered owner has received five (5) or more outstanding parking violations over a period of five (5) or more
days.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 317/797
B. If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that
vehicle, the processing agency shall, on written request of the operator, cancel the notice of parking violation. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd.
Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-111: AFFIDAVIT OF NONLIABILITY; LEASED OR RENTED VEHICLE:
A registered owner shall be released from liability for a parking citation if the registered owner files with the processing agency an affidavit of nonliability in
a form satisfactory to the processing agency and such form is returned within thirty (30) calendar days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking
violation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer which identifies the
renter or lessee and provides the operator's driver's license number, name, and address. The processing agency shall serve or mail to the renter or lessee
identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall inform the renter or lessee that he or she must
pay the full amount of the fine, or provide notice to the processing agency that he or she intends to contest the parking citation pursuant to section 7-5-113
of this article within twenty one (21) calendar days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the processing agency does not receive
payment of the parking citation or does not receive notice of an intent to contest within twenty one (21) calendar days, the processing agency may proceed
against the renter or lessee pursuant to section 7-5-115 of this article. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-
2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-112: AFFIDAVIT OF NONLIABILITY; SALE:
A registered owner of a vehicle shall be released from liability for a parking citation issued to that vehicle if the registered owner served with a notice of
delinquent parking violation files with the processing agency, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of delinquent parking violation, an affidavit of
nonliability together with proof that the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the
vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation. The processing agency shall obtain verification
from the department that the former owner has complied with the requirements necessary to release the former owner from liability pursuant to California
Vehicle Code section 5602 or the successor statue thereto.
If the registered owner has complied with California Vehicle Code section 5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall cancel the
notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner.
If the registered owner has not complied with the requirements necessary to release the owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code section
5602, or the successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation must be paid in full or contested pursuant
to section 7-5-113 of this article. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to section 7-5-115 of this article.
(Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-113: CONTESTING PARKING CITATION; PROCEDURE:
A. If an operator or registered owner contests a parking citation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do all of the
following:
1. First, either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the issuing agency investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to
the contestant's written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation.
If, based on the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur, because the registered owner was not
responsible for the violation by virtue of having sold, rented or leased the vehicle, or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set
forth in the city's administrative policy warrant a dismissal, the processing agency shall cancel the parking citation, and make an adequate record of
the reason or reasons for canceling the parking citation. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation by first class mail to the
contestant within ten (10) days of the decision.
2. If the contestant is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in subsection A1 of this section, the contestant may, within twenty
one (21) calendar days of the mailing of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty and other related fees or
provide proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty, and request an administrative review. An administrative hearing shall be held within ninety
(90) calendar days following the receipt of a request for an administrative hearing, excluding time tolled pursuant to article 2 of chapter 1 of division
17 of the Vehicle Code. The operator requesting the administrative hearing may request one continuance, not to exceed twenty one (21) calendar
days.
3. If the contestant prevails at the administrative hearing, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.
B. The administrative review procedure shall consist of the following:
1. The contestant shall make a written request for administrative review on a form and in a manner satisfactory to the processing agency, and may
request to contest the parking citation either in person or by written declaration.
2. If the contestant is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking citation without the necessity of
the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as if the minor were an adult.
3. The administrative review shall be conducted before a qualified hearing examiner as defined in Vehicle Code section 20215 and appointed or
contracted by the city to conduct the administrative review.
C. The issuing officer shall not be required to participate in an administrative review. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence
other than the parking citation or copy thereof, and information received from the department identifying the registered owner of the vehicle.
This documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 318/797
D. The hearing examiner's final decision shall be in writing and delivered personally to the contestant or the contestant's agent, or delivered by first class
mail within ten (10) working days following the hearing.
E. If the contestant is not the registered owner of the vehicle, all notices to the contestant required under this section shall also be given to the registered
owner by first class mail. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253 eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-114: VEHICLE PARKING PERMITS DENIED IF OUTSTANDING PARKING PENALTIES:
Parking permits issued by the city pursuant to chapter 3 of this title shall not be issued to applicants unless all outstanding parking penalties and other
related fees are paid in full. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-115: COLLECTION OF UNPAID PARKING PENALTIES:
Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under subsection A or B of this section, but not both, in order to collect an
unpaid parking penalty:
A. File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and other related fees with the department for collection pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section
4760 or the successor statute thereto.
B. If more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) in unpaid parking penalties and other related fees have been accrued by any one registered owner or the
registered owner's renter, lessee or sales transferee, proof thereof may be filed with the court which has the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution
may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of unpaid civil judgments
entered against a defendant in an action against a debtor.
The processing agency shall send notice by first class mail to the registered owner or renter, lessee or sales transferee indicating that a civil judgment
has been filed and the date that the judgment shall become effective. The notice shall also indicate the time: that execution may be levied against that
person's assets, that liens may be placed against that person's property, that the person's wages may be garnished, and that other steps may be taken
to satisfy the judgment. The notice shall also state that the processing agency will terminate the commencement of a civil judgment proceeding if all
parking penalties and other related fees are paid prior to the date set for hearing. If judgment is entered, then the city may file a writ of execution or an
abstract with the court clerk's office identifying the means by which the civil judgment is to be satisfied.
If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency.
The processing agency shall pay the established first paper civil filing fee at the time an entry of civil judgment is requested.
C. If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the
department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section 4760, or the successor statute thereto, then the processing agency may file proof of unpaid
penalties and fees with the court which has the same effect as a civil judgment as provided in subsection B of this section.
D. The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking citation filed with the department unless the processing agency
has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty (60) days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been
collected by the department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code section 4760 or the successor statute thereto. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993;
amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-116: OBLIGATION OF PROCESSING AGENCY ONCE PARKING PENALTY PAID:
A. If the operator or registered owner served with notice of delinquent parking violation, or any other person who presents the parking citation or notice of
delinquent parking violation, deposits the penalty with the person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following:
1. Upon request, provide the operator, registered owner, or the registered owner's agent with a copy of the citation information presented in the notice
of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall, in turn, obtain and record in its records the name, address and driver's license number
of the person actually given the copy of the citation information.
2. Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with department or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to section
7-5-115 of this article.
B. If the processing agency receives full payment of all parking penalties and other related fees and the processing agency has neither filed a notice of
delinquent parking violation nor entered a civil judgment, then all proceedings for that citation shall cease.
C. If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the department and has been returned by the department pursuant to the provisions of
the California Vehicle Code and payment of the parking penalty has been made, along with any other related fees, then the proceedings for that citation
shall cease.
D. If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the department and has not been returned by the department, and payment of the
parking penalty for, and any applicable costs of, service in connection with debt collection have been made, the processing agency shall do all of the
following:
1. Deliver a certificate of payment to the operator, or other person making payment,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 319/797
2. Within five (5) working days transmit payment information to the department in the manner prescribed by the department,
3. Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation,
4. Deposit all parking penalties and other fees as required by law. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-
2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-117: DEPOSIT OF PARKING PENALTIES WITH THE CITY:
All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing
agency, and then remitted to the city, if the city is not also the processing agency.
If the city is not the processing agency, then the city shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for periodic transfer of parking citation
receipts, along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed and the sums received. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250,
eff. 12-5-1995; Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-118: FILING OF ANNUAL REPORTS:
The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received
and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the city or its authorized issuing agency or the state controller. The report is a
public record and shall be delivered to the city and its authorized issuing agency. (Ord. 93-O-2173, eff. 7-23-1993; amd. Ord. 95-O-2250, eff. 12-5-1995;
Ord. 96-O-2253, eff. 1-12-1996)
7-5-119: PARKING TICKET FORGIVENESS PROGRAM:
The city council may adopt by resolution a parking ticket forgiveness program for individuals who are homeless, formerly homeless, or at risk of
homelessness. (Ord. 09-O-2577, eff. 1-15-2010)
Chapter 6
SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES
7-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit shared mobility devices from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public
right-of-way or on public property, or offered for use anywhere in the City, so as to allow for adequate pedestrian traffic flow and to promote public safety.
(Ord. 18-O-2769, eff. 1-18-2019)
7-6-2: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, "shared mobility device" means any wheeled device, other than an automobile or motorcycle, that is powered by a motor; is
accessed via an on-demand portal, whether a smartphone application, membership card, or similar method; is operated by a private entity that owns,
manages, and maintains devices for shared use by members of the public; and is available to members of the public in unstaffed, self-service locations,
except for those locations which are designated by the City. (Ord. 18-O-2769, eff. 1-18-2019)
7-6-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. It is unlawful to park, leave standing, leave lying, abandon, or otherwise place a shared mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property
anywhere within the City.
B. It is unlawful to operate a shared mobility device in a public right-of-way or on public property anywhere within the City.
C. It is unlawful to provide or offer for use a shared mobility device anywhere within the City. (Ord. 18-O-2769, eff. 1-18-2019)
7-6-4: VIOLATIONS:
A. Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided for in title 1, chapter 3, article 1 of this Code.
B. Peace officers, traffic control officers, parking enforcement officers, those City officials designated by the City Manager, and any party contracted by the
City to specifically impound shared mobility devices are authorized to impound any shared mobility device pursuant to the California Vehicle Code. The
impound shall be subject to an impound and storage fee established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 18-O-2769, eff. 1-18-2019)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 320/797
7-6-5: SUNSET PROVISION:
This chapter shall remain in effect for twelve (12) months from the date of its adoption, at which time it shall become ineffective unless the City Council
acts to readopt the provisions herein. (Ord. 18-O-2769, 1-18-2019)
Chapter 7
SPECTATORS AT SPEED CONTESTS OR RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITIONS
7-7-1: PURPOSE:
Pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed (more commonly referred to as street racing or
drag racing) conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. In addition, California Vehicle Code section 23103 prohibits reckless driving, which is
defined to mean driving a vehicle upon a highway or in an off street parking facility in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
Reckless driving includes performing vehicle stunts (commonly referred to as sideshows), including but not limited to, driving in tight circles (referred to as
doughnuts) and exiting a car one is driving and dancing around or on top of it (referred to as ghost riding). Such street racing and reckless driving
threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of
private business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the City. Spectators tend to gather, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, forming a
racetrack area, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding and abetting the racing process or reckless driving exhibitions (sideshows).
Illegal street racers and exhibitors of reckless driving can accelerate to high speeds and engage in reckless driving behavior without regard to property,
oncoming traffic, pedestrians, or vehicles parked or moving nearby, and use their electronic devices, social media and the internet to communicate with
each other and attract spectators. In most cases, illegal street races and reckless driving exhibitions attract hundreds of spectators. The mere presence of
spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and reckless driving exhibitions and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can
flourish.
This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races and reckless driving exhibitions. The chapter targets a very clear, limited population
and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and
participating in illegal street races will be discouraged. (Ord. 19-O-2780, eff. 5-17-2019)
7-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST OR ILLEGAL EXHIBITION OF SPEED: Means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in
California Vehicle Code section 23109.
PREPARATIONS: For the illegal motor vehicle speed contest, illegal exhibition of speed, or reckless driving exhibition include, but are not limited to,
situations in which:
A. A group of motor vehicles or individuals have arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event;
B. A group of individuals have lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event;
C. A group of individuals have gathered on private property without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof for the purpose of participating
in or being a spectator at the event;
D. One or more individuals have impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of
conducting the event;
E. Two (2) or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed;
F. One or more drivers is revving their engine or spinning their tires in preparation for the event;
G. An individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.
RECKLESS DRIVING EXHIBITION: Means any exhibition of reckless driving referred to in California Vehicle Code section 23103.
SPECTATOR: Means any individual who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed, or reckless driving exhibition, or at a
location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses.
Spectator includes any individual at the location of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a
passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 19-O-2780, eff. 5-17-2019)
7-7-3: SPECTATORS:
A. It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property, at an illegal motor
vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed or reckless driving exhibition.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 321/797
B. It is unlawful for any individual to be knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway, or on private property, where preparations
are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed or reckless driving exhibition.
C. An individual is present at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest, exhibition of speed or reckless driving exhibition if that individual is within one
hundred feet (100') of the location of the event, or within one hundred feet (100') of the location where preparations are being made for the event. (Ord.
19-O-2780, eff. 5-17-2019)
Title 8
PARKS, STREETS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 1
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Article 1. General Parks And Recreational Facilities Provisions
8-1-101: CITY PARKS DESIGNATED:
The following areas within the city are hereby designated as public parks for the recreational use of the public:
Arnaz Minipark, on Arnaz Drive, north of Wilshire Boulevard and south of Clifton Way;
Beverly Gardens Park, extending from the westerly city limits along the northerly side of Wilshire Boulevard to the intersection of Santa Monica Boulevard,
thence along the northerly side of Santa Monica Boulevard, including the three (3) blocks between Rodeo Drive, Crescent Drive, Park Way, and Santa
Monica Boulevard, and extending to the easterly city limits;
Coldwater Canyon Park, which includes the area north and south of Coldwater Canyon Drive at the intersection of North Beverly Drive;
Crescent Minipark, on Crescent Drive, north of Wilshire Boulevard and south of Clifton Way;
Greystone Park, north of Doheny Road and west of Loma Vista Drive, and with the main entrance from Loma Vista Drive;
Hamel Minipark, on Hamel Drive, south of Charleville Boulevard and north of Gregory Way;
La Cienega Park, between Le Doux Road, Olympic Boulevard, Schumacker Drive, and Gregory Way;
Maltz Minipark, on Whittier Drive, south of Sunset Boulevard and north of Lomitas Avenue;
Oakhurst Minipark, on Oakhurst Drive, south of Wilshire Boulevard and north of Charleville Boulevard;
Reeves Minipark, on Reeves Drive, south of Wilshire Boulevard and north of Charleville Boulevard;
Rexford Minipark, on Rexford Drive, south of Burton Way and north of Dayton Way;
Roxbury Memorial Park, on Olympic Boulevard between the westerly city limits and Roxbury Drive;
Will Rogers Memorial Park, between Sunset Boulevard, Beverly Drive, and Canyon Drive. (1962 Code § 2-7.01; amd. Ord. 00-O-2353, eff. 10-20-2000;
Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-102: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY:
Recreational activity in any of the designated public parks, use of such parks, and city sponsored recreational activity at any facility leased from the
Beverly Hills school district, shall be under the direction and control of the director of recreation and parks. (1962 Code § 2-7.02; amd. Ord. 17-O-2722, eff.
2-10-2017)
8-1-103: HOURS OF OPERATION:
A. The following public parks shall be closed between dusk and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each day: Arnaz Minipark, Crescent Minipark, Hamel Minipark,
Maltz Minipark, Oakhurst Minipark, Reeves Minipark, and Rexford Minipark.
B. The following parks shall be closed between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. each day: Beverly Gardens Park,
Coldwater Canyon Park, La Cienega Park, Roxbury Memorial Park, and Will Rogers Memorial Park.
C. Greystone Park shall be closed between the hours from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. of each day.
D. Use of the public parks at times other than those specified in this section may be authorized by a special permit issued by the director of recreation and
parks pursuant to rules and regulations issued under section 8-1-107 of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 2-7.01.1, 2-7.06; amd. Ord. 00-O-2353, eff. 10-20-
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 322/797
2000; Ord. 04-O-2456, eff. 11-19-2004; Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-104: RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO USE OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
The following conduct or activity shall be prohibited in the use of any park or recreational facility:
A. Making or kindling any fire except in designated barbecues provided by the city;
B. Engaging or participating in any game or activity which may create hazard or danger to other persons or property, including, but not limited to, baseball,
driving of golf balls, engaging in model airplane flying; provided further, any such activity is permissible within any area which is specifically designated
for such activity;
C. Consumption of any alcoholic beverage, unless authorized under a special permit issued by the director of recreation and parks pursuant to rules and
regulations issued under section 8-1-107 of this chapter;
D. Riding any bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or similar type of device except where such activity is specially authorized by posted signs;
E. Obstructing, interfering with, or loitering, in a manner which interferes with the use or purpose of any recreation facility;
F. Using any recreation or park facility for the purpose of tennis or golf instruction for compensation; or the use of more than six (6) tennis balls by two (2)
or more persons in any tennis court, with the exception of city sponsored tennis instruction;
G. Sponsoring or holding any organized gathering of fifty (50) or more persons in any park, unless authorized by special permit issued by the director of
recreation and parks pursuant to rules and regulations adopted under section 8-1-107 of this chapter. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-
2017)
8-1-105: SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO GREYSTONE PARK:
Recreational uses of Greystone Park shall be limited principally to the enjoyment and appreciation of the cultural and aesthetic values of its grounds,
gardens, structures, and view and to such other programs and events which will enhance community enjoyment and appreciation of the cultural arts. To
achieve this objective, in addition to the restrictions imposed by section 8-1-104 of this chapter, the following additional conduct and activities shall be
prohibited in Greystone Park, unless such activity is authorized by special permit issued pursuant to rules and regulations issued by the director of
recreation and parks under section 8-1-107 of this chapter:
A. Picnicking or food consumption;
B. Engaging or participating in organized physical games, including, but not limited to, baseball, football, or similar activity, or the throwing of balls or other
objects;
C. Using any noise producing hobby or sports equipment or devices;
D. Using any type of public address system, loudspeaker, or any electrically powered musical instrument;
E. Dogs shall be prohibited, except authorized guide dogs while assisting the visually impaired. (1962 Code § 2-7.01.1; amd. Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-
2017)
8-1-106: RESTRICTIONS AND PRIORITIES ON LEASED USE OF CITY RECREATIONAL FACILITIES:
Recreational facilities may be made available for rental for exclusive use when such facilities are not in use for city functions. Rental use of such
recreational facilities shall be exclusively for recreational uses and purposes, and shall not be rented for business or religious functions. Fees for such use
shall be established by council resolution, and such use shall comply with the rules and regulations issued by the director of recreation and parks pursuant
to section 8-1-107 of this chapter. Priority for rental of such facilities shall be in the following order:
A. Beverly Hills residents;
B. Groups whose membership consists of fifty percent (50%) or more of Beverly Hills residents;
C. Groups whose membership consists partially of Beverly Hills residents, but less than fifty percent (50%) of such membership is Beverly Hills residents;
D. Other individuals or groups. (1962 Code § 2-7.03; amd. Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 323/797
8-1-107: AUTHORITY TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director of recreation and parks shall designate rules and regulations pertaining to park and recreational facility use consistent with the provisions of
this chapter; and upon council approval of such rules and regulations, the director is authorized and empowered to enforce such rules and regulations.
Copies of such rules and regulations shall be made available at each recreational facility, and violation shall be subject to the penalties provided in title 1,
chapter 3, article 1 of this code. (1962 Code § 2-7.03; amd. Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
Article 2. Use Of Public Recreational Property For Professional Instruction
8-1-201: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMERCIAL OR PROFESSIONAL INSTRUCTION: Instruction performed in whole or in part for salability or profit or for any form of consideration, such
as time or money.
DIRECTOR: The director of community services or his or her designee.
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL PROPERTY: All city parks as designated in section 8-1-101 of this chapter, and city owned or parking authority owned facilities.
(Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-202: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct any commercial or professional instruction such as boot camps, fitness instruction, day camps, yoga classes, youth sports camps,
dog training or similar activities on public recreational property without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. No person shall
bring onto any public recreational property any equipment to be used for commercial or professional instruction except as authorized by a permit issued
pursuant to this article. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-203: CONTENTS OF THE APPLICATION:
A. An application for a permit shall be on forms as prescribed by the director. The application shall include:
1. The name and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the applicant is a partnership,
association, limited liability company, organization or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association,
organization or company with the address and telephone number of each;
2. The proposed dates, hours, and location where the commercial or professional instruction is to be held;
3. The number of participants anticipated to participate in the commercial or professional instruction; and
4. A list of the number and type of equipment and the weight of the equipment to be used by the applicant.
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury and shall contain an agreement whereby the applicant agrees to defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the city and its employees from and against any claims arising from the actions or omissions of the applicant or the
applicant's client(s). The agreement shall also require the applicant to fully compensate the city for any damage to public property, as well as to clean
and otherwise restore any public recreational property to the condition in which it was found prior to the conduct of the commercial or professional
instruction. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-204: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
The permittee shall be responsible to carry, maintain, and keep in full force and effect, a policy or policies of comprehensive general and/or professional
liability insurance with minimum limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, combined single limit coverage and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate against any injury, death, loss or damage as a result of wrongful or negligent acts or omissions by the permittee, with an
endorsement naming the city as an additional insured. In addition, permittee is required to carry workers' compensation and automobile coverage sufficient
to meet requirements of the state of California. The insurance shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-
2017)
8-1-205: PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
An application for a permit may be denied by the director for any of the following grounds:
A. The applicant fails to include all of the information required by section 8-1-203 of this chapter.
B. The director determines that the instructional activity or equipment proposed by the applicant will unreasonably interfere with the public's use and
enjoyment of the public recreational property.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 324/797
C. The instruction proposed in the application is prohibited by other provisions of this code.
D. The proposed instruction or equipment will unreasonably interfere with the activities authorized by another permit.
E. The proposed equipment is greater than twenty five (25) pounds.
F. The proposed instruction equipment will interfere with normal operation of the public recreational property.
G. The proposed instruction equipment will damage public recreational property.
H. The applicant has not provided evidence of an insurance policy that complies with section 8-1-204 of this chapter.
The director may impose reasonable terms and conditions concerning the commercial or professional instruction or the equipment authorized by the
permit, including the time and location of the activity, the maximum number of participants, the type and number of equipment, the duration of the
activity. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-206: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
A permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended for any of the following reasons:
A. Permittee or permittee's client damages public property;
B. A material false statement contained in the application;
C. Failure to comply with federal, state or local laws and regulations;
D. Loss of insurance;
E. Failure to comply with any conditions imposed by the city on the issuance of the permit;
F. Conduct of the business or activity in a manner which endangers the public health, welfare or safety. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-207: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Except as provided in section 8-1-208 of this chapter, no permit shall be suspended or revoked prior to providing a ten (10) calendar day written notice
to the holder of the permit and an opportunity to be heard before the officer considering revocation or suspension of the permit. On determining that
grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the director shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee.
Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based. The notice
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the permittee, at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing date.
B. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the director. All parties involved shall have a right to: 1) offer testimonial,
documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; and 2) be represented by counsel.
C. The decision of the hearing officer designated by the city to hear the matter shall be rendered within five (5) days of the close of the hearing. The
decision shall be in writing, and shall set forth the findings and reasons for the decision, and the permittee shall be notified in writing in accordance with
title 1, chapter 5, article 1 of this code. If the hearing officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action, the hearing officer shall
impose one of the following penalties:
1. A warning;
2. Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six (6) months; or
3. Revocation of the permit.
The hearing officer shall, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate
corrective action. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
8-1-208: EMERGENCY TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
Certain types of commercial or professional instruction may create an imminent peril to public health or safety. Where the conduct or activity of the
permittee creates an imminent peril to the public health or safety, the permit may be summarily suspended upon notice to the permittee, provided further,
that the permittee shall be entitled to a hearing within two (2) weeks thereafter and a decision within two (2) days after the hearing. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-
10-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 325/797
8-1-209: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
A violation of any provision of this article is punishable as provided for in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. (Ord. 17-O-2722, eff. 2-10-2017)
Chapter 2
EXCAVATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND OBSTRUCTION IN STREETS, ALLEYS, AND
OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION, CONSTRUCTION, OR INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall perform or engage in any excavation, construction, alteration, repair, or any other similar type of interference or obstruction in, on, or under
any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or any other public property, including, but not limited to, the installation, repair, maintenance, or removal of any
pipe, conduit, duct or other utility or device, the alteration of grade, the installation of driveway approaches, repair or reconstruction of street, sidewalks,
curbs or gutters, or any other type of physical interference with, or any obstruction of street or other public property, including, but not limited to, the
standing or parking of trucks or equipment used in construction type activity, without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code §§ 7-
1.03, 7-3.02)
8-2-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of section 8-2-1 of this chapter:
A. Performance of excavating or construction or other operations by the city.
B. Emergency repairs by public utilities to existing installations when circumstances require the work to be done immediately for the preservation of the
public peace, health, safety, or welfare and a permit could not reasonably be obtained prior to such emergency repair; provided however, a permit shall
be applied for on the first business day following such emergency repairs. (1962 Code §§ 7-1.48, 7-3.03)
8-2-3: TYPES OF PERMITS:
Permits may be issued for the following types of activities under the provisions and conditions designated in this chapter:
A. Class A permits shall be required for the following types of activities:
1. Use of the public property in conjunction with construction type activity occurring on the abutting private premises, including the standing or parking
of trucks or equipment; loading and unloading materials, and other related types of construction activity which impose a minor and temporary burden
on public property.
2. Maintenance of construction barricades, canopies or protective walkways, provided further, no portion of any construction barricade, canopy, or
walkway extends in any roadway, or extends a distance more than one foot (1') into any alley.
3. Repair, construction, or reconstruction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway approaches, and other types of surface improvements, not exceeding
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
B. Class B permits shall be required for excavation and construction on public property, including, but not limited to, street and alley improvements, storm
drains, sanitary sewers, and any excavation or construction of any kind or nature which is not authorized by a class A permit.
C. Class C permits shall be required in lieu of class A or class B permits, for all franchised public utilities to engage in any type of excavation, or physical
disturbances or intrusion into public property for the purpose of constructing, repairing or maintaining franchised utilities.
D. Class D permits designating street routing shall be required for any truck in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds, or in excess of eight feet six inches
(8'6") in width, which is engaged in hauling debris, excavated or fill material, or equipment from any site in which a grading or demolition permit has
been issued under provisions of the building code; or for the hauling of materials or equipment in conjunction with any class A, class B,or class C
permit issued under this section. (1988 Code)
8-2-4: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for the type of permit requested shall be filed with the transportation/engineering official and shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Completion of a permit application on the form designated by the city and signed by the applicant.
B. Payment of permit fee as prescribed by council resolution.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 326/797
C. Posting of a security bond and/or insurance as required by section 8-2-6 of this chapter.
D. Proof of legal authority of the applicant to use, occupy, or otherwise engage in activity in, on, or under the public street, alley, or other public property.
E. Plans, engineering drawings, and specifications as required by regulations issued by the transportation/engineering official under section 8-2-20 of this
chapter.
F. Compliance with such other requirements as designated in the rules and regulations of the transportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-2-20
of this chapter. (1962 Code § 7-1.06)
8-2-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
If the applicant complies with the provisions of this chapter, the transportation/engineering official shall issue the permit, subject to imposition of such
conditions as necessary to protect the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code § 7-1.04)
8-2-6: SECURITY BONDS AND INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION; CLASS B PERMITS:
A. Prior to issuance of any class B excavation permit, a security bond in the amount required to restore any excavation to its original condition as
determined by the transportation/engineering official, shall be posted with the city. The security bond may be a cash deposit, security equivalent to cash
as approved by the city attorney and risk manager, or a bond provided in accordance with title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
B. Prior to issuance of a class B permit, public liability insurance shall be provided in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) insuring
against personal injury and property damages arising within the course and scope of the activity authorized by the permit, with the city named as an
additional insured. The insurance shall comply with theprovisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
C. In the event the permittee does not complete the project authorized by a class B permit in a timely manner as required by the permit, the
transportation/engineering official may give ten (10) days' notice to the permittee to complete the work within a time period designated by the
transportation/engineering official, and if the permittee does commence completion of such work within ten (10) days, or fails to diligently pursue the
completion work thereafter, the transportation/engineering official may perform, or cause to be performed such work as necessary to restore the site,
and assess the costs thereof against the bond security.
D. Upon completion of the project in accordance with permit requirements, the city shall return the security bond required by the provisions of this chapter.
(1988 Code)
8-2-7: TERMS OF PERMIT:
A. Class A permits shall be issued for specific dates, provided further no permit shall be issued for a period of time in excess of one year.
B. Class B permits shall be issued for specific dates, provided further, no permit shall be issued for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days.
C. Class C permits shall be issued for specific dates, provided further, no permit shall be issued for a period of time in excess of ninety (90) days.
D. Class D permits shall be issued for specific dates; provided further, no permit shall be issued for any period of time beyond the expiration of the grading
or demolition permit issued by the building official, or beyond expiration of the class A, class B, or class C permit.
E. The transportation/engineering official, may upon a showing of good cause, and upon payment of any fee as established by council resolution:
1. Grant an extension of any permit for a maximum period not to exceed the term of the original permit;
2. Change the specific dates for which such permit is issued.
F. Any permit issued under this chapter shall become void upon its expiration date. (1988 Code)
8-2-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the transportation/engineering official for failure of the permitteeto comply with the terms of the
permit, or for conduct relative to the authorized activity which creates a hazard to public health, welfare, or safety. Prior to revocation, the
transportation/engineering official shall give at least five (5) days' notice to the permittee of the intended revocation and reasons therefor, and provide the
permittee with the opportunity to be heard prior to revocation. Where the conduct or activity of the permittee creates a substantial and immediate danger to
the public health, welfare, or safety, the transportation/engineering official may immediately revoke the permit, and within five (5) days thereafter, provide
the permittee with a hearing on the permit revocation. (1962 Code § 7-1.45)
8-2-9: REFUND OF PERMIT FEES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 327/797
Permits issued under this chapter which are not utilized, may receive a refund of the permit fee, as designated by council resolution, provided that a refund
application on the form designated by the transportation/engineering official is filed with the city prior to the expiration date of the permit. (1962 Code § 7-
1.47)
8-2-10: POSTING OF PERMITS:
The permit issued by the transportation/engineering official for any activity regulated by this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the site
where the work is performed, and shall be exhibited to any authorized representative of the city, or any public officer upon demand. (1988 Code)
8-2-11: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS, RESTRICTIONS, AND PROHIBITIONS IN PERFORMANCE OF WORK UNDER A PERMIT:
Any permittee issued a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the following requirements, restrictions, and prohibitions in engaging in
the activity authorized by the permit:
A. All activity shall be conducted in accordance with any requirements and restrictions in the permit.
B. Streets, alleys, or sidewalks shall not be obstructed with material, equipment, or excavated materials except as expressly authorized under the permit.
C. Where the activity interferes with, or creates a hazard to pedestrians, a walkway shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the transportation/engineering official issued under section 8-2-20 of this chapter.
D. The activity shall not interfere with traffic in any street or alley, except as expressly authorized by permit.
E. The activity shall be conducted in a careful and prudent manner to avoid damage to public and private property, including trees, shrubs, plants or
vegetation, utilities, sewers, storm drains or other installations; provided further, the permit expressly may authorize interference with city owned trees
or vegetation.
F. Trenching operations and construction, including pavement breakage, excavation, installation, backfilling and patching, under any permit shall not
exceed a maximum aggregate distance of one thousand feet (1,000') at any one time; and prior to proceeding with any further segment of construction
the street shall be patched, all debris removed, and the street cleaned.
G. Any excavation shall be backfilled in accordance with the specifications designated by the transportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-2-20
of this chapter.
H. Upon completion of work authorized by the permit, the permittee shall restore the surface in accordance with the specifications issued by the
transportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-2-20 of this chapter.
I. During street excavations, pedestrian crossings as designated by the rules and regulations of the transportation/engineering official pursuant to section
8-2-20 of this chapter shall be maintained at intervals not exceeding three hundred feet (300').
J. Access shall be provided to fire hydrants and fire valves at all times.
K. Any excavation shall proceed in a manner which imposes the minimum annoyance and inconvenience to traffic, pedestrians and adjacent properties,
and the excavation site shall, to the extent possible, be maintained free from dust and other construction related inconveniences.
L. Any excavation shall provide lateral, sublateral, adjacent, and overhead support to surrounding embankments, substructures, pavement, buildings and
surrounding property in accordance with regulations issued by the transportation/engineering official under section 8-2-20 of this chapter.
M. Any service pipe, main pipe, conduit, duct, or other installation, with the exception of manholes, culverts, and catchbasins shall be installed a minimum
distance of two feet (2') beneath the surface on any public property, with the exception of parkway in which the minimum distance shall be sixteen
inches (16").
N. Barricades and warning lights shall at all times be maintained in the vicinity of any excavation in accordance with the rules and regulations issued by the
transportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-2-20 of this chapter.
O. No person engaged in the performance of work associated with apermit issued pursuant to this chapter shall interfere with the normal flow of vehicular
traffic without using a flagman or flagmen.
P. No person managing a work site and no person directing vehicles which are delivering or picking up goods or materials shall permit the staging of those
vehicles in a public right of way. For purposes of this subsection, the term "staging" shall be defined as stopping a vehicle in the public right of way at or
near the entrance to a construction site behind another vehicle that is awaiting the delivery or pick up of goods or materials. (Ord. 90-O-2088, eff. 2-8-
1990)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 328/797
8-2-12: DAMAGE CAUSED BY PERMITTEE:
The permittee shall be responsible for any and all damage or injury caused to property, either directly or indirectly, in the conduct of operations or activity
under any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and shall immediately notify the transportation/engineering official of any such damage or injury. The
permittee shall promptly repair, or arrange for prompt repair of any damage to public or private property, and upon failure to promptly effect repair, the city
may repair or cause such repairs to be made, and assess the cost of such repair against any security bond of the permittee. (1988 Code)
8-2-13: FAILURE OF PERMITTEE TO PERFORM WORK IN A TIMELY MANNER:
Where the permittee commences activity or construction under a permit issued under this chapter, and fails to complete the project in a timely manner,
thereby resulting in the creation of a nuisance or a dangerous situation, the city shall have the right to take such action as reasonably necessary to abate
such nuisance or eliminate such dangerous condition. The permittee shall be responsible for costs incurred by the city in any action taken to abate the
nuisance or eliminate the dangerous condition, and the city may assess the cost of abatement against the security bond of the permittee. (1988 Code)
8-2-14: REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF EXISTING INSTALLATIONS IN STREET, ALLEY, OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY:
Where the removal or relocation of an existing installation in, on, or under a public street, alley, or other public property is determined to be reasonable and
necessary by the transportation/engineering official to facilitate governmental operations, the transportation/engineering official shall give written notice to
the owner requiring removal or relocation, and within thirty (30) days of such notice the owner shall remove or relocate such installation. If the owner fails
to effect the relocation or removal within the designated time, the city may perform the removal or relocation, and the owner shall be liable to the city for
the cost of such removal or relocation. (1962Code § 7-1.12)
8-2-15: MAPS REQUIRED FOR SUBSURFACE INSTALLATIONS:
Any person owning, using, or having an interest in any pipes, conduits, or other devices or structures which are installed subsurface in any public street,
alley, or other public place, and used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, oil, water, electricity, or communications shall file with the
transportation/engineering official a map or set of maps, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch (1") to two hundred feet (200'), showing in detail the
location, size, description, and date of such installations, including mains, laterals, all valves, pressure regulators, drips, manholes, hand holes,
transformers, chambers, and any other appliances. The maps required by this section shall be updated each calendar year if any changes have occurred
within the calendar year, and a revised map shall be filed within fifteen (15) days after expiration of the calendar year; provided further, maps of any
changes or modifications during the calendar year shall be furnished to the city upon twenty four (24) hours' written notice by city. (1962 Code § 7-1.26)
8-2-16: ABANDONMENT OF SUBSURFACE INSTALLATIONS:
Whenever any type of subsurface installation or use thereof in any public street, alley, or other public place is abandoned, any person who owned, used or
had any interest therein shall notify the transportation/engineering official in writing within thirty (30) days of such abandonment, and shall file a map
conforming to the requirements of section 8-2-15 of this chapter designating in detail the location of such abandoned installation. The owner of such
installation at the time of abandonment shall remain responsible for removal, and the city may at any time require such abandoned installation to be
removed from its location if it is determined to obstruct a city project. (1962 Code § 7-1.42)
8-2-17: SURVEY MONUMENTS:
Any permanent survey bench mark, or precise survey reference point of any monument of granite, concrete, iron, steel, brass, or other permanent material
shall not be removed, disturbed, or caused to be removed or disturbed without written authorization from the transportation/engineering official, and such
authorization shall be granted only upon payment of all expenses incurred in the removal or relocation. (1988 Code)
8-2-18: INSPECTION:
All excavation and construction performed by permit under this chapter shall be subject to inspection by the city in accordance with the rules and
regulations issued by thetransportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-2-20 of this chapter. (1988 Code)
8-2-19: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any decision of the transportation/engineering official in granting or denying a permit under the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to council
pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (1988 Code)
8-2-20: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation/engineering official is authorized and empowered to issue rules and regulations for implementation of provisions of this chapter, and
upon issuance all persons shall comply with such rules and regulations issued by the transportation/engineering official under the authority of this section.
(1988 Code)
Chapter 3
ENCROACHMENTS IN STREETS, ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 329/797
8-3-1: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ENCROACHMENT IN ANY STREET OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person, unless exempted under the provisions of section 8-3-2 of this chapter, shall encroach, obstruct, or cause any encroachment to be placed upon,
in, or under any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other public property without a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code
§§ 7-2.04, 7-3.02, 7-3.04, 7-3.29, 7-1.27)
8-3-2: EXCEPTIONS:
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of section 8-3-1 of this chapter:
A. Activities and installations for which a permit is issued under chapter 2 of this title.
B. Newsracks for which a permit has been issued under title 4, chapter 3, article 6 of this Code.
C. Public utilities which have an existing easement for utility service.
D. Producers of agricultural products or other vendors with written permission from the City to operate in the public right-of-way during a "farmers' market"
as defined in chapter 6 of this title.
E. Special events for which a permit has been issued under title 4, chapter 8 of this Code.
F. Activities for which a permit is issued under title 4, chapter 2, article 22 of this Code. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011; amd. Ord. 19-O-2771, eff. 2-8-
2019)
8-3-3: PERMIT APPLICATION:
An application for a permit shall be filed with the transportation/engineering official and shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Completion of a permit application on the form designated by the City and signed by the applicant.
B. Filing of plans and specifications as required by section 8-3-12 of this chapter in accordance with the regulations issued by the
transportation/engineering official.
C. Payment of the permit fee as prescribed by Council resolution.
D. Posting of any security bond and/or insurance as required by section 8-3-9 of this chapter.
E. Compliance with such other requirements as designated in the rules and regulations of the transportation/engineering official pursuant to section 8-3-14
of this chapter. (1962 Code § 7-1.06)
8-3-4: PERMIT AUTHORITY OF TRANSPORTATION/ENGINEERING OFFICIAL:
The transportation/engineering official shall have the authority to act upon and issue permits under the criteria set forth in section 8-3-6 of this chapter for
the following types of encroachments:
A. Minor encroachments for objects or materials which are not affixed to real property, including, but not limited to, ornamentation, flower containers, and
other encroachments not regulated by permits issued under chapter 2 of this title.
B. Other minor encroachments for a period not exceeding three (3) years, unless such encroachments require council approval under section 8-3-5 of this
chapter. (1988 Code)
8-3-5: PERMITS REQUIRING COUNCIL APPROVAL:
Council approval under the criteria set forth in section 8-3-6 of this chapter shall be required for the following types of encroachments:
A. Encroachments for any permanent structure above, on, or beneath the surface.
B. Encroachment upon any public street which closes the street to public use, or which substantially interferes with public use of the street, except
parades, for which a permit is issued under title 4, chapter 3, article 2 of this code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 330/797
C. Any other type of encroachment other than construction activity, which would exceed one year in duration, and not authorized by any other provision of
this code. (1988 Code)
8-3-6: CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Encroachment permits may be granted if each of the following criteria are met:
A. The encroachment use for which the permit is requested is necessary or desirable;
B. The encroachment use does not create a substantial adverse impact on persons or property;
C. The encroachment use does not adversely affect the public health, welfare, and safety. (1988 Code)
8-3-7: CONDITIONS IMPOSED ON PERMIT:
A. As a condition of issuance of any permit issued under section 8-3-5 of this chapter, the permittee and legal owner of the adjacent property shall execute
a recordable covenant running with the land, in a form approved by the city attorney, surrendering possession of the encroachment structure, and
releasing the city from all claims in the event the city determines to widen or improve the street, alley, parkway, or other public place where the
encroaching structure is situated.
B. In addition to the requirement of subsection A of this section and the requirements under the provisions of this chapter, such conditions may be imposed
on any permit as deemed necessary to protect the city, persons, property, or the public health, welfare, and safety. (1962 Code § 7-2.06)
8-3-8: NOTICE OF DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Upon denial of a permit, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and furnished a statement of the reasons for such denial. (1988 Code)
8-3-9: BONDING AND INSURANCE:
Upon issuance of a permit under this chapter, the permittee shall post and at all times while the permit is in existence, maintain a security bond and
insurance as required by the provisions of this chapter.
A. The amount of the bond shall be designated by the approving authority at the time of approval of the permit, and shall be in an amount which is
determined to be sufficient for removal of the encroachment in the event the permittee fails to comply with the conditions of the encroachment permit.
The bond may be waived where it is determined that any injury to the city from the existence of the encroachment is minimal. Any security bond
required by this section may be cash, or cash equivalent security approved by the city attorney and the risk manager, or a bond in accordance with title
3, chapter 4 of this code.
B. The amount of insurance shall be designated by the approving authority at the time of approval of the permit, and shall be in an amount which is
determined to be sufficient to adequately protect the city, persons, and property for injuries or damages which may be caused by the encroachment
authorized by the permit; provided further, insurance may be waived where risk is very minimal, and the encroachment has aesthetic value to the city.
The insurance shall comply with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of this code. (1988 Code)
8-3-10: TERM OF ENCROACHMENT PERMIT:
A. The term of an encroachment permit issued under section 8-3-4 of this chapter shall not exceed a maximum period of three (3) years; and provided
further, any encroachment permit issued under section 8-3-4 of this chapter shall be revocable upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the permittee.
B. The term of an encroachment permit issued under section 8-3-5 of this chapter shall be determined by council at the time of approval of the permit.
(1988 Code)
8-3-11: FAILURE TO REMOVE ENCROACHMENT:
Upon failure of the permittee to remove an encroachment for which a permit was issued under this chapter, or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of
the encroachment permit, the city may remove, or cause the removal of such encroachment or take such other action as reasonably necessary, and the
permittee shall be liable for all costs incurred in such action by the city. (1988 Code)
8-3-12: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED:
Any encroachment for which a permit is required under the provisions of this chapter shall require the submittal and approval of location, plans, and
specifications in accordance with the regulations issued by the transportation/engineering official under section 8-3-14 of this chapter. (1988 Code)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 331/797
8-3-13: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
The permit applicant, or any person adversely affected by the decision of the transportation/engineering official in granting or denying a permit under
section 8-3-4 of this chapter may appeal to council under the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (1988 Code)
8-3-14: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The transportation/engineering official is authorized and empowered to issue rules and regulations for implementation of the provisions of this chapter, and
upon issuance all persons shall comply with such rules and regulations. (1988 Code)
Chapter 4
PARKWAYS, STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVEWAYS
8-4-1: PARKWAY SURFACE:
The abutting property owner shall plant and maintain the parkway with grass or other plant material that is maintained at no more than six inches (6") in
height as approved by the city's arborist with the following exception: The parkway area abutting commercially zoned property may be surfaced in concrete
in lieu of grass. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
8-4-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN:
Sidewalk construction shall comply with the specifications on file in the office of the transportation/engineering official. Sidewalk marking, color, and design
shall comply with the "sidewalk marking design standard" on file in the office of the transportation/engineering official. Sidewalk construction shall require a
permit issued by the transportation/engineering official under chapter 2 of this title. (1962 Code §§ 7-3.22, 7-3.23)
8-4-3: STREET CONSTRUCTION:
Street construction shall comply with the specifications on file in the office of the transportation/engineering official, and shall require a permit by the
transportation/engineering official under chapter 2 of this title. (1988 Code)
8-4-4: DRIVEWAYS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
All driveway approaches shall require a permit issued by the transportation/engineering official and shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Construction: Driveway approach construction shall comply with the specifications on file in the office of the transportation/engineering official and shall
require a permit issued by the transportation/engineering official under chapter 2 of this title.
B. Slope: Driveways with a slope exceeding one foot (1') vertical for each six feet (6') shall require a special permit from the transportation/engineering
official.
C. Width: The maximum width of any residential driveway approach shall not exceed twenty feet (20'), and the maximum width of two (2) adjacent
residential driveway approaches which are combined shall not exceed twenty six feet (26'). The maximum width of any commercial driveway approach
shall not exceed forty feet (40'). The minimum width of any driveway approach shall not be less than sixteen feet (16'). The transportation/engineering
official may approve driveway approaches which vary from the widths designated herein to accommodate existing topography, or nonremovable
objects, such as buildings, walls, trees, or natural rock outcroppings. Driveway approach widths shall be the transition distance, measured along the
curb, from the full height curb on one side to on the opposite side.
D. Location: No portion of a driveway approach shall be closer than three feet (3') from any tree, lighting standard, public utility, another driveway, or other
device erected in the parkway. Except in single-family residential zones, driveway approaches are restricted to access which lead directly to a carport,
garage, or parking area located beyond the front setback area. Two (2) driveway approaches authorized for any lot or parcel shall not be less than
twenty eight feet (28') apart, and each such driveway approach shall be a minimum of two feet (2') from the side property line as measured at the
beginning of the full height curb. Any circular driveway shall have a minimum outer radius of twenty six feet (26'). The transportation/engineering official
may approve a driveway approach closer to the side property line, or closer to any tree, lighting standard, public utility, another driveway or a device
erected in the parkway where necessary to accommodate existing topography or nonremovable objects, such as buildings, walls, trees, or natural rock
outcroppings.
E. Number: Only one driveway approach shall be permitted in any residential zone on any lot or parcel with less than seventy five (75') feet of frontage, or
with a front setback of less than twenty five feet (25'); with the exception that a circular driveway requiring two (2) driveway approaches shall be
permitted where the parcel frontage is within four percent (4%) of the seventy five feet (75') minimum required for two (2) driveway approaches, and
further, that no other deviation from the provisions of this code or discretionary action is required for such circular driveway. (1962 Code §§ 7-3.24, 7-
3.25)
8-4-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 332/797
The transportation/engineering official shall issue rules and regulations for implementation of the provisions of this chapter, and upon issuance, all persons
shall comply with rules and regulations issued under this section. (1988 Code)
Chapter 5
CIVIC CENTER
8-5-1: CIVIC CENTER AREA DEFINED:
The Civic Center is hereby designated and defined as the grounds, buildings, structures and open areas bounded by Crescent Drive to the west, Foothill
Road to the east, North Santa Monica Boulevard to the north and Burton Way/South Santa Monica to the south. (Ord. 92-O-2142, eff. 6-26-1992)
8-5-2: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The Civic Center, except for Rexford Drive, shall be closed to the public between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of each
day. Use of the Civic Center by the public between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. shall be restricted to persons attending
public meetings of the city council, commissions or committees of the city or to persons having business with the city police and fire departments. (Ord. 92-
O-2142, eff. 6-26-1992)
8-5-3: ENTRY INTO RESTRICTED AREAS PROHIBITED:
Unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering into areas of the Civic Center closed to public access. (Ord. 92-O-2142, eff. 6-26-1992)
Chapter 6
FARMERS' MARKET
8-6-1: FARMERS' MARKET DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, a "farmers' market" shall mean a location for the sale of agricultural products directly to consumers, approved by the Los
Angeles County agricultural commissioner, and operated by the city of Beverly Hills in compliance with the requirements of title 3 of the California Code of
Regulations. (Ord. 94-O-2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
8-6-2: SALES AUTHORIZED IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, persons who have been permitted by the city, in writing, to sell products in the public right of way at a
farmers' market, or in conjunction with a farmers' market, may encroach into the public right of way for the purpose of participating in the farmers' market
and associated city approved vending in those areas closed to vehicular traffic. Such encroachment shall be limited to the extent authorized by the city in
writing and shall be conducted pursuant to the city's market rules. In addition, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, such persons may conduct
business outside of a permanent and substantial building during the operation of the farmers' market and pursuant to the city's market rules. (Ord. 94-O-
2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
8-6-3: MARKET MANAGER:
The city manager shall designate a market manager who shall be empowered to implement and enforce the rules, regulations and policies of the city
relating to the farmers' market and associated activities. (Ord. 94-O-2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
8-6-4: MARKET RULES:
The city manager shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, market rules governing the admission and removal of producers from the market and
such other subjects as may be required by title 3 of the California Code of Regulations as the prerequisite to certification of the city's farmers' market. The
market rulesmay also address any other topic deemed appropriate by the city manager for the purpose of operating the farmers' market in the best interest
of the community. (Ord. 94-O-2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
8-6-5: MARKET FEES:
The city manager shall establish an appropriate fee to be paid by a producer who participates in the farmers' market. The fee shall include the business
license tax required pursuant to title 3 of this code. (Ord. 94-O-2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
8-6-6: PARKING REGULATIONS:
During the hours of operation of any farmers' market, no vehicle over six feet (6') in height, nor any trailer or semitrailer with a load, shall be parked within
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 333/797
two hundred fifty feet (250') of an intersection that is within five hundred feet (500') of the farmers' market. In addition, no vehicle engaged in vending from
a public street shall be parked within five hundred feet (500') of the farmers' market. (Ord. 94-O-2210, eff. 8-19-1994)
Chapter 7
USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
8-7-1: PURPOSE; AUTHORITY:
A. The public rights of way are unique public resources held in trust by the city for the benefit of the public. These physically limited resources require
proper management by the city to maximize the efficiency and minimize the costs to the taxpayers, to protect against foreclosure of future economic
expansion because of premature exhaustion of the public rights of way, and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects on the public from
nontraditional uses of the public rights of way.
B. Under applicable state and federal law, the city is empowered to control access to and use of its public rights of way, and to obtain reasonable and fair
compensation for the use thereof.
C. The purpose of this chapter is to serve and further the purposes identified herein and to enable the city to treat similarly persons who are making a
similar use of the city's public rights of way, as may be appropriate to comply with applicable law. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the following words, phrases, and terms shall have the meanings set forth herein unless a different
meaning is clearly intended by the use and context of the word, phrase or term:
ABOVEGROUND: Projecting more than one-half inch (1/2") above the adjacent finished grade where the facility is to be located.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Beverly Hills.
DIRECTOR: The deputy city manager of capital assets of the city of Beverly Hills or designee unless otherwise specified.
FACILITY: Any fiber optic, coaxial, or copper cable, telephone, telecommunications, electric or other wire or line, antenna or antenna soil, gas, or other
pipeline, duct, conduit, cabinet, tunnel, vault, equipment, drain, manhole, splice box, surface location, marker, pole structure, utility, or other appurtenance,
structure, property, or tangible thing owned, leased, operated, or licensed by a person and located or proposed to be located in, upon, above, beneath, or
across any public right of way.
PERMITTEE: A person to whom the city has granted a right of way use permit under this chapter or any lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of such
person.
PERSON: Any person, business, firm, corporation, or other legal entity who places, constructs, owns, controls, operates, manages, or uses any facility in,
upon, above, beneath, or across any public right of way.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: The area in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public street, road, lane, court, alley, boulevard, sidewalk, pathway, median,
parkway, park, open space, landscape lot, drainage facility, easement or other public place or property within the city, as it now or hereafter exists.
RIGHT OF WAY USE PERMIT: The authorization granted by the city to a person under this chapter giving the person a nonexclusive right to occupy
certain space in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right of way for the purpose of providing a specified service. (Ord. 13-O-2647, eff. 10-11-
2013)
8-7-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use any facility in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right of way without first
obtaining a right of way use permit from the city for such purpose. The issuance of a right of way use permit pursuant to this chapter shall not diminish,
abrogate, or otherwise affect a permittee's obligation to comply with any other applicable provision of this code or other city ordinances or regulations, or
state or federal law, including, but not limited to, the following:
A. Any permit or authorization required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by title 4 of this code or any other ordinances of
the city.
B. Any permit, agreement, or authorization pursuant to chapter 2 of this title required in connection with activities in, upon, above, beneath, or across the
public rights of way, including by way of example but not limitation, street work, street excavation, use, removal and relocation of property within a
street, or other street work.
C. Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the city to which access is not specifically granted by the right of way use permit
including, without limitation, permits and licenses for placing devices on or in poles, conduits, or other structures or facilities owned by the city or other
governmental entity.
D. Any permit or authorization required for the privilege of conducting special events pursuant to title 4, chapter 8 of this code. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-
2005; amd. Ord. 07-O-2541, eff. 1-5-2008)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 334/797
8-7-4: EXEMPTIONS; EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
A. Any person who is a party to an existing agreement or franchise with the city that authorizes the use of the public rights of way, and which agreement or
franchise is in full force and effect on the effective date of this chapter, shall not be subject to section 8-7-3 of this chapter until such time as the existing
agreement or franchise expires or is terminated. If an existing agreement or franchise for use of the public rights of way contains within it a provision for
the renewal or extension of the agreement or franchise, then renewal or extension shall be negotiated and executed pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
B. Any person who is a party to a statewide franchise pursuant to the provisions of California Public Utilities Code section 7901 or its successor statute
that authorizes the use of the public rights of way for telegraph or telephone facilities shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Any persons proposing to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use a facility in the public rights of way shall be exempted from the
provisions of section 8-7-3 of this chapter if the director determines in writing that the facility: 1) is an insignificant impact or encroachment on, or use of
the public rights of way, and 2) does not inconvenience or jeopardize the public's continued use of the public rights of way.
D. Facilities temporarily placed in the public rights of way for a period not to exceed one year, when such facilities have been otherwise approved by the
director.
E. Any encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-5: APPLICATION:
Application for a right of way use permit shall be in writing, shall be filed with the director on a form provided by the city, and shall contain the following
information:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. A statement and description of the facilities proposed to be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed, or used by the applicant; the
proposed location of such facilities; the manner in which the applicant proposes to place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use the same;
and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other facilities of other persons will be used. The statement shall include the applicant's
proposed schedule for servicing or maintaining the facility.
C. Whether the proposed facility will generate any noise, vibration or light.
D. A description and location map of the public rights of way or other public places within which the applicant proposes or seeks authority to place,
construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use any facilities and any adjacent public or private facilities, equipment, or property; and a detailed
description of the proposed traffic control plan, if required by the director. If the applicant proposes to install new aboveground facilities that will be
affixed to the ground, such as a new pole or cabinet, the applicant shall provide the addresses of the properties immediately adjacent to and across
from that new facility.
E. If appropriate, documentation reasonably satisfactory to the director showing that the proposed facilities comply with FCC regulations with regard to RF
emissions.
F. Before and after computer simulations and a computer rendering of the proposed facilities.
G. Two (2) copies of the engineering plans for the proposed facilities.
H. Payment to the city of any application fee established by resolution of the city council.
I. The city may, at any time, demand, and applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the director, or the city council on
appeal, may deem reasonably necessary, in accordance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law, to determine whether the requested
right of way use permit should be granted.
Following the receipt of an application, the director's designee shall conduct a review of the proposed location to assess compliance of the proposed
facility with the provisions of this chapter. If the applicant proposes to install new aboveground facilities that will be affixed to the ground, such as a new
pole or cabinet, the director's designee shall provide written notice about that component of the project to the owners of the properties immediately
adjacent to and across from that new facility. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-6: MOCK-UP REQUIRED:
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of an application for a right of way use permit, the director shall review the application to determine if it is complete and
shall notify the applicant in writing of such determination. For any application that proposes the installation of aboveground facilities that are ten feet (10')
or more in height, as measured from the base of the facility at existing, adjacent grade, the applicant shall first install a mock-up of the facilities following
issuance of written notice from the director approving the installation of the mock-up. The applicant shall provide funds, which are to be held in trust by the
city, in an amount that the director estimates will be sufficient to cover the city's costs to process the review of the mock-up. Any unused funds shall be
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 335/797
returned to the applicant when the process has been completed. The mock-up shall include a sign that displays the image of the proposed facilities,
including any related cabinet, and the telephone number of the city's public works department. The mock-up shall remain in place for a minimum period of
thirty (30) days so that any significant view impacts from the proposed installation can be raised by the public and analyzed by the director or his or her
designee. If significant view impacts are raised, the director shall notify the applicant about those issues so that the placement of the facility can be
modified to address those concerns. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-7: NOTICE:
Upon determination that an application for a right of way use permit is complete and any mock-up of the proposed facilities required by section 8-7-6 of this
chapter has been installed, the director shall provide notice of the application by first class mail to the owners of all affected property where the proposed
facilities will be installed. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-8: ACTION BY DIRECTOR:
A. Timing Of Action: Not sooner than sixty (60) days, and not longer than one hundred twenty (120) days after the application for a right of way use permit
is deemed complete, the director shall grant, deny, or conditionally grant the right of way use permit. If the right of way use permit is granted, the
application submitted shall constitute and form part of the right of way use permit. If the application is denied, the decision shall include the reason(s)
for denial.
B. Findings: The director shall not grant an application for a right of way use permit unless he or she makes the following findings:
1. The proposed use is compatible with the public's use of the right of way.
2. The public rights of way identified in the application have sufficient capacity to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities and any foreseeable
additional facilities of the applicant or other permittees that may need to be accommodated.
3. Granting the requested right of way use permit will not interfere with the city's future plans for the affected public rights of way as reflected in the
city's general plan or the city's capital improvement plan.
4. Granting the requested right of way use permit will not damage or disrupt any public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel, or
landscaping.
5. Granting the requested right of way use permit will not have a significant adverse impact upon a view from a private residence or upon any protected
public view corridors, as defined in the city's general plan;
6. Granting the requested right of way use permit will not have a significant adverse aesthetic impact on neighboring properties;
7. The applicant has received all required licenses, permits, or franchises from the federal communications commission, the California public utilities
commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction concerning any matters affecting the applicant's
proposed activities or facilities, and the applicant has presented satisfactory proof of such licenses, permits or franchises to the director.
C. Conditions: In granting a right of way use permit, the director shall impose such conditions on the permit, which are reasonably necessary to protect and
manage the public rights of way and to safeguard the health and safety of the city and the public. The conditions imposed shall comply with applicable
provisions of state and federal law and may relate to one or more of the following:
1. The availability of existing and/or approved future facilities of other utilities or right of way users, such as underground conduits or utility poles, to
meet the applicant's needs.
2. The design and installation of landscaping and other barriers to minimize public view of aboveground facilities whose location has been approved by
the city.
3. The maintenance of all aboveground facilities in good condition, including compliance with the city's ordinances regarding graffiti removal.
4. The placement of aboveground facilities, such as overhead drops, as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable electrical
codes.
5. Reasonable limitations upon the number of aboveground facilities that may be installed within a designated geographical area.
6. Reasonable limitations upon the dimensions or volume, or both, of aboveground facilities.
7. The specification of colors of aboveground facilities reasonably requested by the city to ensure that these facilities blend with the surrounding
environment to the maximum extent possible.
8. Any specific limitations or restrictions on the timetable for the proposed construction with which the applicant must comply during construction.
9. Such additional conditions regulating the time, place, and manner of installations of aboveground facilities as will reasonably mitigate potential safety
hazards and adverse visual impacts attributable to the proposed facilities in a manner that is consistent with this chapter and applicable state and
federal law.
D. Installation Of Facilities:
1. To the extent feasible, all aboveground facilities proposed in the public rights of way shall be installed on/in existing and/or previously approved
facilities of other utilities or right of way users, such as utility poles, streetlights or other structures. The requirement that facilities colocate may be
waived by the director only when the applicant submits written evidence which: a) describes in reasonable detail the efforts made by the applicant to
obtain from other utilities or right of way users the right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, thereby avoiding the need to construct new
facilities, and b) documents to the satisfaction of the director that either: 1) such existing facilities are not available for shared use or 2) colocation is
technologically infeasible.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 336/797
2. New facilities shall be located along arterial roadways, whenever possible.
3. If one or more new cabinets are proposed to be installed adjacent to the front yard of a residential structure, so that the facility is located between the
front yard and the street right of way, all such facilities shall be placed in underground vaults to conceal such facilities from the view of the adjacent
property.
4. If a proposed facility is to be located on a public right of way with homes only on one side of the street, any aboveground cabinet shall be installed on
the side of the right of way where no homes are located.
5. Where existing utility poles, streetlights, or other wire holding structures are available for use, the director may require such poles and structures to
be used if the director determines that the public convenience would be enhanced by such installation, and the terms of the use are just and
reasonable.
6. A new pole may only be constructed if the new pole will not have a significant adverse impact upon a view from a private residence or upon any
protected public view corridors, as defined in the city's general plan;
7. All aboveground facilities, such as overhead drops, shall be placed as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable electrical
codes.
8. Electrical meters shall be installed on existing power poles or other existing structures within the public rights of way unless such installation is
technologically infeasible, poses a danger for utility workers or the owner of the existing structure will not allow the installation. Written evidence
documenting the infeasibility, danger or denial of use by the owner of the facility, shall accompany any request for exemption from this requirement.
9. All aboveground facilities shall be maintained in good condition and free from graffiti. Any graffiti shall be removed immediately in accordance with
the requirements of this code. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the applicant shall affix a coded label or marker to its aboveground
facilities that identifies the specific facility and sets forth a telephone number that may be called to report any damage, destruction, or graffiti
vandalism involving the facility.
10. Aboveground facilities shall be designed to be as unobtrusive and aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area as is technically possible. To
the extent feasible, aboveground facilities shall be screened by vegetation or by another barrier or berm that is compatible with the surrounding area.
The colors of aboveground facilities shall blend with the surroundings. In no event shall any facility be painted or finished with a shiny or reflective
surface.
11. All aboveground facilities shall be no greater in volume or dimension, or both, than is reasonably necessary to provide the services proposed by
applicant.
12. All aboveground facilities shall be installed in compliance with all applicable laws, including, without limitation, the Americans with disabilities act
and the provisions of title 9, chapter 4, article 5 of this code.
E. Excavation Permit Required: Any application for a right of way use permit that requires or proposes excavation or construction activities in the public
right of way must also be accompanied by an application for an excavation permit pursuant to chapter 2 of this title.
F. Notice Of Decision: The director shall provide written notice of his or her decision approving or denying a request for a right of way use permit by first
class mail to: the applicant, the property owner, if applicable, the owners of the properties immediately adjacent to and across from any proposed new
aboveground facility that is to be affixed to the ground, any person who submitted written comments concerning the applicant's request; and any
person who has filed a written request with the city to receive such notice. The written notice shall:
1. Provide a general explanation of the decision, including the evidence upon which the decision is based; and
2. Inform recipients of the notice of the right of any interested person to appeal the decision to the city council and explain how that right may be
exercised. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-9: APPEAL:
Within fourteen (14) days of the date of the director's decision, the applicant or any interested person may appeal the director's decision on an application
for a right of way use permit to the city council in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. No right of way use permit shall
be effective, and no facilities authorized by a right of way use permit shall be installed in the public rights of way until the appeal period has been
exhausted. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-10: TERM OF PERMIT:
Unless otherwise specified in the right of way use permit, a right of way use permit granted under this chapter shall be valid for a period of ten (10) years.
(Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-11: AMENDMENT; APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION:
A permittee may apply to amend its right of way use permit to revise the rights of way within which the permittee is authorized to place, construct, own,
control, operate, manage, or use its facilities, as long as the type of facilities and the use of such facilities is already authorized by the permittee's existing
right of way use agreement. The amendment application shall contain the information required under section 8-7-5 of this chapter, and shall be
accompanied by the application fee specified therein. Notice shall be provided as specified in section 8-7-7 of this chapter. Within forty five (45) days after
the amendment application is deemed complete, the director shall approve or deny the amendment application in whole, in part, or with additional
conditions, applying the following criteria:
A. The criteria set forth in section 8-7-8 of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 337/797
B. The applicant's history and current compliance with any applicable right of way use permit, this chapter, or any other applicable local, state or federal
law, regulation, or policy.
C. The compatibility of the proposed use with the public's use of the right of way. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-12: RENEWAL; APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION:
A permittee that desires to renew its right of way use permit may file an application with the city for renewal, not more than one year nor less than one
hundred eighty (180) days before expiration of its current right of way use permit. The renewal application shall contain the information required under
section 8-7-5 of this chapter, and shall be accompanied by the application fee specified therein. Within forty five (45) days of the renewal application being
deemed complete, the director shall grant or deny the renewal application in whole, in part, or with additional conditions, applying the following criteria:
A. The criteria set forth in section 8-7-8 of this chapter.
B. The applicant's history and current compliance with any applicable right of way use permit, this chapter, or any other applicable local, state or federal
law, regulation, or policy.
C. The continuing capacity of the streets, alleys, or other public rights of way identified in the renewal application to accommodate the applicant's facilities
and use(s) of the public rights of way.
D. The continuing compatibility of the proposed use with the public's use of the right of way. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-13: RIGHT OF WAY USAGE FEE:
Each right of way use permit granted under this chapter is subject to the city's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix, in accordance with the
applicable provisions of state and federal law, a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid by permittee for the rights granted in the right of way use
permit; provided that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and permittee from agreeing and fixing in the right of way use permit the compensation to
be paid for the privileges granted by such permit. This section shall not apply to right of way use permits approved and executed for right of way uses
governed by the Broughton act1, the franchise act of 19372, section 7901 or 10101 of the Public Utilities Code, or any franchise granted or administered by
the city. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-14: BOND; FORFEITURE:
A. Permittee shall, prior to the issuance of any permit for construction in the public rights of way, deliver to the city a performance bond in the amount of
one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of all work to be performed under such permit, as determined by the director. The bond shall be
provided on the form required by the city and maintained in full force and effect until the permitted work in the public rights of way is completed to the
satisfaction of the director, at which time the amount of the bond shall be reduced to ten percent (10%) of the actual cost of the work. The reduced
bond shall be maintained by permittee for a period of one year as a guarantee the work is of good quality and free from any defective or faulty material
or workmanship. The surety supplying the bond must be an "admitted surety insurer", as defined in section 995.120 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
authorized to do business in the state of California. Return of the bond shall be conditioned upon permittee's faithful performance of all work in the
public rights of way specified in the applicable permit. In the event permittee fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter related to such work, or
any provision of any applicable right of way use permit, or other approval related to such work, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result
thereof shall be recoverable from the bond, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal, or abandonment of any
property of permittee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney fees and costs up to the full amount of the bond.
B. Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by the city hereunder shall be construed to excuse permittee's faithful performance of
any right of way use permit or limit the liability or damages of permittee under this chapter, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. In addition
to its rights to take action under the bond, the city may pursue any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-15: USE OF FACILITIES; CHANGE IN USE:
Permittee's facilities shall be placed, constructed, owned, controlled, operated, managed, and used solely and exclusively for the purpose(s) and use(s)
expressly set forth in permittee's right of way use permit. Permittee shall not in any way use, or authorize or allow another person to use, any facility
subject to permittee's right of way use permit for any purpose or use other than the purpose(s) and use(s) expressly set forth in the right of way use permit,
nor shall permittee's facilities occupy any portion of the right of way not expressly identified in the right of way use permit. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-16: TRANSFER OF PERMIT OR FACILITIES:
The issuance of a right of way use permit is a privilege to be held personally by permittee. Subject to applicable law, no right of way use permit or any
facility permitted hereunder shall be sold, leased, licensed, assigned, disposed of, or otherwise transferred, in whole or in part, either by involuntary or
voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, stock transfer, transfer in trust, or otherwise, without providing written notice thereof to the city. A sale or transfer of
stock, assets, or other equitable interests of permittee, or any parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate or permittee, which effects a material change in
permittee's ownership or control shall be deemed to be a transfer for purposes of this section. Any transfer shall be made only by an instrument in writing,
such as a bill of sale, or similar document, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty (30) days after any such
transfer or assignment. Any transferee must agree in writing to comply with all provisions of the right of way use permit and this chapter and submit written
evidence of that agreement to the director within thirty (30) days following the date of such transfer or assignment. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 338/797
8-7-17: NONEXCLUSIVE USE; LIMITATIONS:
A. Any right of way use permit granted under this chapter shall be for the nonexclusive use of the public rights of way. By issuing a particular right of way
use permit, the city does not agree to restrict the number of right of way use permits to be granted that cover all or any part of the city for any person in
the same business, a competing business, or a related business as the permittee.
B. A right of way use permit only authorizes permittee to use the public rights of way specified in the permit, and the use of any other public property,
whether located within or outside a public right of way, is strictly prohibited unless authorized by a separate agreement with the city.
C. Any privilege claimed by permittee in any public right of way shall be subordinate to the rights of the general public to use the public right of way and to
any prior lawful occupancy of the public right of way.
D. Permittee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this
chapter, or of any right of way use permit granted under this chapter, or because of the enforcement of such provisions. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-
2005)
8-7-18: FACILITIES; INSTALLATION:
A. Conformance With Applicable Law: No person shall place, construct, own, control, operate, manage, or use any facility in, upon, above, beneath, or
across any public right of way without first obtaining all necessary or required permits, agreements, or approvals from the city and all other
governmental entities with jurisdiction over the facility or public right of way. All facilities shall be placed, installed or constructed and the right of way
restored in accordance with the standard specifications and any applicable special conditions or provisions imposed by the director or the city council.
All facilities shall be maintained in compliance with such permits, agreements, or approvals, and all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations,
orders, and decisions issued by any federal, state, or local governmental body, agency, or court.
B. Time, Place And Manner: All facilities shall be located, constructed, operated, and maintained in the time, place and manner that causes the least
interference with the public's use of the public rights of way, and the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin the public rights
of ways, all as determined by and approved by the director.
C. Key Map And Plat Map: Every person subject to this chapter shall cause a key map and detailed plat map showing all facilities to be located in the
public rights of way, including the material of construction and horizontal and vertical locations with respect to property lines and grade lines, to be
prepared by a registered professional civil engineer and filed in the office of the director prior to the issuance of any permit or approval for installation.
Prior to requesting the issuance of a permit for installation of any facility, the key map and detailed improvement plan shall be filed with any other entity
that owns, operates, or manages facilities in the affected rights of way, so that such entities may advise the director as to any location, operation, or
compatibility problems created by permittee's proposed use of the rights of way.
D. Disclosure: Upon the request of any person who has contracted to perform work on a public right of way, persons subject to this chapter shall provide
accurate detailed information regarding the location of their existing and proposed facilities in the public rights of way.
E. Colocation: To the extent feasible, all facilities proposed in the public rights of way shall be installed on/in existing and/or previously approved facilities of
other utilities or right of way users, such as underground conduits, utility poles, streetlights or other structures. The requirement that facilities colocate
may be waived by the director only when the applicant submits written evidence which: 1) describes in reasonable detail the efforts made by the
applicant to obtain from other utilities or right of way users the right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, thereby avoiding the need to
construct new facilities, and 2) documents to the satisfaction of the director that either: a) such existing facilities are not available for shared use or b)
colocation is technologically infeasible.
F. Undergrounding Required: To the extent feasible, all facilities shall be placed in underground vaults to conceal such facilities from the view of users of
the roadway and from adjacent properties. The requirement to place facilities underground may be waived by the director only when evidence is
presented demonstrating that due to topography or other physical conditions in the vicinity, it is not technologically feasible to place the facility in an
underground vault. In the event the director waives the requirement to place facilities underground, any facilities permitted to be installed aboveground
shall comply with the provisions of subsection H of this section.
G. Pole Attachments: Where existing utility poles, streetlights, or other wire holding structures are available for use, the director may require such poles
and structures to be used if the director determines that the public convenience would be enhanced by such installation, and the terms of the use are
just and reasonable.
H. Installations Aboveground: The location of installations of any aboveground equipment pursuant to a right of way use permit granted pursuant to this
chapter, such as amplifiers, electric meters, and cabinet boxes, shall be approved by the director. All aboveground installations shall comply with the
following standards:
1. All aboveground facilities, such as overhead drops, shall be placed as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable electrical
codes.
2. All facilities installed aboveground shall be completely hidden by vegetation or by another barrier or berm that is unobtrusive and aesthetically
compatible with the surrounding area so as to shield such facilities from the view of users of the roadway and from adjacent properties. Said
landscaping and/or barriers shall be designed and installed by qualified professionals and shall include provisions for proper maintenance and
upkeep. The requirement to screen all aboveground facilities may be modified or waived by the director only when evidence is presented
demonstrating that such screening interferes with the operation of the facility and is not technologically feasible.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 339/797
3. To the extent feasible, electrical meters shall be installed on existing power poles or other existing structures within the public rights of way unless
such installation is technologically infeasible or poses a danger for utility workers. Written evidence documenting the infeasibility or danger shall
accompany any request for exemption from this requirement. For the purposes of this section, "infeasibility" shall be established if the owner of the
existing power pole(s) refuses to allow the installation of the proposed electrical meters on the existing poles.
4. In no event shall aboveground facilities be placed in a manner or location which interferes with the ability of the public to use the public rights of way
for their primary and intended purpose.
5. All aboveground facilities shall be maintained in good condition and free from graffiti. Any graffiti shall be removed immediately in accordance with
the requirements of this code. To ensure compliance with this requirement, the applicant may be required to affix a coded label or marker to its
aboveground facilities that identifies the specific facility and sets forth a telephone number that may be called to report any damage, destruction, or
graffiti vandalism involving the facility.
6. Aboveground facilities shall be designed to be as unobtrusive and as aesthetically pleasing as possible. Aboveground facilities shall be screened by
vegetation or by another barrier or berm that is compatible with the surrounding area. The colors of aboveground facilities shall blend with the
surroundings. In no event shall any facility be painted or finished with a shiny or reflective surface. All aboveground facilities installed within a
designated geographical area shall be limited to a single equipment cabinet and shall be no greater in volume or dimension, or both, than reasonably
necessary to provide the services proposed by applicant. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-19: FACILITIES; RELOCATION; REMOVAL:
Every person subject to this chapter hereby acknowledges that, in accordance with applicable state law, by accepting any right to use the public rights of
way bestowed by a right of way use permit granted under this chapter it assumes an obligation to pay for the relocation of its facilities when necessary to
make way for a proper public use of the right of way. Every holder of a right of way use permit shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove from any public right of way, any facility owned, operated or maintained by such person when required by the director by
reason of traffic conditions, public safety or other public purposes, street vacation, street relocation or realignment, freeway or street construction, change
or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks, or any other public use of the public rights
of way. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-20: FACILITIES; ABANDONMENT; REMOVAL:
A. Notice Of Removal: In the event the use of any facility is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six (6) months, or in the event any
facility has been installed in any public right of way without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or in the event the required right of way use
permit is revoked pursuant to the provisions of section 8-7-24 of this chapter, the owner of each facility shall promptly, upon being given thirty (30) days'
prior notice, remove from the public rights of way all such facilities, other than any which the director may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event
of such removal, the area from which such facility has been removed shall be promptly restored to a condition satisfactory to the director.
B. Abandonment: Any facility remaining in place one hundred twenty (120) days after the delivery of the notice set forth in this section shall be considered
permanently abandoned. The director may extend such time as may be necessary under the circumstances.
C. "In Place" Abandonment: Any facility abandoned in place in the public rights of way shall be abandoned in such manner as the director shall prescribe.
Upon permanent abandonment, the facility shall become the lawful property of the city, and the owner of such facility shall submit to the director an
instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring ownership of the facility to the city. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-21: DAMAGE TO FACILITIES AND PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. The city, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any facility placed in, upon, above, beneath,
or across a public right of way unless such damage or loss is caused by the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the city.
B. Any damage done directly or indirectly to any public right of way or other public property or improvement, by any person subject to the chapter, shall be
promptly repaired, at the person's sole cost and expense, to the complete satisfaction of the city. Alternatively, the city may, in its sole discretion,
choose to perform the repair work itself, in which case the responsible person shall reimburse the city for the full costs of the repair work within thirty
(30) days after receiving a statement detailing such costs. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-22: INDEMNIFICATION:
Every person subject to this chapter shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents from any and
all actual or alleged claims, demands, causes of action, liabilities, losses, damages, or injuries, to property or persons, including wrongful death, whether
imposed by a court of law or by administrative action of any federal, state, or local governmental body or agency, arising out of or incident to any acts,
omissions, negligence, or wilful misconduct of permittee, its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or subcontractors in connection with the exercise of a
right of way use permit or the use of any public right of way. This indemnification excludes only such portion of any claim, demand, cause of action, liability,
loss, damage, penalty, fine, or injury, to property or persons, including wrongful death, which is caused by the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the
city as determined by a court or administrative body of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-23: INSURANCE:
Every person subject to this chapter shall procure and maintain a policy of general liability insurance in an amount which city's risk manager determines to
be sufficient to adequately protect such person and the city against all liability for personal injury, including accidental death, as well as claims for property
damage which may arise from or which concern the activities of the person or the existence of the person's facilities in the public rights of way. The amount
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 340/797
of such insurance and any other insurance requirements shall be as designated in the right of way use permit, but in no event shall insurance be provided
in an amount less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-24: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The officer or body taking final action granting any right of way use permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may, after following the same
procedures utilized for approving such right of way use permit, suspend, revoke, or modify the permit if:
A. The permit was issued erroneously; or
B. The permit was issued on the basis of incorrect or fraudulent information supplied by the applicant; or
C. The permit was issued contrary to the provisions of this code; or
D. The permit is being or recently has been, exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such permit.
No permit shall be revoked prior to providing a ten (10) calendar day written notice to the holder of the permit and an opportunity to be heard before the
officer or body considering revocation or suspension of the permit. Any decision to revoke or not to revoke a permit, other than a decision by the city
council, may be appealed by any interested party under the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
8-7-25: RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall contract away, modify, abridge, impair, or affect, in any way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire any facility located
in the public rights of way through the exercise of the right of eminent domain.
B. There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and every person subject
to this chapter, by its use of the public rights of way, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise
of such rights or power.
C. Neither the issuance of a right of way use permit nor any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar the exercise of any governmental
right or power of the city, including the city's authority to make any proper public use of the public rights of way.
D. The city council and the director may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of the city's jurisdiction under this chapter, in
accordance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law.
E. The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and make such
inspections as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter, a right of way use permit, or any other local, state, or federal law,
regulation, permit, or standard. (Ord. 05-O-2462, eff. 3-18-2005)
Title 9
BUILDING AND PROPERTY HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
TECHNICAL CODES
Article 1. Administrative Code For Building Standards
9-1-101: TITLE:
A. This chapter, which includes articles 1 through 16, shall be known as the TECHNICAL CODES, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as
"Beverly Hills administrative code" or "the building code" or "these regulations" or "these building standards", the "code", or "this code". (Ord. 16-O-
2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-102: SCOPE AND INTENT:
A. Scope: This article shall serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes and other building
and property health and safety regulations within this title which regulate site preparation, construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, grading, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings and structures. This article shall be referred to as the "Beverly Hills administrative code" or the
"administrative code".
Except as hereinafter changed or modified, the building standards, which are published in the California building standards code, are applicable to all
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 341/797
occupancies and uses throughout the city. Amendments to the building standards contained in the codes published by the model code organizations
(ICC, IAPMO, and NFPA) by state agencies, are applicable only to those occupancies or uses which the state agency making the amendment is
authorized to regulate.
B. Intent: The purpose of this code adopted hereby is to provide minimum standards to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare through
structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, accessibility, sustainability,
resiliency, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and
emergency responders during emergency operations.
Certain changes and modifications have been made in the adoption of this code because of the requirements of specific local conditions. Consistent
with this purpose, the provisions of this code are intended and always have been intended to confer a benefit on the community as a whole and are not
intended to establish a duty of care toward any particular person.
This code shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer, employee or agent thereof responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason
of any inspection authorized herein or by reason of the issuance or nonissuance of any permit authorized herein, and/or for any action or omission in
connection with the application and/or enforcement of this code. By adopting the provisions of this code, the city does not intend to impose on itself, its
employees or agents any mandatory duties of care toward persons and property within its jurisdiction so as to provide a basis of civil liability for
damages.
This section is declaratory of existing law and is not to be construed as suggesting that such was not the purpose and intent of previous code
adoptions. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-103: APPLICABILITY:
A. Conflicts: Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where, in
any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall
govern. When conflicting provisions or requirements occur within this code or between this code and other codes or laws, the most restrictive
provisions shall govern. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall
apply.
B. Other Laws: The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state, or federal law.
C. Referenced Codes And Standards: The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference.
D. Partial Invalidity: In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any
of the other parts and provisions.
E. Existing Structures, Systems And Equipment: The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to
continue without change, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety
and welfare of the occupants and the public and provided continued use is not dangerous to life, health and safety.
Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy in all buildings, structures, and portions of building and structures, shall comply with
the provisions for new buildings and structures except as otherwise provided for in this code. Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing
building or building service equipment which will cause the existing building or building service equipment to be in violation of the provisions of the
technical codes nor shall such additions or alterations cause the existing building or building service equipment to become unsafe.
Equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code may have their use, maintenance, or repair continued if their use, maintenance,
or repair is in accordance with the original design and a hazard to life, health or property has not been created.
Buildings, structures, and equipment, existing and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. Devices or safeguards
which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the technical code under which installed. The owner, owner's agent, and
occupant shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and their building service equipment. To determine compliance with this
section, the building official may cause a structure to be reinspected.
A change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or structure shall comply with the provisions of this code and the existing building code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof, in the city, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-104: ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Authority:
1. Development Services Division: There is hereby established in the city of Beverly Hills a development services division ("division") which shall be
under the administrative and operational control of the building official.
2. General: The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this code and to make all inspections pursuant to the
provisions of each such code adopted and amended. For such purposes, the building official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order
to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this
code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 342/797
The building official shall classify every building or portion thereof into one of the occupancies set forth in this code according to its use or the
character of its occupancy. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-105: DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
A. Authority:
1. Creation Of Enforcement Agency: There is hereby established in this jurisdiction a code enforcement agency which shall be under the administrative
and operational control of the building official.
2. Building Official: Whenever the term or title "administrative authority", "responsible official", "building official", "chief inspector", "code enforcement
officer", or other similar designation is used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the building official designated by
the appointing authority of this jurisdiction.
3. Fire Official: Whenever the term or title "building official" or other similar designation is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the fire official as
applicable in enforcing the administrative code as it pertains to the California fire code.
B. General: The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this code and to make all inspections pursuant to such
enforcement. For such purposes, the building official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. The building official shall have the power to
render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations, policies, and procedures in order to clarify the
application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules, and supplemental regulations, policies, and procedures shall be in conformance with the intent
and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code. The
building official is authorized to make and enforce such guidelines and policies for the safeguarding of life, limb, health or property as may be
necessary from time to time to carry out the purpose of this code. The building official shall classify every building, or portion thereof, into one of the
occupancies set forth in this code according to its use or the character of its occupancy. The building official shall also classify every building into one of
the types of construction as set forth in this code.
C. Deputies: The building official may appoint such number of technical officers, inspectors, plans examiners, assistants, and other employees as shall be
authorized from time to time. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. The building official may deputize such
employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the building department.
D. Applications And Permits: The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection,
construction, alteration, relocation, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, grading, removal and
demolition of every building or structure, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of
this code.
E. Notices And Orders: The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
F. Inspections: The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection
by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency
or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual
technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
G. Identification: The building official or designee, shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties
under this code.
H. Right Of Entry: Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of, or perform any duty imposed by this code or other
applicable law, or where the building official or an authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, or may exist, in a
structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code or other similar law, which makes the structure or premises
noncompliant, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or an authorized representative is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code or other applicable law, provided that if such structure or premises be
occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry.
I. Records: The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections,
and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records in accordance with state laws and the city's guidelines for the
retention of public records.
J. Liability: The liability and indemnification of the building official and any subordinates are governed by the provisions of division 3.6 of title 1 of the
Government Code.
K. Modifications: Where there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to
grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent and payment of a fee, provided that the building
official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical, the modification is in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety or structural requirements. The details of any
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files. The request for modification shall be submitted using the department's official
request form accompanied by a review fee as established by city council resolution.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 343/797
L. Alternative Materials, Equipment, Design And Methods Of Construction: The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any
material, appliance or device, or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved.
The building official shall have the authority to approve, upon application of the owner or the owner's authorized agent and payment of a fee, any such
alternative, where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that
the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, not less than the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any
claims that may be made regarding its use. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically
provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved sources.
The request for use of alternate materials, methods and design shall be submitted using the department's official request form and accompanied by a
review fee as established by city council resolution.
M. Tests: Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or evidence that any material or any construction does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the building official may
require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner or the owner's agent by an approved agency. The building official may
require tests and reports when cause exists to conclude that an electrical, gas or plumbing system, or a portion thereof, may be defective or not
working property, which tests and reports shall be at the expense of the owner or the owner's agent. As used herein, "system" means and includes,
without limitation, all equipment, devices, fixtures and installations. Failure of an owner to undertake a required test and to provide a report that is
satisfactory to the building official constitutes a violation of this code.
Test methods shall be as specified by this code for the material in question. If there are no appropriate test methods specified in this code, the building
official shall determine the test procedure.
Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official in accordance with the city's guidelines for the retention of public records.
The results of the tests shall be submitted to the city accompanied by a review fee as established by city council resolution.
N. Emergency Powers:
1. Where the building official determines that an imminent life safety hazard exists in a building or with regard to a structure or premises, that requires
immediate containment, correction or elimination, or other actions to protect public health and welfare, the building official or his/her designee may
exercise any or all of the following powers in accordance with article 8 of this chapter or the housing code.
a. Order the immediate vacation of all persons and prohibit the occupancy, reentry, or use of the premises until the hazard has been fully abated and
all repairs and other corrective actions have been completed with all required permits and inspection approvals.
b. Post the premises as unsafe, substandard or dangerous, and regulate or condition entries thereon by all persons until an order to vacate and/or an
order to not enter is rescinded in writing.
c. Board, fence or secure the building, or structure, or the premises.
d. Raze and grade any portion of the building, structure, or site that involves the imminent life safety hazard to prevent further collapse in order to
protect public health, safety and welfare.
e. Make emergency repairs or undertake other actions as necessary to eliminate, correct, or contain any imminent life safety hazard.
f. Cause any water, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, or other system connections or installations that are, or could possibly be, affected by the
hazard, or that could contribute to the hazard, to be disconnected or otherwise rendered inoperative.
g. Take any other action as appropriate under the circumstances.
2. The building official or his designee shall comply with the following provisions when exercising emergency powers:
a. In determining the existence of an imminent life safety hazard, the building official or his/her designee shall conduct a personal inspection of the
hazard and issue a brief written report identifying the nature, scope and condition of the hazard.
b. The building official or his/her designee shall give notice, setting forth the imminent life safety hazard found, to the owner, occupant, other
responsible person or authorized representative of the building, structure or site upon which the hazardous condition exists. If the building official
or his designee determines that, under the circumstances, notice cannot first be given or it is impractical to do so because of the nature of the
hazard, emergency powers may be exercised without prior notice.
c. The nature and scope of emergency powers to contain, eliminate, or correct the imminent life safety hazard level, or to protect public health, safety
and welfare be determined by the building official or his designee.
3. The building official or his designee may, notwithstanding the exercise of any emergency powers, alternatively or concurrently exercise any remedy
to address violations of this title.
O. Appeal From The Exercise Of Emergency Powers: An owner or occupant of premises may appeal the building official's exercise of emergency powers
in accordance with the procedures set forth in article 8 of this chapter for building or structures governed thereby, or in accordance with the procedures
set forth in article 9 of this chapter for buildings, structures or premises governed thereby. A timely appeal shall not stay the effectiveness of an issued
order to vacate and/or an order to not enter.
P. Violation: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with an order to vacate and/or an order to not enter. (Ord. 16-
O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-106: DEFINITIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 344/797
A. General: For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section.
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. "Webster's Third New
International Dictionary Of The English Language, Unabridged", copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinarily accepted meanings. Words
used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the
masculine.
ADDITION: An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ALTER OR ALTERATION: A change or modification in construction or building service equipment.
APPROVED: As to materials, types of construction, equipment and systems, refers to approval by the building official as the result of investigation and
tests conducted by the building official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or scientific organizations.
APPROVED AGENCY: An established and recognized agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, when the
agency has been approved by the building official.
BUILDING: A structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering a use or occupancy.
BUILDING CODE: The California building code published by the California Building Standards Commission, as adopted and amended by this
jurisdiction.
BUILDING, EXISTING: A building erected prior to the adoption of this code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or a regularly authorized
deputy. Used herein, the term director of building and safety, or his or her designee, shall be construed to mean the building official.
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT: Refers to plumbing, mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment, devices and installations including, but not
limited to, piping, wiring, and fixtures which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, firefighting and transportation facilities
essential to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use. This term shall include "system service equipment".
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE: The Beverly Hills code for the abatement of dangerous buildings identified in article 8 of this chapter as adopted by
this jurisdiction.
ELECTRICAL CODE: The California electrical code published by the California building standards commission, as adopted and amended by this
jurisdiction and may be cited as the electrical code of the city of Beverly Hills.
FIRE OFFICIAL: The officer of other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the fire code, or a regularly authorized
deputy. Used herein, the term fire chief, or his or her designee, shall be construed to mean the fire official. Whenever the term or title "fire official" or
other similar designation is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the fire official designated by the appointing authority of this jurisdiction, as
applicable in enforcing the administrative code as it pertains to the California fire code. Whenever the term or title "building official" or other similar
designation is used herein, it shall be construed to mean the fire official as applicable in enforcing the administrative code as it pertains to the California
fire code.
GREEN BUILDING CODE: The California green building standards code and may be cited as CALGreen code published by the California building
standards commission, as adopted and amended by the jurisdiction and may be cited as the green building code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
HOUSING CODE: The Beverly Hills housing code identified in article 9 of this chapter.
JURISDICTION: As used in this code, is the city of Beverly Hills.
LISTED AND LISTING: Terms referring to equipment and materials included in a list published by an approved testing laboratory, inspection agency, or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of current productions of listed equipment or materials. The
published list shall state that the material or equipment complies with approved nationally recognized codes, standards or tests and has been tested or
evaluated and found suitable for use in a specified manner.
MECHANICAL CODE: The California mechanical code published by the California building standards commission, as adopted and amended by this
jurisdiction and may be cited as the mechanical code of the city of Beverly Hills.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal interest in the property.
PERMIT: An official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of a specified activity.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, fiduciaries, administrators or assigns, trustees, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or
their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. "Person" also includes officers, members, managers, partners and principals of
entities (including, but not limited to, corporations, limited liability companies, limited partnerships, partnerships and joint ventures) that have an interest
in real property.
PLUMBING CODE: The California plumbing code published by the California building standards commission, as adopted and amended by this
jurisdiction and may be cited as the plumbing code of the city of Beverly Hills.
REPAIR: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building, structure or building service equipment for the purpose of its maintenance.
RESIDENTIAL CODE: The international residential code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted and amended by this jurisdiction.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Includes all persons, whether as owners, lessees, occupants or others, who allow, cause, create, maintain, suffer, or permit
a violation of the Beverly Hills municipal code to exist or continue, by any act or the omission of any act or duty.
SHALL: As used in this code, is mandatory.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 345/797
STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION: The visual observation of the structural system, for general conformance to the approved plans and specifications, at
significant construction stages and at completion of the structural system. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the
inspections required by the fire code.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, or an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some manner.
SUCCESSFUL INSPECTION: A required inspection (as set forth in section 9-1-111 of this chapter) in which work inspected was determined by the
building official or designee thereof to meet all applicable minimum code requirements and the inspection was approved and documented as
successful by the development services division.
TECHNICAL CODES: Refer to those codes adopted by this jurisdiction containing the provisions for design, construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and structures and "building service equipment" as herein defined.
VALUATION OR VALUE: As applied to improvements a building and its building service equipment, shall be the estimated cost to replace the building
and its building service equipment in kind, based on current replacement costs. Valuation or value, as applied to building permit fees, shall mean the
estimated fair market value of the cost of all construction work for which the permit is issued as determined by the building official. To determine the
valuation, the building official may use the most current building valuation table published by the International Code Council, the mean of three (3)
responsible bids from properly licensed contractors or any other commonly accepted method to estimate construction costs. Soft cost including design
services shall not be incorporated unless a design build project approach is used. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-107: PERMITS:
A. Required: Except as specified in this code, no building, structure or building service equipment regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed,
enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, installed, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate, appropriate application has been made
and permit for each building, structure or building service equipment has first been obtained from the building official. No grading shall occur without the
prior procurement of a grading permit.
1. Sandblasting: No person shall engage in any sandblasting on the inside or outside of any building or structure within the city without first making
application, paying fees, and obtaining a permit from the building official. The sandblasting operation shall at all times be protected and separated
from any adjoining property by canvas or other suitable barriers sufficient to prevent splashing or blowing of water or sand, or both. Failure to comply
with any provision of this code shall be cause for the immediate revocation of any permit and the immediate stoppage of the sandblasting on any job.
B. Work Exempt From Permit: A permit shall not be required for the types of work in each of the separate classes of permit as listed below. Exemption
from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of the
building standards codes, zoning code, or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
1. Building Permits: A building permit shall not be required for the following:
a. One story (not exceeding 7 feet in height) detached accessory buildings used as tool or storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the
projected roof area does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet and the maximum roof projection does not exceed twenty four inches
(24"). This exception is not applicable to Trousdale and the Hillside Areas.
b. Retaining walls which are not over four feet (4') in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding flammable liquids, and walls that do not require a permit and do not violate provisions under title 10 of the Beverly Hills
municipal code.
c. Platforms, walks and driveways not more than thirty inches (30") above adjacent grade and not over any basement or story below, or part of an
accessible route, or within any front setback or on top of slopes as defined in title 10 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
d. Painting, papering and similar finish work.
e. Temporary motion picture, television, and theater stage sets and scenery, except when used as a building.
f. Window awnings projecting not more than fifty four inches (54") and supported by an exterior wall in group R, division 3 and group U occupancies.
g. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a group R, division 3 occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade and the
capacity does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) gallons, provided the requirements of this code are met.
h. Antennas that are less than fifteen feet (15') in height, as measured from the base of the antennas, if such antennas are capable of receiving only
VHF, UHF, and FM radio signals.
i. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five feet nine inches (5'9") in height.
Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical, and mechanical permits will be required for actions and installations that are regulated
by this code.
2. Electrical Permits: An electrical permit shall not be required for the following:
a. Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an
approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the electrical code.
b. Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.
c. Any temporary decorative lighting.
d. Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch, contactor or control device.
e. Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the outlets therefor.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 346/797
f. Repair or replacement of any overcurrent device of the required capacity in the same location.
g. Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.
h. Taping joints.
i. Removal of electrical wiring, provided new electrical wiring is not installed, or will not be installed in the future.
j. Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable experimental laboratories. As used herein, "suitable" means a structure or portion thereof
that has: 1) an appropriate certificate of occupancy for a laboratory; and 2) all required technical (building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical)
code permits and inspection approvals for the improvements and installations therein; and 3) all required fire code approvals and permits for the
improvements and installations therein.
k. The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.
l. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than twenty five (25) volts and not capable of supplying more than
fifty (50) watts of energy.
m. Low energy power, control and signal circuits of class II and class III as defined in the electrical code.
n. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the generation, transmission,
distribution or metering of electrical energy or in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or private utility in the
exercise of its function as a serving utility.
3. Mechanical Permits: A mechanical permit shall not be required for the following:
a. A portable heating appliance.
b. Portable ventilating equipment.
c. A portable cooling unit.
d. A portable evaporative cooler.
e. A closed system of steam, hot or chilled water piping within heating or cooling equipment regulated by the mechanical code.
f. Replacement of any component part of assembly of an appliance which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable
requirements of the technical codes.
g. Refrigerating equipment which is part of the equipment for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of the technical codes.
h. A unit refrigerating system as defined in the mechanical code.
4. Plumbing Permits: A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following:
a. The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe
become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a
permit shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this code.
b. The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, nor for the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided
such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.
C. Emergency Repairs: Where equipment replacement and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, a complete permit application shall be
submitted within the next working business day to the building official.
D. Minor Repairs: Application or notice to the building official is not required for minor repairs, such as to structures, replacement of lamps or the
connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of
any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load bearing support, or the removal, obstruction or change of any
required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to,
alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
E. Public Service Agencies: A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or
other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right.
F. Moved Buildings Or Structures: It shall be unlawful for any person to move, or cause the removal of, a building or structure into, onto, within the city, or
out of the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official. The permit fee shall be established by city council resolution. In addition to the
applicable requirements specified for demolition of buildings, the permittee shall comply with the following:
1. The necessary permits for moving the building or structure across public property shall be obtained in accordance with title 4, chapter 3, article 7 of
the Beverly Hills municipal code regulating the moving of buildings on or across public streets.
2. Before a permit is issued, the applicant may be required to post a performance bond in accordance with the provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of the
Beverly Hills municipal code as security. The amount of the bond shall be in an amount, as determined by the building official, which is sufficient to
complete any related or concurrent demolition work, restore the site, or to complete relocation of the building or structure.
3. Compliance with the requirements of this article shall not relieve anyone from any other applicable requirements of the Beverly Hills municipal code,
including, but not limited to, the provisions of title 4, chapter 3, article 7 regulating the moving of buildings on or across public streets.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 347/797
4. The property owner or the owner's representative shall post at the property entrance a notice of intent to move a building or structure that is readily
visible and either less than forty five (45) years old; or, forty five (45) years or older and the designer is not included on the city's list of master
architects, at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of permit whenever the director of community development determines in writing that the grading,
demolition, or construction work will have a significant impact on the surrounding properties.
5. If a building or structure is more than forty five (45) years old and the designer is included on the city's list of master architects, the property owner or
the owner's representative shall post at the entrance to the property a notice of intent to move at least thirty (30) days prior to issuance of a permit.
This requirement can be waived by the director of community development if the director determines that the subject property is not an eligible
property. The building or structure relocation activities authorized by a permit issued for a project subject to the thirty (30) day hold period required by
this code shall be commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance, and thereafter shall be diligently pursued to completion,
otherwise the permit shall be null and void, and of no further effect whatsoever. Any subsequent application for a structure or building relocation
permit for the same property shall be subject to a new thirty (30) day hold period pursuant to this paragraph.
The community development department shall furnish the sign for notice of intent to move a building, structure or object. Failure to comply with the
requirements of this section shall be cause for the city to engage the necessary services or facilities to accomplish the intent of this section, and the
city shall charge the owner of the lot or parcel of land for all costs so incurred by the city.
G. Demolition Of Buildings And Structures: It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish any building or structure, or portion thereof, within the city
without first obtaining a permit from the building official. The amount of the fee for the permit shall be established by city council resolution.
The permittee shall comply with the following requirements before a permit to perform demolition may be issued under this section:
1. A construction fence shall be installed to screen the site from view on public property, if required by the building official. The composition, location
and effectiveness of the proposed fence for screening purposes shall meet the approval of building official, which shall be confirmed in writing.
2. Water service shall be maintained on the site for the duration of the demolition project and for any subsequent development or improvements on the
subject property.
3. When required by other provisions of this code, indemnification bonds and insurance shall be posted with the city.
4. All utility companies shall be notified in writing by the owner of the property of the intention to demolish the building or structure.
5. A permit shall be obtained to remove and fill any basement, pool, sump, or other depression in the surface of the lot or parcel of land.
6. A permit shall be obtained to cap the sewer and any drains connecting to the building or structure. The sewer and drains shall be capped at the
property line unless otherwise approved by the building official in writing. The sewer caps shall be inspected and approved by the building official.
7. The building shall be inspected by qualified individuals for the presence of asbestos. If the building is found to contain asbestos, the building owner
or his representative shall submit a letter to the building official so stating. If the building is found to contain asbestos, then an asbestos abatement
permit shall be obtained from the department upon submittal by the applicant of all necessary documentation as required by rule 1403 of the South
Coast air quality management district. Demolition permits shall not be issued prior to submittal of an asbestos abatement completion certificate by
qualified contractors.
8. The building shall be inspected for rats and rodent infestation and a report from qualified individuals that are acceptable to the building official shall
be submitted attesting that the building is free of any rats or rodents prior to issuance of the demolition permit. If the building is found to be infested,
then proper eradication measures by qualified individuals shall be implemented and a report attesting to the eradication of the rodent infestation shall
be submitted prior to issuance of the demolition permit.
9. If the building or structure proposed for demolition is forty five (45) years or older and the designer is included on the city's list of master architects,
the property owner or the owner's representative shall post at the construction site a notice of intent to demolish at least thirty (30) days prior to
issuance of permit. This requirement can be waived by the director of community development if the property has been specifically surveyed for its
potential and has been determined to not be eligible for listing on a register of historic resources, or has been subject to a thirty (30) day hold period
pursuant to section 10-3-3218 of the Beverly Hills municipal code for the same project. Any subsequent application for a demolition permit for the
same property shall be subject to a new thirty (30) day hold period pursuant to this section.
10. If a building or structure proposed for demolition is either less than forty five (45) years old, or forty five (45) years or older and the designer is not
included on the city's list of master architects, the property owner or the owner's representative shall post at the construction site a notice of intent to
demolish at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of a permit whenever the director of community development determines that the demolition work
will have a significant impact on the surrounding properties. Any subsequent application for a demolition permit for the same property shall be subject
to a new thirty (30) day hold period pursuant to this section.
The community development department shall furnish the sign for notice of intent to demolish. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section
shall be cause for the city to engage the necessary services or facilities to accomplish the intent of this section, and the city shall charge the owner of
the lot or parcel of land for all costs so incurred by the city.
Before a demolition permit shall receive final inspection approval and before the pertinent bonds are released, the following requirements shall be
met:
a. All concrete, weeds, debris, stones, or other loose material shall be removed from the lot or parcel of land.
b. All basements, pools, tanks, sumps, or other subterranean structures shall be removed and backfilled and the lot properly graded.
c. The fence, when required by the building official, is installed and inspected.
H. Completion Of Demolition: The demolition activities authorized by a demolition permit issued for a project required by this section shall be commenced
within one hundred eighty (180) days of permit issuance, and thereafter shall be diligently pursued to completion, otherwise the demolition permit shall
be null and void, and of no further effect whatsoever.
I. Performance Bond: When a building is to be demolished, the permittee may be required to post a bond in compliance with the provisions of title 3,
chapter 4 of the Beverly Hills municipal code as security for restoration of the site, or completion of the demolition. The amount of the bond shall be in
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 348/797
an amount, as determined by the building official, which is sufficient to complete the demolition, or restore the site.
J. Temporary Structures And Uses: Temporary structures such as reviewing stands and other miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies, or fences used
for the protection of the public around and in conjunction with construction work may be erected by special permit from the building official for a limited
period of time. Buildings or structures erected under a special permit need not comply with the type of construction or fire resistive time periods as
required by the building code. Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit. It
is unlawful to maintain a temporary structure without a special permit or after a special permit has expired.
K. Historic Buildings: Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a building, structure,
or its building service equipment may be made without conforming to the requirements of the technical codes when first authorized in writing by the
building official, provided:
1. The building or structure has been designated by official action of the legally constituted authority of this jurisdiction as having special historical or
architectural significance.
2. Unsafe conditions as determined pursuant to this code have first been fully abated with all required permits and inspection approvals from the
development services division.
3. The restored building or structure and its building service equipment will be no more hazardous based on life safety, fire safety and sanitation
considerations than the existing building prior to its restoration.
L. Application For Permit: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application on a form furnished by the city for that purpose.
1. Application Requirements: Every such application shall:
a. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.
b. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed building or work.
c. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.
d. Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations, and specifications, and other data as required by section 9-1-108, "Submittal Documents", of
this chapter.
e. State the valuation of all proposed work.
f. Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority.
g. Give such other data and information, as well as reports, as may be required by the building official.
2. Action On Application: The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the applications for permits, construction documents, plans,
specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments to verify compliance
with any applicable laws under their purview. If the building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit, and the construction
documents, plans, specifications and other data filed therewith, conform to the requirements of this code, and all other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and that the fees specified by resolution of the city council have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the
applicant.
3. Expiration Of Application: An application for a permit for any proposed work for which no permit is issued within three hundred sixty five (365) days
following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and construction documents, plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be
returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not
exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have
prevented action from being taken. An application shall not be extended more than once. An application shall not be extended if this code or any
other pertinent laws or ordinances have been amended subsequent to the date of application. In order to renew action on an application after
expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.
M. Validity Of Permit: The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for,
or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the city. Permits presuming to give authority to violate
or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the city are null and void.
The issuance of a permit based on construction documents, plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the building official from thereafter
requiring the correction of errors in said construction documents, plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being
carried on in violation of these codes or of any other ordinances of the city.
N. Expiration Of Permit: Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void
unless work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the issuance date of such permit. If work
authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the issuance date, such permit shall expire by limitation
and become null and void one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the date of the last successful inspection or documented inspection.
Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and all fees paid, provided no changes have been made or will
be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that the expiration period has not exceeded one year. In order to
renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee.
A permittee holding an unexpired permit for work not requiring plan check may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence
under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons, as
determined by the building official in writing. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action
from being taken. Permits shall not be extended more than once.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 349/797
1. Expiration Of Permit For Unlawful Structure: Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection N or any other provision of this chapter, if a building
permit was issued in order to bring an unpermitted structure or other unlawful, substandard, or hazardous condition into compliance with any
applicable law, or ordinance, such permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void ninety (90) calendar days after the date on which the
permit was issued. The building official may extend the validity of the permit for a period not exceeding ninety (90) calendar days beyond the initial
ninety (90) day limit upon written request by the applicant filed with the building official prior to the expiration date of the original permit.
O. Additional Permit Requirements; Noticed Code Violations: Notwithstanding any other provision of the Beverly Hills municipal code to the contrary,
private real property shall be free of all noticed code violations as an additional prerequisite for any person to be entitled to obtain a permit from the
building official. As used in this section, "noticed code violations" means all activities, conditions or uses on private real property that violate any
provision of the Beverly Hills municipal code as described in one or more city notices (from any department or division, or an attorney therefor) or in
final administrative citations to a prior or current owner or other responsible person, which violations the city has determined have not been fully
corrected in the manner required by the Beverly Hills municipal code prior to the submittal date of an application for a permit.
1. Noticed Code Violations: Where noticed code violations exist, the building official shall issue a notice of denial of permit by first class mail to the
permit applicant or to the current owner (if not the applicant). The notice of denial of permit shall include a description of the noticed code violations
as well as notice of the right of appeal pursuant to this section. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice of denial of permit
pursuant to this section shall not invalidate the denial of a permit or extend the appeal period.
a. The building official may issue a permit or a permit with conditions to an owner, despite the existence of one or more noticed code violations, if
he/she determines one of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The noticed code violations require the permit being applied for in order to abate the violations.
(2) Denial of a permit would result in an immediate threat to: a) the health or safety of occupants of the real property on which noticed code
violations exist; or b) the occupants of adjoining private property; or c) persons on public property.
b. If the building official imposes conditions on a permit, he/she shall issue a notice of permit condition(s) to the permit applicant or to the current
owner (if not the applicant) by first class mail that shall be deposited in a United States postal container. Notice of the right of appeal pursuant to
this section shall be included therein. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice of permit condition(s) shall not invalidate the
conditions or extend the appeal period. If an owner fails to comply with a condition in a timely manner, as determined by the building official,
he/she may suspend or revoke the permit pursuant to this code. The notice and appeal provisions shall apply if the building official issues a notice
of suspension or revocation of permit.
c. The issuance of a permit without conditions shall not preclude the division from subsequently issuing a notice of permit condition(s). Failure of any
person to receive a properly addressed notice of permit condition(s) shall not invalidate the condition(s) or extend the appeal period.
d. An owner may appeal a notice of denial of a permit or a notice of permit condition(s) that is issued pursuant to this section.
(1) In order to be timely, an owner's dated and signed appeal, which shall contain the owner's mailing address and contact information by
telephone and e-mail (if available), must be received by the development services division ("division") within ten (10) calendar days of the date
of mailing of the division's notice of denial of permit or a notice of permit condition(s). The appeal shall state all grounds in support thereof. An
appeal fee shall not be charged.
(2) An untimely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal, in which case the division's notice of denial of a permit or notice of permit
condition(s) is final.
(3) If an appeal is timely filed with the required fee, then an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing officer who shall be
appointed by the city manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the division's issuance of a notice of denial
of permit or a notice of permit condition(s). The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the division's receipt of a timely appeal. Formal rules
of evidence and discovery do not apply. The owner and the city shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of their respective
positions and to cross examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at the appeal hearing to establish cause for the division's issuance
of a notice of denial of permit or a notice of permit condition(s). All final administrative citations and/or notices to prior or current owners shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents. The hearing officer shall use preponderance of evidence as the
standard of review in deciding the matter on appeal.
(4) The city shall issue a notice to the owner by first class mail of the date, time and place of the hearing, which notice shall be deposited in a
United States postal container no less than ten (10) calendar days prior thereto. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice
pursuant to this section shall not affect any appeal hearing pursuant to this section.
(5) Failure of an owner to appear at an appeal hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal, in which case the hearing officer shall cancel the
hearing. In that event, the notice of denial of permit or the notice of permit condition(s) is final.
(6) The hearing officer shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing issue a written notice of decision to the owner and the city by first class
mail that upholds the division's determination that cause existed to issue a notice of denial of permit or a notice of permit condition(s).
Alternatively, the hearing officer may overrule a notice of denial of permit due to an absence of cause, in which event the owner shall be entitled
to obtain a permit, provided all other requirements therefor under the Beverly Hills municipal code have been met. The hearing officer may also
overrule a notice of permit condition(s) due to an absence of cause. The notice of decision shall include findings in support thereof. The hearing
officer's decision shall be final.
e. The building official may, prior to the issuance of a permit, also require an advance tender of a cash deposit for code enforcement fees to monitor
real property for noticed code violations until they have been fully abated to the satisfaction of the building official. Such fees are chargeable from
the date of permit issuance and shall terminate upon the abatement of the noticed code violations. The amount of the deposit shall be calculated in
the manner set forth below, which shall be in addition to any permit fees. The building official may require the owner to replenish a deposit within
seven (7) calendar days of written notice by first class mail, if fifty percent (50%) of that deposit is depleted. Failure to replenish a deposit in a
timely manner shall constitute cause for the division to suspend or revoke the permit.
As used in this section, "code enforcement fees" shall mean fees imposed by the city to defray its costs of code enforcement actions, pursuant to
California Government Code section 54988 and California Health And Safety Code section 17951 (and any successor statutes thereto), this code,
and any other applicable local, state, or federal law, as well as by the city's police powers as authorized by the California constitution.
Monitoring real property for noticed code violations constitutes code enforcement actions pursuant to this section and include, but are not limited
to, the time and other resources of public officials in all city departments or divisions and city consultants expended by them to inspect and/or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 350/797
reinspect real property in connection with noticed code violations, as well as to draft reports or notices, take photographs, engage in related
communications (whether in meetings or otherwise) with other city officials, other agencies or responsible persons and, to seek or cause the
abatement of noticed code violations by the exercise of one or more of the city's remedies. In no instance shall the city charge a code enforcement
fee for any actions that are covered by permit fees.
In establishing the required amount of a cash deposit in each case the building official shall estimate the time in hours the city will expend for
monitoring actions and shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature and number of noticed code violations;
(2) Whether their abatement requires city approvals, licenses or permits;
(3) The time it will take for an owner to obtain those approvals, licenses or permits;
(4) The time it will take for an owner to fully abate the noticed code violations with all required approvals, inspections and permits.
The estimate of hours shall be multiplied by the average burdened dollar hourly rate the city pays personnel in the community development
department to arrive at the amount of the required deposit.
The city shall provide an accounting of code enforcement fees that have been charged to a deposit in the form of a statement of code
enforcement fees by first class mail to an owner within ten (10) calendar days of the date the noticed code violations have been fully abated. If
an unused portion of the deposit exists, the city shall tender it to the owner along with the accounting. Notice of the right to appeal the statement
of code enforcement fees shall be included that informs the owner of the time period and manner in which to do so. Code enforcement fees that
exceed a deposit are nonetheless chargeable to an owner and due the city. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed statement of
code enforcement fees pursuant to this section shall not invalidate the accounting therein or extend the appeal period.
f. In order to be timely, an owner's dated and signed appeal of the statement of code enforcement fees, which shall contain the owner's mailing
address and contact information by telephone and e-mail (if available), must be received by the division within ten (10) calendar days of the date of
mailing of the division's statement of code enforcement fees. The appeal shall state all objections to the statement. An appeal fee shall not be
charged.
An untimely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the statement of code enforcement fees, in which case it is final.
If an appeal is timely filed, then an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the city
manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the statement of code enforcement fees and the noticed code
violations. The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the division's receipt of a timely appeal. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not
apply. The owner and the city shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of their respective positions and to cross examine
witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at the appeal hearing to establish it incurred code enforcement fees in the amount claimed. The
statement of code enforcement fees, and all amendments or supplements thereto, shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in
those documents. The hearing officer shall use preponderance of evidence as the standard of review in deciding the matter on appeal.
The city shall issue a notice to the owner by first class mail of the date, time and place of the hearing, which notice shall be deposited in a United
States postal container no less than ten (10) calendar days prior thereto. Failure of any owner to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing
pursuant to this section shall not invalidate a statement of code enforcement fees.
Failure of an owner to appear at an appeal hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal, in which case the hearing officer shall cancel the
hearing. In that event, the statement of code enforcement fees is final.
The hearing officer shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing issue a written notice of decision to the owner and the city by first class mail
that: 1) upholds the city's statement of code enforcement fees; or 2) determines the statement of code enforcement fees is inaccurate with a
written explanation therefor. In that event, the hearing officer shall specify the amount the owner is due for any additional refund of the deposit less
any prior city refund, which the city shall tender to the owner within a period of ten (10) days from the date of the notice of decision. The hearing
officer's decision shall be final.
g. The division shall, provided all other requirements in the Beverly Hills municipal code have been met, issue a permit once it determines grounds to
deny it pursuant to this section no longer exist. The division shall also rescind conditions to a permit once it determines grounds no longer exist to
require their imposition.
h. The actions authorized by this section shall not affect, alter, modify or waive the city's right to exercise its remedies at any time against owners or
responsible persons in connection with violations of the Beverly Hills municipal code, irrespective of whether they were noticed.
2. Suspension Or Revocation:
a. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit when:
(1) The permit was issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate, or incomplete information;
(2) It was issued in violation of any provision of the Beverly Hills municipal code;
(3) One or more noticed code violations exist; or
(4) A condition to a permit has not been met or has otherwise been violated.
b. If the building official suspends or revokes a permit pursuant to this section, the building official shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation of
permit to the permit applicant or to the owner (if not the applicant) by first class mail. Suspension of a permit shall not extend its life. The notice
shall include a description of the basis for the suspension or revocation as well as notice of an appeal right if the notice of suspension or revocation
of permit was issued pursuant to subsection O2a(3) or O2a(4) of this section. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice of
suspension or revocation of permit shall not invalidate the suspension or revocation of a permit or extend the appeal period.
c. The building official may, as an alternative to suspension or revocation for noticed code violations, impose conditions to a permit in the form of a
notice of permit condition(s) that is issued to the permit applicant or to the current owner (if not the applicant) by first class mail. Failure of any
person to receive a properly addressed notice of permit condition(s) pursuant to this section shall not invalidate the conditions or extend the appeal
period. Failure to comply with a notice of permit condition(s) in a timely manner constitutes additional cause to suspend or revoke a permit.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 351/797
d. The building official may, prior to issuing a notice of permit condition(s) and in order to monitor noticed code violations, also require tender of a
cash deposit (if not previously tendered and/or used) for code enforcement fees that the city incurs from the date of the issuance of a notice of
permit condition(s) until the noticed code violations have been fully abated with all required approvals, inspections and permits. The provisions in
this code shall apply if a cash deposit is required.
e. Failure to replenish a deposit as required by this code shall also constitute cause for the division to issue a notice of suspension or revocation of
permit pursuant to this section. No right of appeal shall exist for a notice of suspension or revocation of permit that has been issued for this reason.
f. An owner may appeal a notice of suspension or revocation that is issued pursuant to subsection O2a(3) or O2a(4) of this section. No right of
appeal exists if a notice of suspension or revocation is based on subsection O2a(1) or O2a(2) of this section.
(1) In order to be timely, an owner's dated and signed appeal, which shall contain the owner's mailing address and contact information by
telephone and e-mail (if available), must be received by the division within ten (10) calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice of
suspension or revocation of permit or a notice of permit condition(s). The appeal shall state all grounds in support thereof. An appeal fee shall
not be charged.
(2) An untimely appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal, in which case the notice of suspension or revocation of permit or the notice of
permit conditions shall be final.
(3) If an appeal is timely filed, then an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the city
manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the division's issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of
permit or a notice of permit condition(s). The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the division's receipt of a timely appeal. Formal rules of
evidence and discovery do not apply. The owner and the city shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of their respective
positions and to cross examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at the appeal hearing to establish cause for the division's issuance
of a notice of suspension or revocation or a notice of permit condition(s). All final administrative citations and/or notices to prior or current owners
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents. The hearing officer shall use preponderance of evidence as the
standard of review in deciding the issue on appeal.
g. The city shall issue a notice to the owner by first class mail of the date, time and place of the hearing, which notice shall be deposited in a United
States postal container no less than ten (10) calendar days prior thereto. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice pursuant to
this section shall not affect any appeal hearing pursuant to this section.
h. Failure of an owner to appear at an appeal hearing constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal, in which case the hearing officer shall cancel the
hearing. In that event a notice of suspension or revocation of permit or a notice of permit condition(s) is final.
i. The hearing officer shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing issue a written notice of decision to the owner and the city by first class mail
that: 1) upholds the division's determination that cause existed to issue a notice of suspension or revocation of permit or a notice of permit
condition(s); or 2) reverses the division's suspension or revocation due to the absence of cause. The notice of decision shall include findings in
support thereof. The hearing officer's decision shall be final.
j. The building official shall rescind a notice of suspension or revocation of permit in writing, once it determines cause for its issuance no longer
exists. The division shall also rescind a notice of permit condition(s) in writing once it determines grounds no longer exist for their imposition.
k. The actions authorized by this section shall not affect, alter, modify or waive the city's right to exercise its remedies at any time against owners or
responsible persons in connection with violations of the Beverly Hills municipal code, irrespective of whether they were noticed. (Ord. 16-O-2719,
eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-108: SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS:
A. General: Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams, soil investigation reports,
geotechnical reports, special inspection and structural observation programs, a construction management plan and other data shall constitute the
submittal documents and shall be submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit. When such plans are not prepared by an architect
or engineer, the building official may require the applicant submitting such plans or other data to demonstrate that state law does not require that the
plans be prepared by a licensed architect or engineer. If provided by local law, or in order to ensure quality design consistent with the standards of the
city of Beverly Hills, or to otherwise promote the public health, welfare and safety, the building official may require plans, computations and
specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer and architect licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by state law.
1. Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents, plans, calculations, construction, and other data if it
is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
B. Construction Documents: Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn to scale upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are
permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature
and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, as determined by the building official. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the house and street address of the work and the name
and address of the owner and persons who prepare them. Plans shall include a site plan showing the location of the proposed building and of every
existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed specifications, the building official may approve references on the plans to a specific section or part
of this code or other ordinances or laws. Computations, stress diagrams and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans shall be
submitted when required by the building official. Where proposed construction will affect site drainage, existing and proposed drainage patterns shall
be shown on the plot plan.
C. Approval Of Construction Documents: When the building official issues a permit the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp
as "APPROVED". One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the
applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative.
Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official, and all work regulated
by this code shall be done in accordance with the plans marked "APPROVED".
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 352/797
D. Phased Approval: The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure, or the installation of
equipment before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this code and other appropriate city conditions and/or
requirements. The holder of such permit shall proceed at the holder's own risk and without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure,
or equipment will be granted.
E. Architect Or Engineer In Responsible Charge: When it is required that documents be prepared by an architect or engineer, the building official shall be
authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered architect or engineer who shall act as the
architect or engineer of record. If the circumstances require, the owner may designate a substitute registered architect or engineer of record who shall
perform all of the duties required of the original architect or engineer of record. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the
architect or engineer of record is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.
The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all submittal documents prepared by others, including phased
and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.
F. Deferred Submittals: For the purposes of this section, "deferred submittals" are defined as those portions of the design which are not submitted at the
time of the application and which are to be submitted within a period specified by the building official. Deferral of any submittal items shall have prior
approval of the building official. The architect or engineer of record shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the
building official.
Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the architect or engineer of record who shall review them and forward them to the building
official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general
conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal documents have been
approved by the building official.
G. Amended Construction Documents: Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during
construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction
documents. In addition to submitting revised plans and drawings of any proposed changes to plans already checked or approved, the applicant shall
submit a change list setting forth all of those changes, beyond those necessary to address the department's correction notices, for which approval is
requested. Even if proposed changes are shown on the revised plans and drawings that have been approved, no change shall in itself be considered
approved unless it appears on the approved change list. The change list may be included on the face of the revised plans and drawings.
H. Inspection And Observation Program: When special inspection is required by chapter 17 of this code, the architect or engineer of record shall prepare
an inspection program which shall be submitted to the building official for approval prior to issuance of the building permit. The inspection program shall
designate the portions of the work that require special inspection and indicate the duties of the special inspectors.
The special inspector may be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or an agent of the owner, but shall not be employed by the
contractor or his employees, representatives or agents, or any other person performing the work.
When structural observation is required by chapter 17 of this code, the inspection program shall name the individuals or firms who are to perform
structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur.
The inspection program shall include samples of inspection reports and provide time limits for submission of reports.
I. Responsible Person Or Contractor Of Record: When required by the building official, the contractor of record or a representative responsible person
shall be present at the construction site at all times during the construction process. That person shall have the authority to address the concerns of
neighboring property residents or occupants regarding the particular construction project. The names and telephone numbers of the contractor of
record or the responsible person shall be conspicuously displayed at the construction site in a manner satisfactory to the building official.
J. Notice Of Demolition/Construction: The property owner or the owner's representative shall post at the construction site a notice of intent to do grading,
construction or demolition that is readily visible at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of permit whenever the building official determines that the
grading, demolition, or construction work will have a significant impact on the surrounding properties.
K. Construction Parking And Hauling Restrictions: No hauling or construction related parking shall be permitted on a public street except as otherwise
approved by the building official and city engineer, provided that the work described in an application for a permit, and the plans, specifications and
other data filed therewith, conform to the requirements of this code, the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees
specified by resolution of the city council in section 9-1-110 of this chapter have been paid. All hauling related to construction shall not be commenced
without hauling permits.
L. Construction Means And Method Plan Required:
1. When applying for a permit to alter, repair, or rehabilitate any structure that contains one or more dwelling units, the applicant shall indicate on a form
furnished by the city building official whether the property is occupied by tenants.
2. If the property is tenant occupied and, as determined by the city building official, the construction work could impact the habitability of any unit on the
property, prior to obtaining a permit, the applicant shall submit a construction means and method plan to the city building official which contains the
information required by this section. The construction could impact unit habitability if any of the following conditions may exist at the property for a
period exceeding one working day:
a. Inadequate sanitation including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, or bathtub or shower,
(2) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 353/797
(3) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures,
(4) Lack of adequate heating,
(5) Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment,
(6) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by the building code of the city of Beverly Hills,
(7) Lack of required electrical lighting,
(8) Dampness of habitable rooms,
(9) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system;
b. Structural hazards including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Deteriorated or inadequate foundations,
(2) Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports,
(3) Any of the following structural features that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety: flooring or floor supports, members of
walls, partitions, or other vertical supports, members of ceiling, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other horizontal members;
c. Wiring, plumbing, or electrical equipment that will no longer conform with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation;
d. Faulty weather protection, including, but not limited to, the following: ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including
broken windows or doors;
e. The building, premises, or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation is in such a condition as to cause a fire
or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause;
f. The building or portion thereof is an unsafe building as defined by the building code of the city of Beverly Hills;
g. The building, premises or portions thereof is not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the building code and fire code of the city of
Beverly Hills;
h. The building or portions thereof is not provided with the fire resistive construction or fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by the
building code of the city of Beverly Hills and the fire code of the city of Beverly Hills.
3. No permit shall be issued until a satisfactory means and method plan is approved by the city building official, if required.
4. If a construction means and method plan was not required prior to permit issuance, the city building official shall require a construction means and
method plan be submitted after work commences if the city building official determines that the work could impact the habitability of any unit on the
property given the manner in which the construction is being undertaken. If the city building official requires a construction means and method plan,
the requirements of this section shall also apply. The city building official may stop construction until all applicable requirements of this chapter have
been met.
M. Contents Of Construction Means And Method Plan: The construction means and method plan required by this code shall provide the following
information:
1. A detailed description of the construction process, organized sequentially;
2. An explanation of the impact that this construction will have on the occupancy of the units by tenants;
3. The owner's plan to address the habitability impacts on the tenants created by the proposed construction project;
4. An assessment of whether any or all of the tenants will need to be temporarily relocated during any phase of the work. A tenant will need to be
temporarily relocated if the conditions of the property or the repair or rehabilitation thereof will render the premises unsafe for continued occupancy;
5. A description of the construction mitigation measures that the owner will implement to minimize the impacts of noise, dust, vibrations, utility shutoffs,
and other construction impacts on tenants.
N. Relocation Plan: If the construction means and method plan demonstrates, as determined by the city building official, that the work being performed on
the property may require that tenants be temporarily relocated, the applicant shall also prepare and submit a relocation plan for city approval prior to
issuance of a permit which shall contain facts sufficient to show that:
1. Fair and reasonable relocation benefits will be provided to all displaced tenants as required;
a. A mutual agreement between the landlord and tenant to be impacted by construction will be an acceptable method of complying with the
relocation plan requirements; or
b. A reasonable relocation plan which demonstrates the following:
(1) Relocation facilities shall be located within the city of Beverly Hills.
(2) Relocation facilities shall provide equal accommodations to include, but not be limited to, laundry facilities, exercise facilities, balconies,
kitchens, pet housing/care, and parking.
(3) Storage facilities required to temporarily store tenant's personal belongings during the period of construction shall be provided by landlord. For
the security of personal belongings, storage shall be independent from other relocated tenant's property.
(4) Moving expenses and costs shall be incorporated into the relocation plan.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 354/797
2. Notice of the relocation assistance and benefits to be provided and the timing of the displacement will be provided to all tenants who will be
displaced.
O. Tenant Noticing Requirement:
1. Before a permit can be issued for the alteration/repair/rehabilitation of a building which required an applicant to prepare a construction means and
method plan pursuant to this code, the applicant must certify that all tenants of the property will receive the information required, in a form approved
by the city, within ten (10) days following the issuance of the permit and that no work will commence under the permit until ten (10) days after all
tenants are notified. This notice shall either be hand delivered to each tenant of the property or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
2. The notice required of this section shall contain the following information:
a. A detailed description of the nature and type of construction activity that will be undertaken;
b. Information regarding the scheduling of construction and the periods in which services such as laundry, parking, elevators, water and power, will
be unavailable;
c. A statement that the construction being undertaken at the property will not terminate the tenant's tenancy;
d. A statement informing the tenants of their right to seek mitigation from the property owner for nuisance conditions at the property, including, but not
limited to, noise, dust, vibrations, utility shutoffs and other construction impacts. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, temporary
rent reductions, quiet office space for tenants working at home and temporary accommodations;
e. A statement informing tenants of their right to review and receive free copies of the owner's construction means and method plan;
f. A statement informing tenants of their right to review and receive free copies of the owner's relocation plan, if such plan was required;
g. Information explaining how to contact the project applicant, including the designation of a project manager responsible for responding to tenant
inquiries, complaints, and requests for mitigation of nuisance conditions;
h. A statement informing tenants that they should immediately contact the city's building and safety division regarding any conditions at the property
which they consider to be unsafe, in violation of the city's technical codes, or in violation of the applicant's construction means and method plan;
i. For construction projects that exceed thirty (30) days in duration as measured from the date that construction commences, the applicant shall also
inform the tenants that the applicant will provide twice monthly notices to the tenants regarding the progress of construction and will schedule
monthly meetings to address the construction progress and obtain tenant input and feedback regarding the construction;
j. Any other information that the city building official determines is necessary due to the unique circumstances of the construction work.
3. In addition to the information required of this section, the tenant notification shall provide the following information if the project will require the
temporary relocation of tenants:
A statement that the construction activity may require displacement, but that to the greatest extent practicable, no tenant lawfully occupying the
property will be required to move without at least thirty (30) days' written notice from the owner.
P. Security: Before receiving a permit for a project which requires an applicant to prepare a construction means and method plan pursuant to this section,
the applicant shall furnish security to the city sufficient to ensure the timely and faithful performance of all work included within the scope of the permit
and the payment of all relocation assistance necessitated by the temporary displacement of the tenants, if any. The city building official may exempt a
project from the security requirements of this section if the city building official determines such security is unnecessary based on an analysis of the
following factors: size of project, duration of project, potential for impact on tenant safety, and invasiveness of project. If required, cash bonds are
acceptable forms of security.
Q. Compliance With Required Means And Method Plan:
1. General: No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, sandblast or convert the use of any building, structure or
building service equipment regulated by this code without complying with all conditions of any required construction means and methods plan.
2. Owner's Responsibility: The property owner shall remain responsible for any violation of the construction means and method plan regardless of the
responsibility of any other person for the violation or any contract or agreement the owner entered into with a third party concerning the owner's
property or the construction that necessitated the preparation of the means and method plan.
R. Administrative Regulations: The city building official shall have the authority to promulgate and/or adopt administrative regulations to implement the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-109: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
A. Issuance: The application, plans, specifications, computations and other information filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the director
of building and safety. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their purview. If the
director of building and safety finds that the work described in an application for a permit, and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith,
conform to the requirements of this code, the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified by resolution of the
city council have been paid, the director of building and safety shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.
When a permit is issued when plans are required, the director of building and safety shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications
"APPROVED". Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the director of building and
safety, and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the plans marked "APPROVED".
The director of building and safety may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building, structure or building service equipment before the entire
plans and specifications for the whole building, structure or building service equipment have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 355/797
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the technical codes and other appropriate city
conditions and/or requirements.
The holder of such permit shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure or building service will be granted.
In addition to submitting revised plans and drawings of any proposed changes to plans already checked or approved, the applicant shall submit a
change list setting forth all of those changes, beyond those necessary to address the department's correction notices, for which approval is requested.
Even if proposed changes are shown on the revised plans and drawings that have been approved, no change shall in itself be considered approved
unless it appears on the approved change list. The change list may be included on the face of the revised plans and drawings.
B. Retention Of Plans: One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be submitted by the applicant, and retained by the city, in a digital
format deemed acceptable by the building official and as outlined in the city's retention schedule; and one set of approved plans and specifications
shall be returned to the applicant, and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in
progress.
C. Construction Management Plan Required: Prior to issuance of a building permit for a project requiring plan check, the owner shall prepare and submit a
construction management plan (CMP) for all work to be performed, using a form provided by the building official, or otherwise found acceptable by the
building official. The CMP shall set forth construction inspection milestones to be timely completed, that shall correspond to progress inspections
required by this code. If the CMP is approved, work may be commenced and shall comply in all respects with time limits set forth in the CMP. The total
time within which to complete construction, as set forth in the CMP, shall not exceed three (3) years unless approved in writing by the building official.
D. Safety Deposit: Prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner shall also post a safety deposit with an approved local financial institution ("safety
deposit") in such amount as determined by the building official based upon the potential need for imposition by the city of safety measures on the
project site, capable of being unilaterally drawn upon by the city in the event construction ceases and/or an inspection milestone is missed. The safety
deposit shall be in the form of cash or structured letter of credit satisfactory to the city attorney, and shall be used solely to procure construction site
security fencing, removal of construction site solid waste, maintenance of landscaping, including lawns and parkways, and/or remediation of any other
conditions determined by the building official to be unsafe, after the owner's refusal or failure to correct such condition(s). The owner shall deposit
additional funds within five (5) business days of city's withdrawal, sufficient to maintain the required safety deposit amount at all times during the course
of the work, until final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, if applicable.
Any failure by the owner to meet a CMP inspection milestone shall authorize the building official to issue a notice requiring completion of the work and
corresponding inspection within thirty (30) days ("completion notice"). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the building official shall be authorized as
otherwise provided under this code, California building standards code, or any other provision of local or state law, to issue written orders requiring the
immediate correction of any condition deemed to present an immediate and unreasonable risk of harm or danger to the public health and safety
("safety order"). The building official shall be authorized to utilize the safety deposit, consistent with the procedures set forth in this section, to
implement measures to protect the public from any immediate and unreasonable risk of harm or danger on the project site, if the owner fails or refuses
to timely comply with the safety order.
Every permit issued by the building official shall expire and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit, including the
inspection milestone, is not completed, or the safety deposit is not made, prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period specified in the completion
notice. In the event a permit expires, a stop work order may be issued, and the owner shall apply for, pay all new permit fees, submit a new CMP, and
obtain a new permit before recommencing the work.
Prior to withdrawing funds from the safety deposit, the owner shall be provided ten (10) days' prior written notice within which the owner may file a
written appeal of the pending fund withdrawal. If no appeal is filed within said ten (10) day period, the city may withdraw funds in the amount stated in
the notice. If an appeal is timely filed, then an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the city
manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the determination to withdraw funds from the safety deposit. The owner
shall be provided notice of the hearing which shall be set to occur not later than fourteen (14) days after receipt of the timely appeal. Prior to or at the
hearing on the appeal, the owner shall submit: 1) documentary evidence sufficient to establish that: all permit applications were timely filed;
construction contracts were entered into in a diligent manner; compliance with all permit requirements occurred in a timely manner; and that all fees
were timely paid; and 2) any other evidence demonstrating that construction delays, including any failure to comply with a safety order, resulted from
circumstances beyond the owner's reasonable control and despite diligent and clearly documented efforts to achieve timely compliance.
Following the conclusion of the hearing, and based upon substantial evidence presented, the hearing officer shall be authorized to make any of the
following determinations:
1. The owner shall be provided with up to thirty (30) additional days within which to complete the work and required inspection;
2. Modify the determination to withdraw funds by authorizing a lesser amount to be withdrawn; or
3. Deny the appeal in its entirety.
The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. A failure or refusal by an owner to make or fund a required safety deposit and/or allow any work of
construction to remain in an unsafe condition as determined by the building official, or in unfinished condition beyond the time limits set forth in this
section or a CMP, shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated as provided for the abatement of nuisances in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
In addition to the rights granted to the building official pursuant to this code, the building official shall have all rights to enter the property to inspect,
mitigate unsafe conditions including boarding up of openings, abate unsafe weeds, remove unsafe construction materials and demolition waste,
demolish unsafe structures, and otherwise to enforce any of the provisions of this code.
E. Special Building Permit Requirements: Prior to issuance of a building permit for a project requiring plan check, the owner shall prepare and submit a
construction management plan (CMP) for all work, using a form provided by the city building official, or otherwise found acceptable by the city building
official. The CMP shall set forth construction inspection milestones to be timely completed, that shall correspond to progress inspections required by
the city's technical codes. If the CMP is approved, work may be commenced and shall comply in all respects with time limits set forth in the CMP. The
total time within which to complete construction, as set forth in the CMP, shall not exceed three (3) years unless approved in writing by the city building
official.
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the owner shall also post a safety deposit with an approved local financial institution ("safety deposit") in such
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 356/797
amount as determined by the city building official based upon the potential need for imposition by the city of safety measures on the project site,
capable of being unilaterally drawn upon by the city in the event construction ceases and/or an inspection milestone is missed. The safety deposit shall
be in the form of cash or structured letter of credit satisfactory to the city attorney, and shall be used solely to procure construction site security fencing,
removal of construction site solid waste, maintenance of landscaping, including lawns and parkways, and/or remediation of any other conditions
determined by the city building official to be unsafe, after the owner's refusal or failure to correct such condition(s). The owner shall deposit additional
funds within five (5) business days of city's withdrawal, sufficient to maintain the required safety deposit amount at all times during the course of the
work, until final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, if applicable.
Any failure by the owner to meet a CMP inspection milestone shall authorize the city building official to issue a notice requiring completion of the work
and corresponding inspection within thirty (30) days ("completion notice"). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city building official shall be authorized as
otherwise provided under the Beverly Hills administrative code, California building code, or any other provision of local or state law, to issue written
orders requiring the immediate correction of any condition deemed to present an immediate and unreasonable risk of harm or danger to the public
health and safety ("safety order"). The building official shall be authorized to utilize the safety deposit, consistent with the procedures set forth in this
section, to implement measures to protect the public from any immediate and unreasonable risk of harm or danger on the project site, if the owner fails
or refuses to timely comply with the safety order.
Every permit issued by the city building official shall expire and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit, including the
inspection milestone, is not completed, or the safety deposit is not made, prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) day period specified in the completion
notice. In the event a permit expires, a stop work order may be issued, and the owner shall apply for, pay all new permit fees, submit a new CMP, and
obtain a new permit before recommencing the work.
Prior to withdrawing funds from the safety deposit, the owner shall be provided ten (10) days' prior written notice within which the owner may file a
written appeal of the pending fund withdrawal. If no appeal is filed within said ten (10) day period, the city may withdraw funds in the amount stated in
the notice. If an appeal is timely filed, then an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing officer who shall be appointed by the city
manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the determination to withdraw funds from the safety deposit. The owner
shall be provided notice of the hearing which shall be set to occur not later than fourteen (14) days after receipt of the timely appeal. Prior to or at the
hearing on the appeal, the owner shall submit: 1) documentary evidence sufficient to establish that: all permit applications were timely filed;
construction contracts were entered into in a diligent manner; compliance with all permit requirements occurred in a timely manner; and that all fees
were timely paid; and 2) any other evidence demonstrating that construction delays, including any failure to comply with a safety order, resulted from
circumstances beyond the owner's reasonable control and despite diligent and clearly documented efforts to achieve timely compliance.
Following the conclusion of the hearing, and based upon substantial evidence presented, the hearing officer shall be authorized to make any of the
following determinations:
1. The owner shall be provided with up to thirty (30) additional days within which to complete the work and required inspection; or
2. Modify the determination to withdraw funds by authorizing a lesser amount to be withdrawn; or
3. Deny the appeal in its entirety; or
4. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.
A failure or refusal by an owner to make or fund a required safety deposit and/or allow any work of construction to remain in an unsafe condition as
determined by the building official, or in unfinished condition beyond the time limits set forth in this section or a CMP, shall constitute a nuisance and
may be abated as provided for the abatement of nuisances in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
In addition to the authority, duties, and powers granted to the building official pursuant to this administrative code, and consistent therewith, the
provisions of said section, the building official shall have all rights to enter private real property to inspect, mitigate unsafe conditions including
boarding up of openings, abate unsafe weeds, remove unsafe construction materials and demolition waste, demolish unsafe structures, and
otherwise to enforce any of the provisions of this section or this title. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-110: FEES:
A. General: Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of this section or shall be as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction.
B. Permit Fees: For each and every permit issued pursuant to title 24, California building standards there shall be paid to the city a permit fee in such
amount as established by resolution of the city council. The permit fees shall be established by state or local agencies or by resolution of the city
council.
The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these codes shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in
computing the permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work,
painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment.
In addition to the permit fees, if buildings or structures are required to meet energy, sound insulation and/or seismic zone standards as mandated by
the state, then the building official shall collect a fee in the amount established by state or local agencies or by resolution of the city council.
C. Plan Review Fees: When a plan review is required, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. The
plan review fee shall be those fees established by resolution of the city council. Additional review fees may be assessed for changes and revisions to
the plans beyond those required to address the plan review corrections and for those changes made after issuance of the permit. Applications for
extension of the plan review expiration date, which are submitted in accordance with this code, shall be accompanied by payment of fees.
In addition to the plan review fee, if buildings or structures are required to meet energy, sound insulation and/or seismic zone standards as mandated
by the state, then the building official shall collect a fee in the amount established by state or local agencies or by resolution of the city council.
When the building official determines that the construction or work poses a hazard or that the nature of the construction or work requires a degree of
specialized knowledge, skill or experience beyond that possessed by any regular employee of the city, or when there are differences of opinions
between the department staff and the project's consultants, the building official may employ a consultant or consultants. The owner, or his agents, shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 357/797
pay to the city all direct and indirect costs of such consultants and shall maintain a cash deposit with the city at all times in a sufficient amount for the
purpose of paying such costs.
D. Investigation Fees; Work Without A Permit:
1. Investigation: Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special
investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.
2. Fee: An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation
fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt an applicant from
compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from the penalty prescribed by law.
E. Fee Refunds: The building official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.
The building official may authorize refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit
issued in accordance with this code.
The building official may authorize refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for
which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of fee payment. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-111: INSPECTIONS:
A. General: Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and the construction or work shall
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the building official. In addition, certain types of construction shall have
continuous inspection as specified in this section.
Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances or laws.
Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.
It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor
this jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
A survey of the lot may be required by the building official to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans.
Neither the building official nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
B. Demolition, Excavation, And Shoring Inspections: Reinforcing steel or structural framework of a part of a building or structure shall not be covered or
concealed without first obtaining the approval of the building official. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire resistive assemblies shall not be
concealed from view until inspected and approved.
The building official, upon notification, shall make the following inspections:
1. Demolition inspection: To be made before demolition begins and after demolition is completed per approved plans but before construction, grading,
or shoring is commenced.
2. Shoring and excavation: To be made throughout and after shoring and excavations are complete and required before foundations are in place.
3. Basement and subterranean garage: To be made throughout and after the basement and subterranean footings and walls are in place.
C. Footing And Foundation Inspection: To be made after excavations for footings are complete and required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete
foundations, required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. All materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except when concrete is ready
mixed in accordance with approved nationally recognized standards such as ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job. When the foundation is
to be constructed of approved treated wood, additional inspections may be required by the building official.
D. Concrete Slab Or Underfloor Inspection: To be made after in-slab and underfloor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping
accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
E. Trades (Plumbing, Mechanical, Gas And Electrical Systems) Inspection: Rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical, gas and electrical systems shall be
made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures or appliances are set or installed, and prior to framing inspection.
F. Frame Inspection: To be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys and vents to
be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, and heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved. Prior to rough framing inspection
approval, and prior to final inspection approval, the city may verify conformity with applicable entitlements and zoning regulations.
G. Lath, Gypsum Board And Gypsum Panel Product Inspection: To be made after lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel products, interior and exterior, is
in place but before plaster is applied or before gypsum board and gypsum panel projects joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
H. Fire And Smoke Resistant Penetrations: Protection of joints and penetrations in fire resistance rated assemblies, smoke barriers and smoke partitions
shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. Prior to final approval, the city must witness a test of all fire smoke dampers.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 358/797
I. Weatherproofing: To be made after exterior lathing, roofing, and other weather protection materials are in place but before plaster is applied. An
approved weatherproofing consultant must certify the installation of weatherproofing on all retaining walls which are adjacent to interior areas of the
building. The consultant will not be required if the installer is certified in writing by the manufacturer. For all new construction and when required by the
city, an approved weatherproofing consultant must certify that the weatherproofing elements of the building have been installed in accordance with the
approved plans, all relevant codes, and per manufacturer's specifications. At a minimum, an inspection and report will be required before plastering
begins and before final approval is granted.
J. Energy Efficiency Inspection: To be made before work is concealed or made inaccessible based at the point in time when adequate stages of
construction for the selected method of code compliance. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with energy code and shall include, but
not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water heating
equipment efficiency.
K. Green Building Standards Inspection: To be made before work is concealed or made inaccessible based at the point in time when adequate stages of
construction for the selected method of code compliance. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with green building standards code and
shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for site, parking, energy efficiency, water efficiency and conservation, material conservation and
resource efficiency, and environmental quality.
L. Other Inspections: In addition to the inspection specified, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work
to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws.
M. Site Grading/Landscaping: To be made before work is concealed or made inaccessible. Underground irrigation system shall be inspected before
landscaping is installed. Planting compliant with this code needs to be installed prior to final approval.
N. Equipment Inspections: Equipment for which a permit is required by this code shall be inspected by the building official. Equipment intended to be
concealed by a permanent portion of the building shall not be concealed until inspected and approved. When the installation of equipment is complete,
an additional and final inspection shall be made. Equipment regulated by this code shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power supply, or sewer
system until authorized by the building official. The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of equipment installed
to replace existing equipment serving an occupied portion of the building in the event a request for inspection of such equipment has been filed with the
building official not more than forty eight (48) hours after the replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment is concealed by
permanent portions of the building.
O. Additional Required Inspections And Tests:
1. A preconstruction meeting with the city and the project personnel will be required prior to beginning any new building or when required by the city.
2. For all new construction and when required by the city, a licensed surveyor must certify that the location of the footing forms is per the approved
plans before foundations can be poured. The surveyor must provide a plot plan showing precise dimensions to the property lines and the elevation of
the forms as compared with the reference elevation shown on the approved plans.
3. For all new construction and when required by the city, a licensed surveyor must certify that the height of the building is in accordance with the
approved plans. The surveyor must show the precise height of the building as compared with the reference elevation shown on the approved plans.
4. An approved weatherproofing consultant must certify the installation of weatherproofing on all retaining walls which are adjacent to interior areas of
the building. The consultant will not be required if the installer is certified in writing by the manufacturer.
5. For all new construction and when required by the city, an approved weatherproofing consultant must certify that the weatherproofing elements of
the building have been installed in accordance with the approved plans, all relevant codes, and per manufacturer's specifications. At a minimum, an
inspection and report will be required before plastering begins and before final approval is granted.
6. Prior to final approval, a certified air balancer must provide a written report showing the air volumes for all elements of a commercial garage exhaust
system or a commercial kitchen hood system.
7. Prior to final approval, the city must witness a test of all fire smoke dampers.
8. Prior to rough framing inspection approval, and prior to final inspection approval, the city may verify conformity with applicable entitlements and
zoning regulations.
P. Final Inspection: To be made after finish grading and the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
Q. Special Inspections: In addition to the inspections required by this section, the owner, the engineer, the architect, or the person acting as the owner's
agent shall employ one or more special inspectors who will provide inspections during construction as required in chapter 17 of the building code and
which may also be required by the building official for work which, in the opinion of the building official, involves unusual hazards or conditions.
1. Special Inspector: The special inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate competence to the satisfaction of the building official, for
inspecting the particular type of construction or operation requiring special inspections, and shall possess a current certification by an agency
approved by the city.
a. Duties And Responsibilities Of The Special Inspector: The special inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the approved
design drawings and specifications.
The special inspector shall furnish inspection reports to the building official, the engineer or architect of record, and other designated persons.
Discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction, then, if uncorrected, to the proper design authority and to
the building official.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 359/797
The special inspector shall submit a final signed report stating whether the work requiring special inspection was, to the best of the inspector's
knowledge, in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and the applicable workmanship provision of these codes.
The special inspector employed on any work must be present during the execution of all the work the inspector has undertaken to inspect. The
inspector shall notify the department of his or her commencement of inspection of a job and shall specify the type of inspection for which the
inspector has been engaged. This notification shall be made not later than the last working day preceding such commencement of inspection. The
inspector shall report to the job sufficiently in advance of construction to become familiar with the plans and to inspect all materials to be used or
concealed within such work; the inspector shall inspect the construction, erection, placing or other use of such materials; and the inspector shall
observe whether there is compliance with the applicable codes as to all of the foregoing. During the execution of the work, the inspector shall not
undertake or engage in any other task or occupation which will interfere with the proper performance of his or her duties of inspection. The
inspector shall report, as directed, to the director of building and safety, noting all violations of the applicable codes, which have occurred, and
such other information as may be required. At the conclusion of his or her duties, on any project, which has been completed in accordance with
this code, the inspector shall submit a report to the department setting forth the portion of the work the inspector inspected. The report shall be
made on forms supplied by the department and shall be filed in the records of the department.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to authorize any special inspector to approve the placing of concrete, grout, masonry, or structural steel prior to
the approval of the regular city building inspector.
Where, in the opinion of the department, the special inspector is negligent in the performance of the inspector's duties, the job shall be stopped
until such time as the negligence is corrected and adequate inspection has been performed.
b. Continuous And Periodic Special Inspection:
(1) Continuous Special Inspection: Continuous special inspection means that the special inspector is on the site at all times observing the work
requiring special inspection.
(2) Periodic Special Inspection: Some inspections may be made on a periodic basis and satisfy the requirements of continuous inspection,
provided this periodic scheduled inspection is performed as outlined in the project plans and specifications and approved by the building official.
c. Approved Fabricators: Special inspections required by this section and elsewhere in this code or the technical codes shall not be required where
the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved by the building official to perform such work without special inspection.
The certificate of registration shall be subject to revocation by the building official if it is found that work done pursuant to the approval is in violation
of the technical codes. The approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance to the building official and to the engineer or architect of
record stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The approved fabricator's qualifications shall
be contingent on compliance with the following:
(1) The fabricator has developed and submitted a detailed fabrication procedural manual reflecting key quality control procedures which will
provide a basis for inspection control of workmanship and the fabricator plant.
(2) Verification of the fabricator's quality control capabilities, plant and personnel as outlined in the fabrication procedural manual shall be by an
approved inspection or quality control agency.
(3) Periodic plant inspections shall be conducted by an approved inspection or quality control agency to monitor the effectiveness of the quality
control program.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the inspection or quality control agency to notify the approving authority in writing of any change to the
procedural manual. Fabricator approval may be revoked for just cause. Reapproval of the fabricator shall be contingent on compliance with
quality control procedures during the past year.
R. Structural Observation: Structural observation shall be provided in seismic design category D, E, or F as indicated in the building code.
S. Inspection Record: Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or the agent of the permit holder shall have posted in a
conspicuous place at the construction site a permit and inspection record such as to allow the building official conveniently to make the required entries
regarding inspection of the work. The permit shall be posted in a location such that it is visible from the street. The permit, construction documents, and
plans shall remain readily available on site until final approval has been granted by the building official. The requirements for posting and location of
posting may be waived or modified by the building official as deemed necessary for the particular type of work.
Duplicate inspection cards may be issued upon payment of fees as established by city council resolution.
T. Inspection Requests: It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the building official that such work is ready for
inspection. Failure to do so constitutes a violation of this administrative code. The building official may require that every request for inspection be filed
at least one business day before such inspection is desired. Such requests shall be made in a manner deemed acceptable by the building official.
It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections required by this code to provide access to and means for inspection of the work.
Failure of a permit holder to schedule and undergo all required progress, final or other inspections by the division is a violation of this administrative
code.
U. Approval Required: Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building
official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspection and shall either indicate that that portion of the construction is
satisfactory as completed (which is referred to as a "successful inspection") or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein
the same fails to comply with this code. Any portion of work that does not comply with the code shall be corrected and such portion shall not be
covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.
All work and installations that are authorized by a permit shall not become lawful until a permit holder has obtained a final inspection approval from the
division, which shall be in writing. There shall be a final inspection and approval of all buildings and structures when completed and ready for
occupancy and use.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 360/797
V. Reinspections: A reinspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not
complete or when corrections called for are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected
for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such
inspection or reinspection.
Reinspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the
approval of the building official. To obtain a reinspection, the applicant shall file an application therefor in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose,
and pay the reinspection fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction. In instances where reinspection fees have been
assessed, additional inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have been paid. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-112: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
A. Use Or Occupancy: Buildings or structures shall not be used or occupied nor shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein.
Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the
city, county of Los Angeles, state of California or the United States. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this
code or of other ordinances of the city, county of Los Angeles, state of California or the United States shall not be valid.
In lieu of a certificate of occupancy, when the building shell, including all structural elements, is completed and all life safety systems are installed and
functional, the building official may issue a certificate of completion to allow a limited use but not occupancy of the building prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. A certificate of completion is issued to signify completion of a building exclusive of interior build out by a tenant or an owner.
B. Change In Use: Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in the building code and the residential code.
C. Certificate Issued: After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws which
are enforced by the code enforcement agency, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:
1. The building permit number.
2. The address of the building.
3. The name and address of the owner.
4. A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued.
5. A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the group and
division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.
6. The name of the building official.
D. Temporary Certificate: If the building official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same
is completed, he/she may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion
of the entire building or structure; provided a cash deposit is made in accordance with section 9-1-115 of this chapter. Applications for a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be submitted with the required fee in accordance with city council resolution and shall be paid prior to issuance. The
building official may set a deadline for the certificate to expire, as well as impose conditions thereto. A violation of a condition shall constitute cause to
revoke or suspend the temporary certificate.
E. Revocation Or Suspension: The building official may, in writing, revoke or suspend a certificate of occupancy when the certificate is issued in error, or
on the basis of incorrect information, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any provision of this
chapter. Revocations or suspensions of certificates of occupancy are appealable by an owner and occupant of the subject premises in the same
manner provided for appeals from notices of denial of a permit or notice of permit condition(s) that are issued pursuant to this administrative code. A
timely appeal shall stay a revocation or suspension, unless the building official is concurrently exercising emergency powers as provided for in this
administrative code.
F. Violation: It is unlawful and a violation of this administrative code for any person to occupy or use a building or structure, or portion thereof, that is
subject to a revoked or suspended certificate of occupancy, or an expired or revoked temporary certificate. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-113: CONSTRUCTION PARKING AND HAULING RESTRICTIONS:
No hauling or construction related parking shall be permitted on a public street except as otherwise approved by the building official and city engineer,
provided that the work described in an application for a permit, and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith, conform to the requirements of
this code, the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified by resolution of the city council in section 9-1-110 of
this chapter have been paid. All hauling related to construction shall not be commenced without hauling permits. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-114: CONNECTION TO SERVICE UTILITIES:
A. Energy Connections: Persons shall not make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building, structure, or system service
equipment that is regulated by this code and for which a permit is required by this code, until approved in writing by the building official.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 361/797
B. Temporary Connection: The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system service equipment
to the utility source of energy for the purpose of testing building service equipment, or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy, provided a
cash performance deposit is made in accordance with section 9-1-115 of this chapter.
Applications for temporary connection to the utility service shall be submitted with the payment of fees as established by Council resolution.
C. Authority To Disconnect Service Utilities: The building official or the building official's authorized representative shall have the authority to authorize
disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Code and the referenced codes and standards in case of
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such utility connection has been made without the approval
of the building official. The building official shall whenever possible notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service
system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the utility, owner and occupant of the building,
structure or service system shall be notified in writing, of such disconnection as soon as practical thereafter.
When any building service equipment is maintained in violation of this Code and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section,
the building official shall institute appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.
Persons shall not make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel, or power to building service equipment which has been disconnected or
ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building
official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-115: PERFORMANCE DEPOSITS:
Where an owner, tenant, or contractor desires to have a gas or electric meter set, or desires to occupy, use, or to permit the occupancy or use of a new
building or structure or portion thereof or of a building or structure being remodeled prior to final approval, and the building official determines no safety
hazard exists, the owner, tenant, or contractor, with the approval of the building official, shall make a cash deposit with the City as a guarantee of
completion and final approval.
The amount of such deposit shall be determined by the building official, based on the extent of the work remaining prior to the final approval.
The application for such deposit shall be made to the Community Development Department, and the deposit shall be held by the Finance Department. All
deposits made in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be placed in a fund or funds and in such a manner that an accounting of each such
deposit can be made.
In instances where cash deposits have been made, they shall not be construed to be a substitute for final approval. Failure on the part of the owner,
tenant, or contractor to obtain final approval from the building official within a reasonable time as established by the building official in writing, shall be
cause for the building official, upon ninety six (96) hours' notice, to use such deposits for the purpose of protecting the public. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-
2017; amd. Ord. 18-O-2750, eff. 4-6-2018)
9-1-116: TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Before the start of construction of any building or structure, and before any remodel where all toilet facilities are temporarily removed, a temporary water
flushed or approved chemical toilet shall be installed for the use of the workers and shall comply with all of the following requirements:
A. Such temporary toilet shall be maintained throughout the construction of the building or structure;
B. If a water flushed toilet is used, such toilet shall be connected to the sewer, and tile pipe without a vent may be used for the installation;
C. Such temporary toilet shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the rear property line and shall be set back at least twenty feet (20') from any other
property line unless the City building official approves an alternate location because the requirements of this subsection prevent servicing the toilet or
are otherwise infeasible; and
D. Such temporary toilet shall not be located on public property without the approval of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-117: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, extend, install, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert,
demolish, equip, use or occupy, or perform any other work, on any building or structure or portion thereof, or with regard to any building service
equipment regulated by this code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Beverly Hills administrative
code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a requirement of this Beverly Hills administrative code or the code, or to disregard a
stop work order, or to maintain any building, structure or building service equipment, or portion thereof, in violation of this Beverly Hills administrative
code or the code.
B. Occupancy Or Use Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy, or allow, permit or suffer any use of a building, structure, or
premises, or portion thereof, in violation of, any of this Beverly Hills administrative code, or the code.
Whenever any structure or portion thereof or equipment therein is being used contrary to the provisions of this code, or other pertinent laws or
ordinances, or whenever any structure or portion thereof which was built contrary to the provisions of this code or other pertinent laws or ordinances, is
being used or occupied, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any
person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice to make the structure,
or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code, provided, however, that in the event of a dangerous building provisions of article 8 of this
chapter shall apply.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 362/797
No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any "unpermitted structure". For the purposes of this code, "unpermitted structure" shall be defined as
any structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted,
demolished, or equipped, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the building official, or any work for which a
permit has expired.
C. Recordation Of Violation:
1. General: The building official may record a notice with the Los Angeles County recorder's office that a property, building, structure, land, or any
portion thereof, is in violation of any provision of this Beverly Hills administrative code or the code provided that the provisions of this subsection C
are complied with. The remedy provided herein is cumulative to any other enforcement actions permitted by this code or the Beverly Hills municipal
code.
2. Recordation: If: a) the building official determines that any property, building, structure, land, or any portion thereof is in violation of any provision of
this Beverly Hills administrative code of the code; and if b) the building official gives written notice of said violation(s) to the owner of the subject
property (as identified on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County assessor's office) as specified below of said violation; then
the building official shall have sole discretion to, at any time thereafter, record with the Los Angeles County recorder's office a notice of violation(s)
concerning the subject property.
3. Notice: The written notice given pursuant to this subsection C shall indicate:
a. The nature of the violation(s); and
b. That if corrective or other required actions to abate the violation(s) are not started and/or completed in accordance with stated deadlines, as
established by the building official in said notice, the building official may, at any time after a missed deadline, record a notice of violation with the
Los Angeles County recorder's office against the subject property. The notice shall be posted on the property and shall be mailed to the owner of
the property as indicated on the last equalized Los Angeles County assessment roll. The mailed notice may be by registered, certified, or first class
mail.
A notice of violation(s) may be combined with other notices that the building official issues in the administration and/or enforcement of this Beverly
Hills administrative code and the code.
4. Rescission: Any owner who desires to have a notice of violation rescinded must first fully abate all violations with all required permits and inspection
approvals, as required by the code. Upon determining full compliance with the code has occurred, the building official shall, within twenty (20) days of
such a determination, file a rescission of notice of violation for recording with the Los Angeles County recorder's office.
Following the recordation of a notice of violation the building official is not required to make any inspection or review of the premises to determine the
continued existence of the noticed violation(s). It is the responsibility of the property owner, to obtain all permits and request inspections, undertake
and complete all corrective or other required actions to abate the violation(s) so that a notice of violation may be rescinded.
5. Penalty: Any person violating, or failing to comply with, any of the provisions of this Beverly Hills administrative code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any
of the provisions of this Beverly Hills administrative code and the code is committed, continued, maintained or permitted, and upon conviction of any
such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions, penalties
or costs which are or may be imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this code.
6. Costs: Any person that violates any provision of this code shall be responsible for the costs of any and all code enforcement actions taken by the
building official in response to such violations. These costs shall be based on the amounts specified by the Beverly Hills schedule of fees and taxes
as adopted by the city.
Any person violating the provisions of this Beverly Hills administrative code and the code shall reimburse the city for any and all costs, expenses and
fees incurred by the city in responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing or remediating any violation of this
Beverly Hills administrative code or the code. Such costs, expenses and fees to be paid to the city shall include all administrative expenses and all
legal expenses, including costs and attorney fees in obtaining compliance and in litigation, including all costs and attorney fees on any appeal. The
costs to be recovered pursuant this section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this code. When required by law, this provision
shall act as a prevailing party provision entitling the prevailing party to an award of attorney fees. Attorney fees shall not be recoverable unless the
city elects in writing, at the initiation of any individual action or administrative proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney fees. In no action,
administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. Unpaid attorney fees shall be collectible in any manner allowed by law. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-
2017)
9-1-118: STOP WORK ORDERS:
A. Authority: Where the building official finds any work being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this Beverly Hills administrative
code or the code, or other laws and ordinances, or that the work is dangerous and unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.
B. Issuance: The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, the owner's authorized agent or the person
performing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. No person shall continue with, or allow the
continuance of, any work that is subject to an issued stop work order, unless first authorized by the building official in writing.
C. Unlawful Continuance: Persons who disregard or violate, or who permit or allow a stop work order to be disregarded or violated, are subject to section
9-1-117 of this chapter. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-119: UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, OR EQUIPMENT:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 363/797
A. All buildings, structures, or building service equipment, or portions thereof, that are or hereafter become unsafe, insanitary, or deficient or which
constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to an existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or
public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster damage, or abandonment as specified in this
code or any other applicable ordinance of the city, are, for the purpose of this code, unsafe buildings or structures. As used herein, "abandonment"
exists when a building or structure is not lawfully occupied and contains conditions that violate the Beverly Hills municipal code, and for which all
required submittals and fees to repair, demolish or replace said building or structure have not been received by any division of the Community
Development Department for a period of six (6) months.
Building service equipment regulated by the Code, which constitutes a fire, electrical or health hazard, or an insanitary condition, or is otherwise
dangerous to human life is, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Use of buildings, structures or building service equipment constituting a hazard to
safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for
the purpose of this section, an unsafe use.
Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a
building and which are in a deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in the Building Code are hereby
designated as unsafe building appendages.
Unsafe building or structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this
Code. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any unsafe building.
All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In addition to instituting any appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate a
violation of this section, the building official may abate an unsafe condition by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in any articles of this chapter. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-120: Expedited Permitting Process For Electric Vehicle Charging Stations:
A. Applicability: This section applies to applications for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations consistent with California
Government Code section 65850.7.
B. Definitions: The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this section:
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION OR CHARGING STATION: Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built
in compliance with article 625 of the California Electric Code, as it read on January 1, 2016, and delivers electricity from a source outside of an electric
vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION: A submission of an application utilizing email, the internet, and/or facsimile transmission.
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date an application was deemed complete.
C. Process:
1. The building official shall adopt a checklist of all application requirements for expedited building permits for electric vehicle charging stations. The
checklist shall substantially conform to the most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" found in the "Zero-
Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook" published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The checklist,
application form, and any other documents required by the building official shall be published on the City's website.
2. Anyone seeking to install an electric vehicle charging station at any site within the City may apply to the building official for an expedited
nondiscretionary building permit.
3. An application for an expedited building permit for an electric vehicle charging station, and all associated documentation, may be submitted to the
building official in person, by mail, or by electronic submission. Electronic signatures may be used in lieu of wet signatures.
4. An application that, in the opinion of the building official, satisfies the information requirements of the checklist adopted by the City shall be deemed
complete.
5. If an application for an expedited building permit is deemed incomplete, the building official shall provide a written correction notice of the
deficiencies and the additional information required to complete the application.
6. If the building official determines that an application for an expedited building permit is complete, the building official shall process the application. If
the building official determines that the proposed charging station meets all health and safety requirements of State and Federal law, and would not
have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the application shall be approved and a building permit shall be issued.
7. If the building official finds, based on substantial evidence, that a proposed charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public
health or safety, the City may require the applicant to apply for an electric vehicle charging station use permit in order to install the proposed charging
station.
8. An application for an electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be reviewed by the building official. The building official shall not deny such an
application without making written findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed charging station would have a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health or safety which could not feasibly be satisfactorily mitigated or avoided. The written findings required for
rejection of an electric vehicle charging station use permit application shall include the building official's basis for rejecting any potentially feasible
alternatives that could mitigate or prevent the alleged adverse impact. Pursuant to Government Code section 65850.7, the building official's review
shall be limited to health and safety issues. Aesthetic concerns, or other items not related to public health or safety shall not be considered.
9. A decision of the building official made pursuant to subsections C6 through C8 of this section may be appealed to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission's review shall be subject to the same limitations as that of the building official, and only health and safety issues may be
considered.
10. Any condition imposed on an application for an expedited building permit or electric vehicle charging station use permit shall be designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 364/797
D. Fees: The City Council may establish by resolution fees that shall be charged for permits issued under this section. (Ord. 17-O-2739, eff. 11-3-2017)
Article 2. California Building Code
9-1-201: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California Building Code, excluding all appendices except I and J, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments set
forth in section 9-1-202 of this chapter. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-202: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE:
The California building code adopted pursuant to section 9-1-201 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1.1.1 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:
1.1.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the California building code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." The
California building code is part 2 of thirteen parts of the official compilation and publication of the adoption, amendment and repeal of building
regulations to the California code of regulations, title 24, also referred to as the California building standards code. This part incorporates by adoption
the 2015 international building code of the International Code Council with necessary California amendments.
For the city of Beverly Hills, these regulations shall be known as the Beverly Hills building code. The provisions contained in the California building
code of the (compiled) California building standards code as defined in section 18910, Health And Safety Code may be cited as such and are
referred to hereafter as "these regulations" or "these building standards" or "this code". These regulations shall also be collectively known as the
"California building code" as amended by the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 501.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
501.2 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address numbers or letters. Each character shall be not
less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height for residential properties and a minimum of 6 inches high for non-residential properties and not less than 0.5
inch (12.7 mm) in width. They shall be installed on a contrasting background and be plainly visible from the street or road fronting the property. When
required by the city building official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where
access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or
means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
501.2.1 Street Numbering. The following provisions shall be applicable to street numbering:
On the east-west axis, all numbers shall sequence, as much as practicable, with the contiguous east-west streets abutting Los Angeles city and
county.
On the north-south axis, streets north of Wilshire Boulevard shall be designated with the prefix "North," and streets south of Wilshire Boulevard
shall be designated with the prefix "South."
Numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of all streets shall end in an odd digit, while numbers on the southerly and easterly sides shall end in an
even digit.
The city building official shall designate street address numbers in the city.
501.2.2 Building Numbering Requirements. The entrances to all buildings from public streets shall have the numbers designated by the city
building official conspicuously displayed near the entrance of the structure in a manner that they are in plain view from the street. Structures which
have access from a rear alley, in addition to the numbering required by this section, shall for purposes of emergency response, provide numbering
and street identification which is clearly visible from the rear alley access in accordance with the following provisions:
The name of the street and street number as designated by the city building official shall be visible from the alley and located adjacent to the alley
access to the structure.
The address markings shall be placed five (5') feet above the alley surface, with numbers four (4") inches in height and letters two (2") inches in
height, and placed upon the structure, wall, fence, gate, or other appropriate surface so as to be clearly visible.
If any property owner shall fail to provide the address identification required by this subsection on the premises, the city may provide and affix such
address identification markings at no cost to the property owner. Where identification markings are provided by the city, no person shall remove,
deface, or modify such markings without the written authorization of the city building official.
When structure access doors are available from the alley or side street for a single tenant or occupant, the door shall be provided with address
numbering and street name identification including unit numbers or letters in a manner approved by the city fire code official.
501.2.3 Diagram Required For Six Or More Dwelling Units. Where a building or building complex contains six (6) or more separate dwelling units,
a description diagram indicating the identification pattern and location of each dwelling unit shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at the primary
entrance of such building or buildings. This requirement of this section shall be included in any building plans submitted for plan check.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 365/797
501.2.4 Prohibition Against Placing Numbers On Streets, Sidewalks, Or Curbs Or Displaying Improper Building Numbers. No person shall
place, maintain, or cause any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design, or other marking upon, or paint, any street, sidewalk, or curb in the city,
except as authorized by the city. No person shall place, maintain, or display any address identification number other than as designated by the city
building official.
Section 704A.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
704A.3 Alternative Methods For Determining Ignition-Resistant Material. Any one of the following shall be accepted as meeting the definition of
ignition-resistant material:
Noncombustible material. Material that complies with the definition for noncombustible materials in section 202.
Fire-retardant-treated wood. Fire-retardant-treated wood identified for exterior use that complies with the requirements of section 2303.2.
Section 707A.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
707A.3 Exterior Walls. The exterior wall covering or wall assembly shall comply with one of the following requirements:
1. Noncombustible material.
2. Ignition-resistant material.
3. Heavy timber exterior wall assembly.
4. Log wall construction assembly.
5. All non-wood wall assemblies that meet the performance criteria in accordance with the test procedures for a 10-minute direct flame contact
exposure test set forth in SFM standard 12-7A-1.
Exception: Any of the following shall be deemed to meet the assembly performance criteria and intent of this section:
1. One layer of 5/8-inch type X gypsum sheathing applied behind the exterior covering in compliance with the state fire marshal standard 12-7A-
1 as listed in the Cal-fire wildland urban interface (WUI) product - building material listing program installed on the exterior side of the framing.
2. The exterior portion of a 1-hour fire resistive exterior wall assembly designed for exterior fire exposure including assemblies using the gypsum
panel and sheathing products listed in the Gypsum Association Fire Resistance Design Manual.
Section 903.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
903.2 Where Required.
A. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be required for all occupancies, except detached storage sheds that
are less than five hundred (500) square feet which do not store motor vehicles.
B. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all existing buildings if: (i) additions, alterations or repairs are made within any twelve
(12) month period which exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of such existing building, (ii) an addition is constructed which exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the square footage of the existing building, or (iii) an addition of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet is constructed.
C. Areas occupied by the following existing occupancies shall have installed an automatic fire extinguishing system in compliance with this code:
(1) Throughout all existing eating establishments having a floor area in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet, including all related floor
area including but not limited to food preparation and waiting areas.
(2) Throughout bowling alleys.
(3) Throughout public assembly occupancies having an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more persons. If such occupancies are located
above the first floor, the floors below shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system; provided further, public assembly occupancies of
three hundred (300) or more persons placed in buildings existing prior to August 19, 1976, shall not be required to provide an automatic fireextinguishing
system in floors below such occupancy.
(4) Throughout hotels except those areas used exclusively for lodging.
(5) Throughout retail sales rooms classified as group M and S occupancies if the floor area of all floors exceeds twelve thousand (12,000)
square feet, and in group M and S retail sales and storage occupancies more than three (3) stories in height, and in group M and S
occupancies, if such occupancies are located within the same building or structure as group R-1 occupancies. The area of mezzanines shall be
included in determining the areas where sprinklers are required.
(6) Nightclubs and discos in rooms primarily used for entertaining occupants who are drinking or dining and unseparated accessory uses where
the total area of such unseparated rooms and assembly uses exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet. For uses to be considered
"separated," the separation shall be not less than is required for a one-hour occupancy separation.
(7) In every story or basement of all buildings if the floor area exceeds fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet and there is not provided at least
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 366/797
twenty (20) square feet of opening entirely above the adjoining ground level in each 50 linear feet or fraction thereof of exterior wall in the story
or basement on at least one side of the building. Openings shall have a minimum dimension of not less than thirty (30) inches. Such openings
shall be accessible to the fire department from the exterior and shall not be obstructed in a manner that firefighting or rescue cannot be
accomplished from the exterior.
When openings in a story are provided on only one side and the opposite wall of such story is more than seventy-five (75) feet from such
openings, the story shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system, or openings as specified above shall be provided on at least
two sides of an exterior wall of the story.
(8) In rooms where nitrate film is stored and handled.
(9) In protected combustible fiber storage vaults as defined in the fire code.
D. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required for new ambulatory health care facilities (as that term is defined herein) located in an
existing building or portion thereof, and that are classified as a business group B or institutional group I-2.1 occupancy.
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10 of the California building code (and the subsections therein) are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section 903.2.11 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
903.2.11 Specific Building Areas And Hazards. In all occupancies an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed for building design or hazards in
the locations set forth in sections 903.2.11.1 through 903.2.11.11.
Section 903.2.11.7 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.2.11.7 Elevator Pits. Approved automatic sprinklers shall be provided in new elevator pits.
Section 903.2.11.8 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.2.11.8 Storage And Use Of Nitrate Film. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new and existing rooms where nitrate
film is stored and handled.
Section 903.2.11.9 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.2.11.9 Fiber Storage Vaults. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in new and existing combustible fiber storage vaults as defined in
the fire code.
Section 903.2.11.10 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.2.11.10 Bowling Alleys. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new and existing bowling alleys.
Section 903.2.11.11 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.2.11.11 Balconies And Decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior overhangs, balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of all
structures that project outward more than 4 feet of exterior wall of the floor immediately below the projection. Balconies and decks built onto a nonsprinklered
structure that projects outward more than 4 feet of exterior wall of the floor immediately below the projection shall be sprinklered.
Section 903.3.1.2, including subsections 903.3.1.2.1 and 903.3.1.2.2, of the California building code are deleted and replaced with the following:
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems. This section including subsections are deleted. NFPA 13R systems are not allowed in the city of Beverly
Hills.
Section 903.3.1.3.1 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.3.1.3.1 Double Check Valve. Two check valves are required to be installed at each fire sprinkler riser in NFPA 13D systems and an approved
backflow assembly (DCDA, DCVA, or RPZ) for NFPA 13 systems.
Section 903.3.1.3.2 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
903.3.1.3.2 Fire Sprinkler Riser Assemblies. Where fire sprinklers are required, each separate structure shall have fire sprinkler riser assembly
with a main control valve, separate domestic valves, identification signage, and exterior horn strobe(s). Appropriate spare sprinklers and wrenches
shall be provided in an approved box and location.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 367/797
Section 903.3.7 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location and size of fire department connection shall be approved by the fire code official and the
connection shall be installed in accordance with section 912.
Section 903.4 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
903.4 Sprinkler System Supervision And Alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler systems,
pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all NFPA 13 and 13D sprinkler systems shall have all
valves locked in the open position as required by the fire official and be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. Where the
combination of new and existing sprinkler systems totaling 20 sprinkler heads or more on one property are being modified or altered, the entire
sprinkler system shall be monitored off-site by an approved supervising station (central, remote or proprietary).
Exceptions:
1. New and existing sprinkler systems with a combined total of 19 heads or less on one property.
2. Electrical supervision of valves on 13D systems shall not be required.
Section 903.4.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved interior audible and audible/visible devices shall be connected to every NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler system in
an approved location(s). Approved, exterior audible/visible devices shall be connected to every NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler system and
installed in an approved location(s). Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single
sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a building fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler
system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. Approved fire alarm notification appliances shall be provided throughout as required by the fire
code official.
Section 905.11 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
905.11 Existing Buildings. Existing structures with occupied floors located 3 or more stories above or below the lowest level of fire department
access shall be equipped with standpipes installed in accordance with section 905. The standpipes shall have an approved fire department
connection with hose connections at each floor level above or below the lowest level of fire department access. The fire code official is authorized to
approve the installation of manual standpipe systems to achieve compliance with this section where the responding fire department is capable of
providing the required hose flow at the highest standpipe outlet.
Section 907.2.11 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
907.2.11 Smoke Alarms. Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 for all new and existing R-occupancies shall be
installed as described in sections 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.8 and NFPA 72.
Section 907.2.11.5 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
907.2.11.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in group
R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the
individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon
activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. When lowvoltage
systems are required, the fire official may require additional sounder bases installed. Low voltage systems shall be installed per NFPA 72 fire
alarm system requirements.
Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.
Section 907.2.11.6 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
907.2.11.6 Power Source. In existing construction, new construction, and in newly classified group R occupancies, required smoke alarms shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery
backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 368/797
Exceptions specifically for properties regulated by California residential code:
1. Smoke alarms shall be permitted to be battery operated when installed in buildings without commercial power.
2. Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where the alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for hard
wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
Section 907.5.2.6 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
907.5.2.6 All Use Areas. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in all occupied rooms where ambient noise impairs hearing of the fire
alarm including but not limited to residential home theaters, public dressing, changing, or fitting rooms with full height doors or curtains that obstruct
seeing the visible notification appliances or businesses with rooms where patients await medical care or consultation is provided.
Section 1008.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1008.2 Illumination Required. The means of egress serving a room or space shall be illuminated at all times that the room or space is occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Aisle accessways in group A.
2. Dwelling units and sleeping units in groups R-1, R-2 and R-3.
3. Sleeping units in group I, R-2.1 and R-4 occupancies.
1008.2.1 Illumination Level Under Normal Power. The means of egress illumination level shall be not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking
surface.
Exception: For auditoriums, theaters, concert or opera halls and similar assembly occupancies, the illumination at the walking surface is permitted
to be reduced during performances by one of the following methods provided that the required illumination is automatically restored upon
activation of a premises' fire alarm system:
1. Externally illuminated walking surfaces shall be permitted to be illuminated to not less than 0.2 footcandle (2.15 lux).
2. Steps, landings and the sides of ramps shall be permitted to be marked with self-luminous materials in accordance with sections 1025.2.1,
1025.2.2 and 1025.2.4 by systems listed in accordance with UL 1994.
1008.2.2 Exit Discharge. In group I-2 occupancies where two or more exits are required, on the exterior landings required by section 1010.6.1,
means of egress illumination levels for the exit discharge shall be provided such that failure of any single lighting unit shall not reduce the illumination
level on that landing to less than 1 footcandle (11 lux).
Section 1008.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1008.3 Emergency Power Of Illumination. The power supply for means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises' electrical
supply.
1008.3.1 General. In the event of power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress, an emergency electrical
system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Aisles.
2. Corridors.
3. Exit access stairways and ramps.
4. Parking garages.
1008.3.2 Buildings. In the event of power supply failure in buildings that require two or more means of egress, an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps.
2. Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
3. Exit passage ways.
4. Vestibules and areas on the level of discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with section 1028.1.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 369/797
5. Exterior landings as required by section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.
1008.3.3 Rooms And Spaces. In the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following
areas:
1. Electrical equipment rooms.
2. Fire command centers.
3. Fire pump rooms.
4. Generator rooms.
5. Public restrooms with an area greater than 300 square feet (27.87 m2).
1008.3.4 Duration. The emergency power system shall provide power for a duration of not less than 90 minutes and shall consist of storage
batteries, unit equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in accordance with section 2702.
1008.3.5 Illumination Level Under Emergency Power. Emergency lighting facilities shall be arranged to provide initial illumination that is not less
than an average of 1 footcandle (11 lux) and a minimum at any point of 0.1 footcandle (1 lux) measured along the path of egress at floor level.
Illumination levels shall be permitted to decline to 0.6 footcandle (6 lux) average and a minimum at any point of 0.06 footcandle (0.6 lux) at the end of
the emergency lighting time duration. A maximum-to-minimum illumination uniformity ratio of 40 to 1 shall not be exceeded. In group I-2 occupancies,
failure of any single lighting unit shall not reduce the illumination level to less than 0.2 foot-candle (2.2 lux).
Section 1010.1.9.12 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1010.1.9.12 Access-Controlled Elevator Lobby Doors In Mid-Rise And High-Rise. For elevator lobbies in mid-rise and high-rise office buildings
where the occupants of the floor are not required to travel through the elevator lobby to reach an exit, when approved by the fire chief, the doors
separating the elevator lobby from the adjacent occupied tenant space shall be permitted to be equipped with an approved entrance and egress
access control system provided all of the following requirements are met:
1. The building is provided throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
2. A smoke detector is installed on the ceiling on the tenant side of the elevator lobby doors along the center line of the door opening, not less than
1 foot and not more than 5 feet from the door opening, and is connected to the fire alarm system.
3. A remote master switch capable of unlocking the elevator lobby doors shall be provided in the fire command center for use by the fire
department.
4. Locks for the elevator lobby shall be U.L. and California state fire marshal listed fail-safe type locking mechanisms. The locking device shall
automatically release on activation of any fire alarm device on the floor of alarm (waterflow, smoke detector, manual pull stations, etc.). All locking
devices shall unlock, but not unlatch, upon activation.
5. A two-way voice communication systems, utilizing dedicated lines, shall be provided from each locked elevator lobby to the 24-hour staffed
location on site, annunciated as to location. Operating instructions shall be posted above each two-way communication device.
Exception: When approved by the fire chief, two-way voice communication system to an off-site facility may be permitted where means to
remotely unlock the access controlled doors from the off-site facility are provided.
6. An approved momentary mushroom-shaped palm button connected to the doors and installed adjacent to each locked elevator lobby door shall
be provided to release the door locks when operated by an individual in the elevator lobby. The locks shall be reset manually at the door. Mount
palm button so that the center line is 48 inches above the finished floor.
Provide a sign stating:
In Case Of Emergency,
Push Palm Button,
Door Will Unlock And
Security Alarm Will
Sound.
Proceed To Exit
The sign lettering shall be 3/4-inch high letters by 1/8-inch width stroke on a contrasting background.
Loss of power to that part of the access control system which locks the doors shall automatically unlock the doors.
Section 1023.9 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1023.9 Stairway Identification Signs. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in an interior exit stairway and ramp connecting more than two
stories designating the floor level, the terminus of the top and bottom of the interior exit stairway and ramp and the identification of the stair or ramp.
The signage shall also state the story of, and the direction to, the exit discharge and the availability of roof access from the interior exit stairway and
ramp for the fire department. The sign shall be located 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor landing in a position that is readily visible when the doors
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 370/797
are in the open and closed positions. Signs shall be installed on the interior of the stairways on each floor and on the exterior door of each stair door
at the ground level, to identify each stair landing and indicate the upper and lower termination of the stairway. Floor level identifications and markings
shall remain consistent throughout the entire property or building including, but not limited to lobbies, hallways, parking levels, and basement levels.
In addition to the stairway identification sign, raised character and Braille floor identification signs that comply with chapter 11B shall be located at the
landing of each floor level, placed adjacent to the door on the latch side, in all enclosed stairways in buildings two or more stories in height to identify
the floor level. At the exit discharge level, the sign shall include a raised five pointed star located to the left of the identifying floor level. The outside
diameter of the star shall be the same as the height of the raised characters.
Section 1023.9.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1023.9.1 Signage Requirements. Stairway identification signs shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. The signs shall be a minimum size of 18 inches (457 mm) by 12 inches (305 mm).
2. The letters designating the identification of the interior exit stairway and ramp shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm) in height.
3. The number designating the floor level shall be a minimum of 5 inches (127 mm) in height with 3/4-inch (19 mm) strokes and located in the
center of the sign. The mezzanine levels shall have the letter "M" preceding the floor level. Basement levels shall have the letter "B" preceding the
floor number.
4. All other lettering and numbers shall be a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) in height.
5. The stairway's upper terminus, such as ROOF ACCESS or NO ROOF ACCESS, shall be placed under the stairway identification in 1-inch-high
(25 mm) block lettering with 1/4-inch (6 mm) strokes.
6. The lower and upper terminus of the stairway shall be placed at the bottom of the sign in 1-inch-high (25 mm) block lettering with 1/4 inch
(6 mm) strokes.
7. Characters and their background shall have a nonglare finish. Characters shall contrast with their background, with either light characters on a
dark background or dark characters on a light background.
8. When signs required by section 1023.8 are installed in interior exit enclosures of buildings subject to section 1024, the signs shall be made of
the same materials as required by section 1025.4.
9. Signs shall also be installed on the exterior of all ground level stairway doors.
Section 1505.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1505.1 General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, roof coverings or roof assemblies on any structure regulated by this code shall be a
fire-retardant roof covering or roof assembly that is listed as a class A assembly in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition, no wood
shall be used as a roof covering material. Noncombustible non-wood roof coverings may be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's
requirements in lieu of a fire-retardant roofing assembly.
Exception: Roof repairs of less than 10 percent of the total roof area on existing structures in any one year period may be repaired with a roof
covering that meets the same fire retardant standard as the existing roof.
Sections 1505.1.1, 1505.1.2 and 1505.1.3 of the California building code are hereby deleted.
Section 1505.1.5 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1505.1.5 Class A Roof Covering Requirement. Notwithstanding any other requirement of the Beverly Hills municipal code, no later than July 1,
2014, all wood roof coverings in the city of Beverly Hills shall be either: (1) fire retardant class A; or (2) treated with a fire retardant spray in
accordance with section 1505.1.6 and section 1505.1.7.
Exceptions:
1. Demolition Or Renovation Permit. Property owners with a non-class A wood roof that, as of July 1, 2014, have applied for or possess a
demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof, shall have until December 31, 2014 to
commence such demolition or renovation and remove the non-class A wood roof; provided however, that such property owner shall submit a
signed affidavit, on a form provided by the city, representing that the non-class A wood roof will be removed by December 31, 2014.
2. Qualified Historical Building Or Property. A qualified historical building or property, as defined in the California historical building code
adopted by reference into the Beverly Hills municipal code, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the California historical building code, as
adopted and amended by the city of Beverly Hills.
Section 1505.1.6 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1505.1.6 Fire Retardant Spray For Non-Class A Wood Roofs. If a fire retardant spray is applied on a non-class A wood roof pursuant to section
1505.1.5 above, such fire retardant spray shall comply with the current standards of the California state fire marshal, including but not limited to
ASTM E-84, NFPA 255 and UL 723, and shall be applied by a California licensed contractor, or other qualified applicator. The property owner and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 371/797
certified applicator shall submit a signed affidavit on a form provided by the city indicating the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period and
the certified applicator's warranty period. The fire retardant spray shall be repeated before the end of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness
period or the certified applicator's certification warranty, whichever is shorter; provided, however, that the fire retardant spray need not be repeated if,
before the end of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period or certified applicator's warranty period, whichever is earlier, a property
owner has applied for or possesses a demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof, and
commences such demolition or renovation and removes the non-class A wood roof within 180 days from the expiration of such effectiveness or
warranty period; provided further however, that the property owner shall submit a signed affidavit, on a form provided by the city, representing that
such property owner is not repeating the fire retardant spray because the non-class A wood roof will be removed within 180 days from the expiration
of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period or certified applicator's warranty period, whichever is earlier, of the existing spray.
Section 1505.1.7 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1505.1.7 Permits Required. No fire retardant spray shall be applied on a non-class A wood roof within the city without first obtaining a permit from
the city. There will be no charge for such permit, which shall remain valid for the term of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period or the
certified applicator's certification warranty, whichever is shorter. The permit shall state the name of the certified applicator, the approved fire retardant
spray material and the permit expiration date. Before a property owner repeats the fire retardant spray in accordance with section 1505.1.6, such
property owner shall renew the permit obtained pursuant to this section.
Section 1505.1.8 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1505.1.8 Replacement Of Non-Class A Wood Roofs Upon Sale Or Transfer. Notwithstanding section 1505.1.5 of the Beverly Hills municipal
code, effective July 1, 2014, all existing non-class A wood roofs shall be replaced with a fire retardant class A non-wood roof before the sale or
transfer of such property for monetary consideration.
Exceptions:
1. Buyer Assumes Responsibility. If the seller and the buyer agree that the buyer shall assume responsibility to replace the wood roof and an
application for a demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof will be submitted, and such
demolition or renovation will commence, and such non-class A wood roof will be removed, within 180 days from the date of title transfer, then the
non-class A wood roof need not be replaced before the sale or transfer of such property, but shall be removed by the buyer within the 180 day
period from the date of title transfer; provided further, that the seller and buyer of such property shall submit a signed affidavit, on a form provided
by the city, representing that the buyer will remove the non-class A wood roof within 180 days from the date of title transfer.
2. Qualified Historical Building Or Property. A qualified historical building or property, as defined in the California historical building code
adopted by reference into the Beverly Hills municipal code, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the California historical building code, as
adopted and amended by the city of Beverly Hills.
Section 1507.3.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1507.3.1 Deck Requirements. Concrete and clay tile shall be installed only over solid structural sheathing boards.
Section 1510.10 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1510.10 Equipment Enclosures. Operating equipment, including associated ducting, located on the roof of a building shall be enclosed so as to be
shielded from view in a horizontal plane or lower and so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of title 5, chapter 1 of the Beverly Hills
municipal code. The enclosure finish shall match that of the building exterior walls. Enclosures on buildings with non-residential uses shall be of noncombustible,
opaque material.
Section 1510.11 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1510.11 Roof Top Equipment Enclosures. Operating equipment, including associated ducting, located on the roof of a building shall be enclosed
so as to be shielded from view in a horizontal plane or lower as so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of title 5, chapter 1 of the
Beverly Hills municipal code. The enclosure finish shall match that of the building exterior walls. Enclosures on buildings with non-residential uses
shall be on non-combustible, opaque material.
Section 1613.5.2 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1613.5.2 Structural Separation. Modify ASCE 7 section 12.12.3 equation 12.12-1 as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 372/797
Section 1613.5.3 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1613.5.3 Values For Vertical Combinations. Modify ASCE 7 section 12.2.3.1 exception 3 as follows:
3. Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of light frame construction.
Section 1613.5.4 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1613.5.4 Wood Diaphragms. Modify ASCE 7 section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:
12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms. In wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage shall not be
accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain
tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F, wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the
following:
1. The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form subdiaphragms to transmit the
anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.
2. The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the subdiaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.
Section 1613.5.5 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1613.5.5 Maximum SDS Value In Determination Of Cs And Ev. Modify ASCE 7 section 12.8.1.3 as follows:
12.8.1.3 Maximum SDS Value In Determination Of Cs And Ev. The value of Cs and Ev are permitted to be calculated using a value of SDS equal to
1.0 but not less than 70% of SDS as defined in section 11.4.4, provided that all of the following criteria are met:
1. The structure does not have irregularities, as defined in section 12.3.2;
2. The structure does not exceed five stories above the lower of the base or grade plane as defined in section 11.2, and, where present, each
mezzanine level shall be considered a story for the purpose of this limit;
3. The structure has a fundamental period, T, that does not exceed 0.5 seconds, as determined using section 12.8.2;
4. The structure meets the requirements necessary for the redundancy factor, ., to be permitted to be taken as 1.0, in accordance with section
12.3.4.2;
5. The site soil properties are not classified as site classes E or F, as defined in section 11.4.2; and
6. The structure is classified as risk category I or II, as defined in section 1.5.1.
Section 1613.7 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 373/797
1613.7 Seismic Design Provisions For Hillside Buildings.
1613.7.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum regulations for the design and construction of new buildings and additions to
existing buildings when constructing such buildings on or into slopes steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). These
regulations establish minimum standards for seismic force resistance to reduce the risk of injury or loss of life in the event of earthquakes.
1613.7.2 Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to the design of the lateral-force-resisting system for hillside buildings at and below the
base level diaphragm. The design of the lateral-force-resisting system above the base level diaphragm shall be in accordance with the provisions for
seismic and wind design as required elsewhere in this division.
Exception: Non-habitable accessory buildings and decks not supporting or supported from the main building are exempt from these regulations.
1613.7.3 Definitions. For the purposes of this section certain terms are defined as follows:
Base Level Diaphragm is the floor at, or closest to, the top of the highest level of the foundation.
Diaphragm Anchors are assemblies that connect a diaphragm to the adjacent foundation at the uphill diaphragm edge.
Downhill Direction is the descending direction of the slope approximately perpendicular to the slope contours.
Foundation is concrete or masonry which supports a building, including footings, stem walls, retaining walls, and grade beams.
Foundation Extending In The Downhill Direction is a foundation running downhill and approximately perpendicular to the uphill foundation.
Hillside Building is any building or portion thereof constructed on or into a slope steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3%). If
only a portion of the building is supported on or into the slope, these regulations apply to the entire building.
Primary Anchors are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a direct connection as described in sections 1613.7.5 and 1613.7.7.3 between
the diaphragm and the uphill foundation.
Secondary Anchors are diaphragm anchors designed for and providing a redundant diaphragm to foundation connection, as described in sections
1613.7.6 and 1613.7.7.4.
Uphill Diaphragm Edge is the edge of the diaphragm adjacent and closest to the highest ground level at the perimeter of the diaphragm.
Uphill Foundation is the foundation parallel and closest to the uphill diaphragm edge.
1613.7.4 Analysis And Design.
1613.7.4.1 General. Every hillside building within the scope of this section shall be analyzed, designed, and constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this division. When the code-prescribed wind design produces greater effects, the wind design shall govern, but detailing requirements
and limitations prescribed in this and referenced sections shall be followed.
1613.7.4.2 Base Level Diaphragm-Downhill Direction. The following provisions shall apply to the seismic analysis and design of the connections
for the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
1613.7.4.2.1 Base For Lateral Force Design Defined. For seismic forces acting in the downhill direction, the base of the building shall be the floor
at or closest to the top of the highest level of the foundation.
1613.7.4.2.2 Base Shear. In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing
wall and building frame systems. The total base shear shall include the forces tributary to the base level diaphragm including forces from the base
level diaphragm.
1613.7.5 Base Shear Resistance-Primary Anchors.
1613.7.5.1 General. The base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted through primary anchors from diaphragm struts provided in the base
level diaphragm to the foundation.
1613.7.5.2 Location Of Primary Anchors. A primary anchor and diaphragm strut shall be provided in line with each foundation extending in the
downhill direction. Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall also be provided where interior vertical lateral-force-resisting elements occur above
and in contact with the base level diaphragm. The spacing of primary anchors and diaphragm struts or collectors shall in no case exceed 30 feet
(9144 mm).
1613.7.5.3 Design Of Primary Anchors And Diaphragm Struts. Primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.5.4 Limitations. The following lateral-force-resisting elements shall not be designed to resist seismic forces below the base level diaphragm
in the downhill direction:
1. Wood structural panel wall sheathing,
2. Cement plaster and lath,
3. Gypsum wallboard, and
4. Tension only braced frames.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 374/797
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of section 2205.2.1.2 may be used to transfer forces from the primary anchors and
diaphragm struts to the foundation provided lateral forces do not induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame or in the diaphragm struts.
Deflections of frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is not rectangular.
1613.7.6 Base Shear Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
1613.7.6.1 General. In addition to the primary anchors required by section 1613.7.5, the base shear in the downhill direction shall be resisted
through secondary anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in the base level diaphragm.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in the downhill direction spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm)
on center extend up to and are directly connected to the base level diaphragm for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
1613.7.6.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity And Spacing. Secondary anchors at the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum force
equal to the base shear, including forces tributary to the base level diaphragm, but not less than 600 pounds per linear foot (8.76 kN/m) based on
allowable stress design (ASD) levels. The secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a
maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
1613.7.6.3 Design. Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.7 Diaphragms Below The Base Level-Downhill Direction. The following provisions shall apply to the lateral analysis and design of the
connections for all diaphragms below the base level diaphragm in the downhill direction.
1613.7.7.1 Diaphragm Defined. Every floor level below the base level diaphragm shall be designed as a diaphragm.
1613.7.7.2 Design Force. Each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for all tributary loads at that level using a minimum
seismic force factor not less than the base shear coefficient.
1613.7.7.3 Design Force Resistance-Primary Anchors. The design force described in section 1613.7.7.2 shall be resisted through primary
anchors from diaphragm struts provided in each diaphragm to the foundation. Primary anchors shall be provided and designed in accordance with
the requirements and limitations of section 1613.7.5.
1613.7.7.4 Design Force Resistance-Secondary Anchors.
1613.7.7.4.1 General. In addition to the primary anchors required in section 1613.7.7.3, the design force in the downhill direction shall be resisted
through secondary anchors in the uphill foundation connected to diaphragm struts in each diaphragm below the base level.
Exception: Secondary anchors are not required where foundations extending in the downhill direction, spaced at not more than 30 feet (9144 mm)
on center, extend up to and are directly connected to each diaphragm below the base level for at least 70% of the diaphragm depth.
1613.7.7.4.2 Secondary Anchor Capacity. Secondary anchors at each diaphragm below the base level diaphragm shall be designed for a minimum
force equal to the design force but not less than 300 pounds per linear foot (4.38 kN/m) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels. The
secondary anchors shall be uniformly distributed along the uphill diaphragm edge and shall be spaced a maximum of 4 feet (1219 mm) on center.
1613.7.7.4.3 Design. Secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be designed in accordance with section 1613.7.8.
1613.7.8 Primary And Secondary Anchorage And Diaphragm Strut Design. Primary and secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be
designed in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Fasteners. All bolted fasteners used to develop connections to wood members shall be provided with square plate washers at all bolt heads and
nuts. Washers shall be minimum 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Nuts shall be tightened to finger tight
plus one half (1/2) wrench turn prior to covering the framing.
2. Fastening. The diaphragm to foundation anchorage shall not be accomplished by the use of toenailing, nails subject to withdrawal, or wood in
cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
3. Size Of Wood Members. Wood diaphragm struts collectors, and other wood members connected to primary anchors shall not be less than 3
inch (76 mm) nominal width. The effects of eccentricity on wood members shall be evaluated as required per item 9.
4. Design. Primary and secondary anchorage, including diaphragm struts, splices, and collectors shall be designed for 125% of the tributary force.
5. Allowable Stress Increase. The one-third allowable stress increase permitted under section 1605.3.2 shall not be taken when the working
(allowable) stress design method is used.
6. Steel Element Of Structural Wall Anchorage System. The strength design forces for steel elements of the structural wall anchorage system, with
the exception of anchor bolts and reinforcing steel, shall be increased by 1.4 times the forces otherwise required.
7. Primary Anchors. The load path for primary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be fully developed into the diaphragm and into the foundation.
The foundation must be shown to be adequate to resist the concentrated loads from the primary anchors.
8. Secondary Anchors. The load path for secondary anchors and diaphragm struts shall be fully developed in the diaphragm but need not be
developed beyond the connection to the foundation.
9. Symmetry. All lateral force foundation anchorage and diaphragm strut connections shall be symmetrical. Eccentric connections may be
permitted when demonstrated by calculation or tests that all components of force have been provided for in the structural analysis or tests.
10. Wood Ledgers. Wood ledgers shall not be used to resist cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension.
1613.7.9 Lateral-Force-Resisting Elements Normal To The Downhill Direction.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 375/797
1613.7.9.1 General. In the direction normal to the downhill direction, lateral-force-resisting elements shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
1613.7.9.2 Base Shear. In developing the base shear for seismic design, the response modification coefficient (R) shall not exceed 5 for bearing wall
and building frame systems.
1613.7.9.3 Vertical Distribution Of Seismic Forces. For seismic forces acting normal to the downhill direction the distribution of seismic forces over
the height of the building using section 12.8.3 of ASCE 7 shall be determined using the height measured from the top of the lowest level of the
building foundation.
1613.7.9.4 Drift Limitations. The story drift below the base level diaphragm shall not exceed 0.007 times the story height at strength design force
level. The total drift from the base level diaphragm to the top of the foundation shall not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm). Where the story height or the
height from the base level diaphragm to the top of the foundation varies because of a stepped footing or story offset, the height shall be measured
from the average height of the top of the foundation. The story drift shall not be reduced by the effect of horizontal diaphragm stiffness.
1613.7.9.5 Distribution Of Lateral Forces.
1613.7.9.5.1 General. The design lateral force shall be distributed to lateral-force-resisting elements of varying heights in accordance with the
stiffness of each individual element.
1613.7.9.5.2 Wood Structural Panel Sheathed Walls. The stiffness of a stepped wood structural panel shear wall may be determined by dividing
the wall into adjacent rectangular elements, subject to the same top of wall deflection. Deflections of shear walls may be estimated by AWC SDPWS
section 4.3.2. Sheathing and fastening requirements for the stiffest section shall be used for the entire wall. Each section of wall shall be anchored
for shear and uplift at each step. The minimum horizontal length of a step shall be 8 feet (2438 mm) and the maximum vertical height of a step shall
be 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm).
1613.7.9.5.3 Reinforced Concrete Or Masonry Shear Walls. Reinforced concrete or masonry shear walls shall have forces distributed in
proportion to the rigidity of each section of the wall.
1613.7.9.6 Limitations. The following lateral force-resisting-elements shall not be designed to resist lateral forces below the base level diaphragm in
the direction normal to the downhill direction:
1. Cement plaster and lath,
2. Gypsum wallboard, and
3. Tension-only braced frames.
Braced frames designed in accordance with the requirements of section 2205.2.1.2 of this code may be designed as lateral-force-resisting elements
in the direction normal to the downhill direction, provided lateral forces do not induce flexural stresses in any member of the frame. Deflections of
frames shall account for the variation in slope of diagonal members when the frame is not rectangular.
1613.7.10 Specific Design Provisions.
1613.7.10.1 Footings And Grade Beams. All footings and grade beams shall comply with the following:
1. Grade beams shall extend at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the lowest adjacent grade and provide a minimum 24 inch (610 mm) distance
horizontally from the bottom outside face of the grade beam to the face of the descending slope.
2. Continuous footings shall be reinforced with at least two no. 4 reinforcing bars at the top and two no. 4 reinforcing bars at the bottom.
3. All main footing and grade beam reinforcement steel shall be bent into the intersecting footing and fully developed around each corner and
intersection.
4. All concrete stem walls shall extend from the foundation and reinforced as required for concrete or masonry walls.
1613.7.10.2 Protection Against Decay And Termites. All wood to earth separation shall comply with the following:
1. Where a footing or grade beam extends across a descending slope, the stem wall, grade beam, or footing shall extend up to a minimum 18
inches (457 mm) above the highest adjacent grade.
Exception: At paved garage and doorway entrances to the building, the stem wall need only extend to the finished concrete slab, provided the
wood framing is protected with a moisture proof barrier.
2. Wood ledgers supporting a vertical load of more than 100 pounds per linear foot (1.46 kN/m) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels and
located within 48 inches (1219 mm) of adjacent grade are prohibited. Galvanized steel ledgers and anchor bolts, with or without wood nailers, or
treated or decay resistant sill plates supported on a concrete or masonry seat, may be used.
1613.7.10.3 Sill Plates. All sill plates and anchorage shall comply with the following:
1. All wood framed walls, including nonbearing walls, when resting on a footing, foundation, or grade beam stem wall, shall be supported on wood
sill plates bearing on a level surface.
2. Power-driven fasteners shall not be used to anchor sill plates except at interior nonbearing walls not designed as shear walls.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 376/797
1613.7.10.4 Column Base Plate Anchorage. The base of isolated wood posts (not framed into a stud wall) supporting a vertical load of 4,000
pounds (17.8 kN) based on allowable stress design (ASD) levels or more and the base plate for a steel column shall comply with the following:
1. When the post or column is supported on a pedestal extending above the top of a footing or grade beam, the pedestal shall be designed and
reinforced as required for concrete or masonry columns. The pedestal shall be reinforced with a minimum of four no. 4 bars extending to the
bottom of the footing or grade beam. The top of exterior pedestals shall be sloped for positive drainage.
2. The base plate anchor bolts or the embedded portion of the post base, and the vertical reinforcing bars for the pedestal, shall be confined with
two no. 4 or three no. 3 ties within the top 5 inches (127 mm) of the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts shall be embedded
a minimum of 20 bolt diameters into the concrete or masonry pedestal. The base plate anchor bolts and post bases shall be galvanized and each
anchor bolt shall have at least 2 galvanized nuts above the base plate.
1613.7.10.5 Steel Beam To Column Supports. All steel beam to column supports shall be positively braced in each direction. Steel beams shall
have stiffener plates installed on each side of the beam web at the column. The stiffener plates shall be welded to each beam flange and the beam
web. Each brace connection or structural member shall consist of at least two 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter machine bolts.
Section 1613.8 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
1613.8 Suspended Ceilings. Minimum design and installation standards for suspended ceilings shall be determined in accordance with the
requirements of section 2506.2.1 of this code and this section.
1613.8.1 Scope. This part contains special requirements for suspended ceilings and lighting systems. Provisions of section 13.5.6 of ASCE 7 shall
apply except as modified herein.
1613.8.2 General. The suspended ceilings and lighting systems shall be limited to 6 feet (1828 mm) below the structural deck unless the lateral
bracing is designed by a licensed engineer or architect.
1613.8.3 Sprinkler Heads. All sprinkler heads (drops) except fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be designed to allow
for free movement of the sprinkler pipes with oversize rings, sleeves or adaptors through the ceiling tile. Sprinkler heads and other penetrations shall
have a 2 inch (50 mm) oversize ring, sleeve, or adapter through the ceiling tile to allow for free movement of at least 1 inch (25 mm) in all horizontal
directions. Alternatively, a swing joint that can accommodate 1 inch (25 mm) of ceiling movement in all horizontal directions is permitted to be
provided at the top of the sprinkler head extension.
Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with section 714 of this code.
1613.8.4 Special Requirements For Means Of Egress. Suspended ceiling assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant load of
30 or more shall comply with the following provisions.
1613.8.4.1 General. Ceiling suspension systems shall be connected and braced with vertical hangers attached directly to the structural deck along
the means of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or more and at lobbies accessory to group A occupancies. Spacing of vertical hangers shall not
exceed 2 feet (610 mm) on center along the entire length of the suspended ceiling assembly located along the means of egress or at the lobby.
1613.8.4.2 Assembly Device. All lay-in panels shall be secured to the suspension ceiling assembly with two hold-down clips minimum for each tile
within a 4-foot (1219 mm) radius of the exit lights and exit signs.
1613.8.4.3 Emergency Systems. Independent supports and braces shall be provided for light fixtures required for exit illumination. Power supply for
exit illumination shall comply with the requirements of section 1008.3 of this code.
1613.8.4.4 Supports For Appendage. Separate support from the structural deck shall be provided for all appendages such as light fixtures, air
diffusers, exit signs, and similar elements.
Section 1704.6 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1704.6 Structural Observations. Where required by the provisions of section 1704.6.1 or 1704.6.2, the owner or the owner's authorized agent shall
employ a structural observer to perform structural observations. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the inspections
in section 110 or the special inspections in section 1705 or other section of this code. The structural observer shall be one of the following individuals:
1. The registered design professional responsible for the structural design, or
2. A registered design professional designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.
Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency
and extent of structural observations.
The owner or owner's authorized agent shall coordinate and call a preconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected
subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the
major structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the
required observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted to the building official.
Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner's authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the building official.
Upon the form prescribed by the building official, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement at each significant
construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural observer's
knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer which states that all observed deficiencies have been resolved is
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 377/797
required before acceptance of the work by the building official.
Section 1704.6.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1704.6.1 Structural Observations For Seismic Resistance. Structural observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to seismic
design category D, E or F, where one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. The structure is classified as risk category III or IV in accordance with table 1604.5.
2. The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the base.
3. The structure is classified as risk category I or II in accordance with table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or portion
thereof.
Exception: One-story wood framed group R-3 and group U occupancies less than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not
steeper than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to seismic design category D.
4. When so designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.
5. When such observation is specifically required by the building official.
Section 1705.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1705.3 Concrete Construction. The special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and
table 1705.3.
Exceptions: Special inspections and tests shall not be required for:
1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the
structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa)
regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.
2. Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock
where:
2.1. The footings support walls of light-frame construction;
2.2. The footings are designed in accordance with table 1809.7; or
2.3. The structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f'c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi)
(17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.
3. Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the
concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).
4. Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.
Exception to section 1705.12 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
Exception: The special inspections specified in sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in
accordance with one of the following:
1. The structure consists of light-frame construction; the design spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in section
1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm)
2. The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of reinforced masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response
acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in section 1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not
exceed 25 feet (7620 mm)
3. The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to seismic design category
D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or vertical irregularities in accordance with section 12.3 of ASCE 7:
3.1 Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.
3.2 Nonparallel systems irregularity.
3.3 Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.
3.4 Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.
Section 1803.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 378/797
1803.2 Investigation Required. Geotechnical investigations shall be conducted in accordance with sections 1803.3 through 1803.5. All proposed
development of habitable structures for four or more units and all commercial properties shall complete an appropriate "standard-of-practice"
geological investigation in accordance with the guidelines stipulated by the building official to ensure that active faults do not underlie the site or, if
present, are appropriately mitigated by avoidance (structural setbacks).
Exception: The building official shall be permitted to waive the requirement for a geotechnical investigation where satisfactory data from adjacent
areas is available that demonstrates an investigation is not necessary for any of the conditions in section 1803.5.1 through 1803.5.6 and sections
1803.5.10 and 1803.5.11.
Section 1807.1.4 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1807.1.4 Permanent Wood Foundation Systems. Permanent wood foundation systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC
PWF. Lumber and plywood shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (commodity specification A, use category 4B and section 5.2) and shall be
identified in accordance with section 2303.1.9.1. Permanent wood foundation systems shall not be used for structures assigned to seismic design
category D, E or F.
Section 1807.1.6 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1807.1.6 Prescriptive Design Of Concrete And Masonry Foundation Walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported
at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall
not be used for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 1809.3 of the 2016 edition of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1809.3 Stepped Footings. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not
exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the
top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F, the stepping requirement shall also apply to the top surface of grade beams supporting
walls. Footings shall be reinforced with four no. 4 bars. Two bars shall be place at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in figure 1809.3.
Figure 1809.3
Stepped Footing
Section 1809.7 and table 1809.7 of the California building code are amended to read as follows:
1809.7 Prescriptive Footings For Light-Frame Construction. Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings
supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in table 1809.7
shall not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
TABLE 1809.7
PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 379/797
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTIONa,b,c,d,e
Number Of
Floors Supported
By The Footingf
Width Of Footing
(Inches)
Thickness Of
Footing (Inches)
1 12 6
2 15 6
3 18 8g
For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm
a. Depth of footings shall be in accordance with section 1809.4.
b. The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.
c. See section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F.
d. For thickness of foundation walls, see section 1807.1.6.
e. Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for
supporting one floor.
Section 1809.12 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1809.12 Timber Footings. Timber footings shall be permitted for buildings of type V construction and as otherwise approved by the building official.
Such footings shall be treated in accordance with AWPA U1 (commodity specification A, use category 4B). Treated timbers are not required where
placed entirely below permanent water level, or where used as capping for wood piles that project above the water level over submerged or marsh
lands. The compressive stresses perpendicular to grain in untreated timber footing supported upon treated piles shall not exceed 70 percent of the
allowable stresses for the species and grade of timber as specified in the AANSI/AWC NDS. Timber footings shall not be used in structures assigned
to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 1810.3.2.4 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1810.3.2.4 Timber. Timber deep foundation elements shall be designed as piles or poles in accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS. Round timber
elements shall conform to ASTM D 25. Sawn timber elements shall conform to DOC PS-20. Timber shall not be used in structures assigned to
seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 1905.1.7 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
1905.1.7 ACI 318, Section 14.1.4. Delete ACI 318, section 14.1.4, and replace with the following:
14.1.4 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F.
14.1.4.1 - Structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:
(a) Concrete used for fill with a minimum cement content of two (2) sacks of portland cement or cementious material per cubic yard.
(b) Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of
the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.
(c) Plain concrete footings supporting walls are permitted provided the footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars
shall not be smaller than no. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum
of one bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.
Exceptions:
Detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud-bearing walls, are permitted to have plain
concrete footings with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not smaller than no. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less
than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing.
Section 1905.1 of the California building code is amended and sections 1905.1.9 through 1905.1.11 are added to read as follows:
1905.1 General. The text of ACI 318 shall be modified as indicated in sections 1905.1.1 through 1905.1.11.
1905.1.9 ACI 318, Section 18.7.5. Modify ACI 318, section 18.7.5, by adding section 18.7.5.7 and 18.7.5.8 as follows:
18.7.5.7 - Where the calculated point of contraflexure is not within the middle half of the member clear height, provide transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 sections 18.7.5.1, items (a) through (c), over the full height of the member.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 380/797
18.7.5.8 - At any section where the design strength, .Pn, of the column is less than the sum of the shears Ve computed in accordance with ACI 318
sections 18.7.6.1 and 18.6.5.1 for all the beams framing into the column above the level under consideration, transverse reinforcement as
specified in ACI 318 sections 18.7.5.1 through 18.7.5.3 shall be provided. For beams framing into opposite sides of the column, the moment
components are permitted to be assumed to be of opposite sign. For the determination of the design strength, .Pn, of the column, these moments
are permitted to be assumed to result from the deformation of the frame in any one principal axis.
1905.1.10 ACI 318, Section 18.10.4. Modify ACI 318, section 18.10.4, by adding section 18.10.4.6 as follows:
18.10.4.6 - Walls and portions of walls with Pu> 0.35Po shall not be considered to contribute to the calculated shear strength of the structure for
resisting earthquake-induced forces. Such walls shall conform to the requirements of ACI 318 section 18.14.
1905.1.11 ACI 318, Section 18.12.6. Modify ACI 318, by adding section 18.12.6.2 as follows:
18.12.6.2 - Collector and boundary elements in topping slabs placed over precast floor and roof elements shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm)
or 6 db in thickness, where db is the diameter of the largest reinforcement in the topping slab.
Section 2304.10.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
2304.10.1 Fastener Requirements. Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in section
2301.2. The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall not be less than that set forth in table 2304.10.1. Staple fasteners in table
2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
Section 2304.12.5 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
2304.12.5 Wood Used In Retaining Walls And Cribs. Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance with
AWPA U1 for soil and fresh water use. Wood shall not be used in retaining or crib walls for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Section 2305.4 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
2305.4 Quality Of Nails. In seismic design category D, E or F, mechanically driven nails used in wood structural panel shear walls shall meet the
same dimensions as that required for hand-driven nails, including diameter, minimum length and minimum head diameter. Clipped head or box nails
are not permitted in new construction. The allowable design value for clipped head nails in existing construction may be taken at no more than the
nail-head-area ratio of that of the same size hand-driven nails.
Section 2305.5 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
2305.5 Hold-Down Connectors. In seismic design category D, E or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to resist shear wall overturning
moments using approved cyclic load values or 75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic loading of the product.
Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate size shall be a
minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus
one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.
Section 2306.2 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
2306.2 Wood-Frame Diaphragms. Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels
are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in
table 2306.2(1) or 2306.2(2) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by
cyclic testing and approved by the building official.
The allowable shear values in tables 2306.2(1) and 2306.2(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.
Wood structural panel diaphragms used to resist seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F shall be applied
directly to the framing members.
Exception: Wood structural panel diaphragms are permitted to be fastened over solid lumber planking or laminated decking, provided the panel
joints and lumber planking or laminated decking joints do not coincide.
Section 2306.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 381/797
2306.3 Wood-Frame Shear Walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. For structures
assigned to seismic design category D, E, or F, application of tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:
1. Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than 3/8-inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on
center.
2. The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8-inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design
category D, E or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).
Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building
official.
3. Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2-inch in from the panel edges and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for
shear greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4
inch from the edge of the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.
4. Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to seismic design category D, E, or F.
For structures assigned to seismic design category D, application of table 4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multilevel
building.
Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear
values set forth in table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by
cyclic testing and approved by the building official.
The allowable shear values in tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with
ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for plywood siding in the AWC SDPWS.
Section 2307.2 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
2307.2 Wood-Frame Shear Walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with section 2306.3 as applicable.
Table 2308.6.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 382/797
Sections 2308.6.5, 2308.6.5.1, 2308.6.5.2, figure 2308.6.5.1, and figure 2308.6.5.2 of the California building code are amended to read as follows:
2308.6.5 Alternative Bracing. An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to
substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm) braced wall panel of method DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS, PCP or HPS. For method GB, each 96-inch (2438 mm)
section (applied to one face) or 48-inch (1219 mm) section (applied to both faces) or portion thereof required by table 2308.6.1 is permitted to be
replaced by one panel constructed in accordance with method ABW or PFH.
2308.6.5.1 Alternate Braced Wall (ABW). An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and figure 2308.6.5.1. In one-story
buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel
shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized box
nails in accordance with table 2304.10.1 and blocked at wood structural panel edges. For structures assigned to seismic design category D or E,
each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common
nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in accordance with section 2308.3.1 shall be
provided in each panel. Anchor bolts shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall have a hold-down device
fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down device shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on floor framing
supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less
than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-
inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing shall be
reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 24 inches (610 mm) with the reinforcement required in
the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line.
Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor
bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity shall be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 383/797
2308.6.5.2 Portal Frame With Hold-Downs (PFH). A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and figure 2308.6.5.2. The adjacent
door or window opening shall have a full-length header.
In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16 inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each
panel shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d
common or galvanized box nails in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to seismic design category D or E, each panel shall
be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3
inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports and in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel sheathing shall extend
up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and shall be nailed in accordance with figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header consisting of at least
two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened in accordance with item 24 of table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A spacer, if
used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside
faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6
feet (1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the
header to the inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with section
2308.3.1 shall be provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel shall have a hold-down device fastened to the
foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15 570 N).
Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the
bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the
bearing studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds
(4400 N). The hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The PFH
panels shall be supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be
reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches
(305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing or turned-down slab edge is permitted at door openings in the
braced wall line. This continuous footing or turned-down slab edge shall be reinforced with not less than one no. 4 bar top and bottom. This
reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 15 24 inches (381 610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly
under the braced wall line.
Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610 mm).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 384/797
Section 2308.6.8.1 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
2308.6.8.1 Foundation Requirements. Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.
Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50 feet (15 240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior walls
only for structures assigned to seismic design category A, B, or C.
For structures in seismic design categories D and E, exterior braced wall panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the
portion of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice and section 2308.1.1.
Section 2308.6.9 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
2308.6.9 Attachment Of Sheathing. Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that prescribed in tables 2308.6.1 or 2304.10.1.
Wall sheathing shall not be attached to framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer
seismic forces in structures assigned to seismic design category D, E or F.
Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and
approved by the building official.
All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18 gauge
minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches (609.6 mm) on center with four 8d nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels shall be
laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum 24 inches (609.6 mm) intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical framing.
Section 3109.3 of the California building code is amended to read as follows:
3109.3 Public Swimming Pools. Public swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than 5 feet (60 inches) in height of a
screen enclosure. Opening in the fence shall not permit the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere. The fence or screen enclosure shall be
equipped with self-closing and self-latching gates.
Section 3112 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3112 Tents, Awnings, Canopies, And Umbrellas.
3112.1 Permits Required. No tent, awning, or canopy in excess of forty (40) square feet shall be erected or maintained on private property within
the city without first obtaining a permit from the city building official. The permit fee shall be as established by resolution of the city council. Unless
otherwise authorized by the city building official, no tent, awning, or canopy in excess of forty (40) square feet shall be erected or maintained on
private property within the city in excess of ten (10) days.
3112.2 Temporary Use. Tents, awnings, or canopies of cloth or pliable material shall be erected only as temporary shelters from the rain or sun and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 385/797
shall not be used as permanent structures or additions to the main building. Except as authorized by the city council or as otherwise specified in the
municipal code, such structures shall not be used for the purpose of sheltering goods, wares, or merchandise or for the purpose of engaging in
business in any manner thereunder. Such structures shall be permitted only if so constructed and situated, so that in the opinion of the city building
official, the structure will not cause a fire hazard or in any other way be dangerous to life, limb, or property.
Exception: The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the covering of materials stored in a yard with fire-retardant tarpaulins.
3112.3 Restrictions And Requirements. Any tent, awning, or other pliable material for which a permit is required under this section shall comply
with the following:
1. All city code provisions and regulations shall be complied with;
2. An electrical permit shall be obtained by a duly licensed electrical contractor for any wiring or lighting to be installed;
3. All plastics used shall display approval by the office of the fire marshal of the state;
4. All cloth used shall be incombustible or flame-retardant. Flame-retardant materials shall display the name of the treating agency, the date of the
flame-retardant application, the type of flame-retardant used, and the flame-retardant certificate;
5. A testing flap shall be provided for the use of the fire department inspector;
6. Two (2) means of egress shall be provided for tents or canopies having an area of 1,000 square feet or more. Such means of egress shall be
not less than five (5') feet in width and located not less than one-fifth (1/5) of the perimeter of the structure apart. Each means of egress shall be
provided with exit signs as required by this code.
3112.4 Umbrellas. No open umbrella in excess of seven (7') feet in diameter shall be permitted in the commercial and industrial zones. Any umbrella
having a diameter of seven (7') feet or less shall be securely fastened to a movable base approved by the city building official. Such umbrella shall at
all times be maintained in a position and in such a manner as shall not constitute a fire hazard to persons or property, either from fire or wind.
Section 3201.5 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3201.5 No part of any structure, or any appendage thereto, shall project beyond the property line of the building site, except as specified in this
chapter and elsewhere in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 3201.6 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3201.6 Structures or appendages regulated by this code shall be constructed of materials as permitted by this code.
Section 3202 of the California building code is hereby deleted.
A new section 3202 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3202 Encroachments Below Grade. Portions of buildings or structures below grade shall not project beyond the property line of the building site
except as otherwise provided in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 3203 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3203 Encroachments Above Grade.
3203.1 Streets. In a commercial or industrial zone those portions of buildings, structures, or appendages thereto that may project beyond property
lines adjacent to a street are as follows:
1. Marquees;
2. Canopies;
3. Cornices;
4. Awnings;
5. Signs; and
6. When approved by the architectural commission, flagpoles, lights, and other ornamental projections.
3203.2 Alleys In A Commercial Or Industrial Zone. Projections beyond property lines adjacent to an alley in a commercial or industrial zone shall
not be permitted.
3203.3 Streets And Alleys In Residential Zones. Projections beyond property lines adjacent to streets and alleys in residential zones shall not be
permitted.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 386/797
Section 3204 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3204 Marquees And Canopies.
3204.1 General. For the purposes of this section, a marquee or canopy shall include any object or decoration attached to or a part of such marquee
or canopy.
3204.2 Projection And Clearance. A marquee or canopy shall project not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the property line to the
curb line and shall be no less than eight (8') feet above the ground or pavement below.
3204.3 Thickness. The maximum height or thickness of a marquee or canopy measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall not
exceed nine (9') feet.
3204.4 Construction. A marquee or canopy shall be supported entirely by the building.
3204.5 Roof Construction. The roof or any part thereof may be a skylight provided wire glass or laminated glass that complies with section 2405 is
used no less than one-fourth (1/4") inch thick with no single pane more than eighteen (18") inches wide. Every roof and skylight of a marquee or
canopy shall be sloped to downspouts which shall conduct any drainage from the marquee under the sidewalk to the curb.
3204.6 Location Prohibited. Every marquee or canopy shall be so located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe or to
obstruct the clear passage of stairways or exits from the building or the installation or maintenance of electroliers.
Section 3205 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3205 Awnings.
3205.1 Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "awning" is defined as follows:
Awning is a temporary shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
3205.2 Construction. Awnings shall have noncombustible frames but may have combustible coverings.
3205.3 Projection. Awnings may extend over public property not more than seven (7') feet from the face of a supporting building, but no portion shall
extend nearer than two (2') feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no case shall the awning extend over public property
greater than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the building site.
3205.4 Height. Awnings shall not exceed nine (9') feet in height above the lowest extremity of the awning.
3205.5 Clearances. All portions of any awning shall be at least eight (8') feet above any public walkway.
Exception: Any valance attached to an awning shall not project above the roof of the awning at the point of attachment and shall not extend more
than twelve (12") inches below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, but in no case shall any portion of a valance be less than seven (7')
feet in height above a public way.
Section 3206 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3206 Doors. Doors, either fully opened or when opening, shall not project beyond the property line. Power-operated doors and their guide rails shall
not project over public property.
Section 3207 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3207 Signs. Signs may project beyond the property line as provided in title 10, chapter 4 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 3208 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3208 Flagpoles. Flagpoles, when permitted, shall project no more than two-thirds (2/3) of the distance from the property line to the curb line and
shall not be less than twelve (12') feet above the ground or pavement below, including the flag.
Section 3209 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
3209 Cornices, Lights, And Other Ornamental Projections. Cornices, lights, and other ornamental projections, when permitted, shall project not
more than two (2') feet beyond the property line and shall not be less than eight (8') feet above the ground or pavement below.
Section 3306.4 of the California building code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of section 3306.4 to read as follows:
3306.4 Railings. Railings shall be painted, and maintained painted, in a neutral color.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 387/797
Section 3306.5 of the California building code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of section 3306.5 to read as follows:
3306.5 Barriers And Fences. Barriers and fences shall be painted and maintained painted in a neutral color.
Section 3306.7 of the California building code is hereby amended by adding a sentence at the end of the first paragraph of section 3306.7 to read as
follows:
3306.7 Canopy Lighting. The space under the canopy over the walkway and the approaches thereto shall be kept well lighted with artificial lighting
continuously between sunset and sunrise. An automatic lighting system shall be used.
Chapter 36 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
Chapter 36 Hillside Building District.
3601 Hillside Building District Established. There is hereby established a hillside building district in the area designated as the "hillside building
district" as defined under Hillside Area and Trousdale Estates Area in Beverly Hills municipal code section 10-3-100. The specific regulations in this
chapter shall apply to the hillside building district where slopes exceed three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical or where unstable geological or soil
conditions are known or suspected to exist.
3602 Geological And Foundation Investigations Required.
3602.1 Investigations Required. Prior to issuing a building permit for any new building, structure, or addition to an existing building or structure on a
site in the hillside building district where slopes exceed three (3) horizontal to one vertical or where unstable geological or soil conditions are known
or suspected to exist, a geological and foundation investigation shall be conducted, and a report shall be submitted to the city building official by a
geologist and a civil engineer registered in the state; provided, however, the city building official may issue a building permit for an addition to an
existing building or structure without a geological and foundation inspection if such addition is located so as not to be affected by slopes exceeding
three (3) horizontal to one vertical.
3602.2 Prerequisites To Permit Issuance. Where a geological and foundation investigation required by this section indicates the presence of a
geological hazard, and evidence indicates mitigating measures can offset or eliminate the hazard, the city building official shall issue a building
permit provided all recommended mitigating measures are designed and incorporated into the proposed project and all other requirements of this
code and the municipal code are met.
3602.3 Denial Of Permits. Where a geological and foundation investigation indicates the presence of a geological hazard, and evidence indicates
no mitigating measures can offset or eliminate the hazard, the city building official shall deny the issuance of a building permit for the proposed
project.
3603 Foundation Embedment. Where foundations are placed on natural slopes or uncompacted fill, the foundation shall extend through the natural
overburdened or uncompacted fill and rest in undisturbed, unweathered, firm natural base materials. Foundations shall be designed to resist any
vertical or lateral movement or overburden or fill.
3604 Yard Drainage. Surface runoff flowing or collecting on building pads and yards shall be directed to catch basins and non-erosive devices to
reduce the hazard of erosion, subsidence, or slippage of the surrounding property. Such devices shall conduct any surface runoff to a street or alley
and shall be designed to accommodate a three (3") inch per hour rainfall.
3605 Gutters. Eave gutters and downspouts on structures located in the hillside building district shall be provided to collect all roof water and deposit
it in non-erosive devices to a street or alley. Gutters, downspouts, and non-erosive devices shall be sized to accommodate a three (3") inch per hour
rainfall.
Chapter 37 is added to the California building code to read as follows:
Chapter 37 Additional Requirements In Certain Areas.
3701 Construction Requirements In Commercial And Industrial Zones.
3701.1 Except as provided in section 3702.2, all buildings and structures hereafter erected, constructed, or moved within any commercial or
industrial zone shall be of type I, II-A, or III-A construction, and shall comply with other provisions of this code.
Exception: Any open parking garage of type II-B construction.
3702 Walls And Fences In Commercial And Industrial Zones. Any wall or fence built, constructed, or erected within a commercial or industrial
zone shall be of noncombustible material.
Exceptions:
1. Protective walls or fences erected for the duration of a construction, demolition or alteration operation may be constructed of combustible
material.
2. A temporary wall or fence erected to close the front or rear portion of a business building pending occupancy may be constructed of combustible
material provided such opening is filled entirely. Such enclosure shall be permitted to be used for a period not exceeding one year.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 388/797
Subsection 2 of appendix section J103.2 of the California building code is deleted.
Appendix section J104.3 of the California building code is amended by adding a sentence at the end to read as follows:
J104.3 In addition, the geotechnical report shall specify whether methane hazard exists on site. If methane hazard exists, a California licensed
engineer or geologist shall submit a report to the satisfaction of the city building official which includes, but is not limited to, the results of the
testing procedure and the proposed mitigation measures.
Appendix section J104.5 is added to appendix J of the California building code to read as follows:
J104.5 Slope Failure Reports. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this chapter, the permit applicant shall submit to the building
official a combined soils and engineering geology report to address the slope failure and provide recommended repair methods.
Appendix section J112 is added to appendix J of the California building code to read as follows:
J112 Hazardous Conditions.
J112.1 Notices. Whenever the city building official determines by inspection that any existing excavation or fill or other condition of the soil from
any cause has become a menace to life or limb, or endangers property, or affects the safety, usability, or stability of a public way, the owner of the
property upon which such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil is located, or other person or agent in control of such property, upon receipt
of a notice in writing from the city building official so to do, within ninety (90) days after the date of such written notice, shall repair and reconstruct
such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil so that it conforms to the requirements of this chapter, or otherwise repair, strengthen, or
eliminate such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil in a manner satisfactory to the city building official to eliminate the danger. The city
building official may designate a shorter period of time for elimination of the condition if an imminent and immediate hazard is found to exist.
J112.2 Reports. In the event the owner or other person or agent in control of such property fails to comply with the notice to repair or reconstruct
such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil, the city building official may submit a written report to council requesting authorization to proceed
in performing the work specified in such written notice, and assess the costs of such work as a special assessment against the property.
J112.3 Hearings. Upon the receipt of such a report, the council may fix a time, date, and place for a hearing on such report and any protests or
objections thereto. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing a notice of the hearing shall be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed
to the owner of the property at his last known address, and to each holder of any security interest in the real property.
J112.4 Authorizing Work. On conclusion of the hearing, the council may by resolution confirm the report of the city building official and order the
repair or reconstruction of such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil by the city.
J112.5 Levy And Assessment. Upon the completion of the repair or reconstruction of such excavation, fill, or other condition of the soil by the
city, the city building official will transmit a final statement of the total direct and indirect costs of such work to the council, which will by resolution
fix the time, date, and place for hearing such statement in accordance with the provisions of this code. Upon the date fixed for the hearing, the
council will hear the report of the city building official, together with any objections or protests thereto, and may then by resolution order the costs
of the work to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property. The city clerk will then transmit a copy of the resolution to the
county auditor-collector directing that the amount designated to be collected concurrently with the next installment of real property taxes on the
property involved.
Appendix section J113 is added to appendix J of the California building code to read as follows:
J113 Bonds.
J113.1 Bonds Required. The city building official may require the posting of a bond prior to issuance of a permit where the nature of the work, if
commenced and allowed to remain in an uncompleted state, would create a hazard to human life or endanger adjoining or other property, any street
or street improvement, or any other public property. The bond shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of eliminating any dangerous
condition or geological hazard if the project is not properly performed or is not completed in a timely manner. The bond shall comply with the
provisions of title 3, chapter 4 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
J113.2 Right Of Entry. In the event of any default in any performance of any term or condition of the permit for the work, the surety, or any person
employed or engaged on its behalf, or the city building official, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, shall have the right to go upon the
premises to complete the required work or make it safe.
J113.3 Interference Prohibited. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or from any such premises by any authorized
representative or agent of any surety or of the city engaged in completing the work required to be performed under the permit or in complying with
the terms or conditions thereof.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-203: MASSING MODEL FEE:
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building designated in subsection B of this section unless the applicant has paid a massing
model fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. In addition, no building permit shall be issued for alteration of the configuration of
the shell of any building designated in subsection B of this section unless the applicant has paid a massing model fee in an amount established by
resolution of the city council. Provided, however, that neither alteration to the facade of the building, nor the addition, removal, or alteration of awnings
or marquees shall be considered an alteration of the configuration of the shell for the purpose of this section.
The massing model fee shall be used to prepare a model of the building being constructed or altered. The model will update the city's massing model
of the areas designated in subsection B of this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 389/797
B. This section shall apply to construction of, and alteration to:
1. Buildings located in the area bounded by and including Santa Monica Boulevard, Crescent Drive, and the lots abutting the southerly side of Wilshire
Boulevard; and
2. Buildings located in the area bounded by and including Santa Monica Boulevard, Civic Center Drive, Burton Way, Maple Drive, and Beverly
Boulevard. (Ord. 02-O-2414, eff. 12-19-2002; amd. Ord. 10-O-2597, eff. 1-1-2011)
Article 2A. California Residential Code
9-1-2A01: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California residential code, excluding all appendices except appendix V, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the provisions
of section 9-1-2A02 of this chapter, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the residential code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff.
1-20-2017)
9-1-2A02: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE:
The California residential code adopted pursuant to section 9-1-2A01 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section R101.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R101.1 Title. For the city of Beverly Hills, these regulations shall be known as the Beverly Hills Residential Code. The provisions contained in the
California residential code of the (compiled) California building standards code as defined in section 18910, Health And Safety Code, may be cited as
such and are referred to hereafter as `these regulations' or `these building standards' or `this code.' These regulations shall also be collectively
known as the `California residential code' as amended by the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section R301.1.3.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R301.1.3.2 Woodframe Structures. The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed
architect or engineer for all dwellings of woodframe construction more than two stories and basement in height located in seismic design category A,
B or C. Notwithstanding other sections of law; the law establishing these provisions is found in Business And Professions Code section 5537 and
6737.1.
The building official shall require construction documents to be approved and stamped by a California licensed architect or engineer for all dwellings
of woodframe construction more than one story in height or with a basement located in seismic design category D0, D1, D2 or E.
Section R301.1.4 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R301.1.4 Seismic Design Provisions For Buildings Constructed On Or Into Slopes Steeper Than One Unit Vertical In Three Units Horizontal
(33.3 Percent Slope). The design and construction of new buildings and additions to existing buildings when constructed on or into slopes steeper
than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33.3 percent slope) shall comply with section 1613.9 of the building code.
Items 1, 3 and 5 of section R301.2.2.2.5 of the California residential code are amended to read as follows:
1. Where exterior shear wall lines or braced wall panels are not in one plane vertically from the foundation to the uppermost story in which they are
required.
3. When the end of a braced wall panel occurs over an opening in the wall below.
5. Where portions of a floor level are vertically offset.
Section R301.2.2.3.8 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R301.2.2.3.8 Anchorage Of Mechanical, Electrical, Or Plumbing Components And Equipment. Mechanical, electrical, or plumbing components
and equipment shall be anchored to the structure. Anchorage of the components and equipment shall be designed to resist loads in accordance with
the California building code and ASCE 7, except where the component is positively attached to the structure and flexible connections are provided
between the component and associated ductwork, piping, and conduit; and either
1. The component weighs 400 lb (1780 N) or less and has a center of mass located 4 ft (1.22 m) or less above the supporting structure; or
2. The component weighs 20 lb (89 N) or less or, in the case of a distributed system, 5 lb/ft (73 N/m) or less.
Section R313.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 390/797
R313.1 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be required for all
occupancies, except U occupancies which are sheds that are less than five hundred (500) square feet.
Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all existing buildings if: (i) additions, alterations or repairs are made within any twelve (12)
month period which exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of such existing building, (ii) an addition is constructed which exceeds fifty percent (50%)
of the square footage of the existing building, or (iii) an addition of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet is constructed.
R313.1.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses.
R313.1.2 Design And Installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems for townhouses shall be designed and installed in accordance with
section R313.3, NFPA 13 or NFPA 13D.
Section R313.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R313.2 One- And Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems. An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in one- and twofamily
dwellings.
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already
provided with an automatic residential sprinkler system.
R313.2.1 Design And Installation. Automatic residential fire sprinkler systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with section R313.3,
NFPA 13, or NFPA 13D.
Section R313.3.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R313.3.1 General. Where installed, residential fire sprinkler systems, or portions thereof, shall be in accordance with NFPA 13D, NFPA 13, or
section R313.3, which shall be considered equivalent to NFPA 13D. Section R313.3 shall apply to stand-alone and multipurpose wet-pipe sprinkler
systems that do not include the use of antifreeze. A multipurpose fire sprinkler system shall supply domestic water to both fire sprinklers and
plumbing fixtures. A stand-alone sprinkler system shall be separate and independent from the water distribution system.
Section R313.3.1.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R313.3.1.1 Backflow Protection. Two check valves are required to be installed at each fire sprinkler riser in NFPA 13D systems and an approved
backflow assembly (DCDA, DCVA, or RPZ) for NFPA 13 systems.
Section R313.3.1.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R313.3.1.2 Required Sprinkler Locations. Sprinklers shall be installed to protect all areas of a dwelling unit.
Section R314.2.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R314.2.2 Alterations, Repairs And Additions. When alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or when one or more sleeping rooms
are added or created in existing dwellings, the dwelling shall be equipped with smoke alarms located as required for new dwellings. Smoke alarms
complying with section R314 shall be installed in all new and existing dwellings.
Section R314.6 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R314.6 Power Source. Smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring is served from a commercial
source, and when primary power is interrupted, shall receive power from a battery. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.
Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than those required for overcurrent protection. Smoke alarms shall be
interconnected.
Exceptions:
1. Smoke alarms shall be permitted to be battery operated when installed in buildings without commercial power.
2. Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where the alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for hard
wiring and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
Section R314.4 of the California residential code is hereby deleted.
Section R319.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 391/797
R319.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address numbers or letters. Each character shall be not
less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height for residential properties and a minimum of 6 inches high for non-residential properties and not less than 0.5
inch (12.7 mm) in width. They shall be installed on a contrasting background and be plainly visible from the street or road fronting the property. When
required by the city building official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where
access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or
means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
R319.1.1 Street Identification. The following provisions shall be applicable to street numbering:
1. On the east-west axis, all numbers shall sequence, as much as practicable, with the contiguous east-west streets abutting Los Angeles city and
county.
2. On the north-south axis, streets north of Wilshire Boulevard shall be designated with the prefix "North," and streets south of Wilshire Boulevard
shall be designated with the prefix "South."
3. Numbers on the northerly and westerly sides of all streets shall end in an odd digit, while numbers on the southerly and easterly sides shall end
in an even digit.
4. The city building official shall designate street address numbers in the city.
R319.1.2 Building Numbering Requirements. The entrances to all buildings from public streets shall have the numbers designated by the city
building official conspicuously displayed near the entrance of the structure in a manner that they are in plain view from the street. Structures which
have access from a rear alley, in addition to the numbering required by this section, shall for purposes of emergency response, provide numbering
and street identification which is clearly visible from the rear alley access in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The name of the street and street number as designated by the city building official shall be visible from the alley and located adjacent to the
alley access to the structure.
2. The address markings shall be placed five (5') feet above the alley surface, with numbers four (4") inches in height and letters two (2") inches in
height, and placed upon the structure, wall, fence, gate, or other appropriate surface so as to be clearly visible.
3. If any property owner shall fail to provide the address identification required by this subsection on the premises, the city may provide and affix
such address identification markings at no cost to the property owner. Where identification markings are provided by the city, no person shall
remove, deface, or modify such markings without the written authorization of the city building official.
4. When structure access doors are available from the alley or side street for a single tenant or occupant, the door shall be provided with address
numbering and street name identification including unit numbers or letters in a manner approved by the city fire code official.
R319.1.3 Diagram Required For Six Or More Dwelling Units. Where a building or building complex contains six (6) or more separate dwelling
units, a description diagram indicating the identification pattern and location of each dwelling unit shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at the
primary entrance of such building or buildings. This requirement of this section shall be included in any building plans submitted for plan check.
R319.1.4 Prohibition Against Placing Numbers On Streets, Sidewalks, Or Curbs Or Displaying Improper Building Numbers. No person shall
place, maintain, or cause any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design, or other marking upon, or paint, any street, sidewalk, or curb in the city,
except as authorized by the city. No person shall place, maintain, or display any address identification number other than as designated by the city
building official.
Section R324.7 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R324.7 Access And Pathways. Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements shall be provided in accordance with sections R324.7.1 through
R324.7.2.7.
Exceptions:
1. Detached, parking shade structures, carports, solar trellises and similar structures.
2. Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements need not be provided where an alternative ventilation method approved by the enforcing
agency has been provided or where the enforcing agency has determined that vertical ventilation techniques will not be employed.
Section R401.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for buildings. In
addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard areas as established by table R301.2(1) shall
meet the provisions of section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AWC PWF.
Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:
1. In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof.
2. When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15 240 mm).
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 392/797
Wood foundations in seismic design category D0, D1 or D2 shall not be permitted.
Exception: In non-occupied, single-story, detached storage sheds and similar uses other than carport or garage, provided the gross floor area
does not exceed 200 square feet, the plate height does not exceed 12 feet in height above the grade plane at any point, and the maximum roof
projection does not exceed 24 inches.
Section R401.4.3 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R401.4.3 Grading. For the requirements for grading see appendix J of the 2016 edition of the California building code as amended by section 9-1-
202 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3.6 and R403.1.5 of the California residential code are amended to read as follows:
R403.1.2 Continuous Footing In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 And D2. Exterior walls of buildings located in seismic design categories D0,
D1 and D2 shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings
located in seismic design categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported on continuous foundations.
R403.1.3.6 Isolated Concrete Footings. In detached one- and two-family dwellings located in seismic design category A, B, or C that are three
stories or less in height and constructed with stud bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are permitted.
R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall not have a slope exceeding one unit vertical in 10
units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footings or
where the slope of the bottom surface of the footings will exceed one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).
For structures located in seismic design categories D0, D1 or D2, stepped footings shall be reinforced with four no. 4 rebar. Two bars shall be place at
the top and bottom of the footings as shown in figure R403.1.5.
Figure R403.1.5
Stepped Footing
Section R404.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls. Wood foundation walls shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of sections R404.2.1 through
R404.2.6 and with the details shown in figures R403.1(2) and R403.1(3). Wood foundation walls shall not be used for structures located in seismic
design category D0, D1 or D2.
Section R501.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R501.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the floors for buildings, including the floors of attic
spaces used to house mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment. Mechanical or plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be attached (or
anchored) to the structure in accordance with section R301.2.2.3.8.
Section R503.2.4 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R503.2.4 Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms. Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular to the joist that is greater than 4
feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in accordance with figure R503.2.4.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 393/797
a. Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.
b. Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)] by 1.5 inches (38 mm) wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the
header-joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 psi (227 MPa).
c. Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with section R301.2.2.2.5.
Figure R503.2.4
Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms
Footnote "j" is added to lines 35 and 36 of table R602.3(1) of the California residential code to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 394/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 395/797
Footnote "b" of table R602.3(2) of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
b. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 7/16-inch on diameter except as noted. Use of staples in roof, floor, subfloor, and braced wall panels
shall be prohibited in seismic design category D0, D1, or D2.
Section R602.10.2.3 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R602.10.2.3 Minimum Number Of Braced Wall Panels. Braced wall lines with a length of 16 feet (4877 mm) or less shall have a minimum of two
braced wall panels of any length or one braced wall panel equal to 48 inches (1219 mm) or more. Braced wall lines greater than 16 feet (4877 mm)
shall have a minimum of two braced wall panels. No braced wall panel shall be less than 48 inches in length in seismic design category D0, D1, or
D2.
Table R602.10.3(3) of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 396/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 397/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 398/797
Table R602.10.4 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 399/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 400/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 401/797
Figure R602.10.6.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 402/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 403/797
Figure R602.10.6.2 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
Figure R602.10.6.4 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 404/797
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 405/797
Section R606.4.4 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R606.4.4 Parapet Walls. Unreinforced solid masonry parapet walls shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick and their height shall not exceed
four times their thickness. Unreinforced hollow unit masonry parapet walls shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) thick, and their height shall not
exceed three times their thickness. Masonry parapet walls in areas subject to wind loads of 30 pounds per square foot (1.44 kPa) or located in
seismic design category D0, D1 or D2, or on townhouses in seismic design category C shall be reinforced in accordance with section R606.12.
Table R602.10.5 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 406/797
Section R606.12.2.2.3 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R606.12.2.2.3 Reinforcement Requirements For Masonry Elements. Masonry elements listed in section R606.12.2.2.2 shall be reinforced in
either the horizontal or vertical direction as shown in figure R606.11(3) and in accordance with the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 407/797
1. Horizontal Reinforcement. Horizontal joint reinforcement shall consist of at least one no. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm).
Horizontal reinforcement shall be provided within 16 inches (406 mm) of the top and bottom of these masonry elements.
2. Vertical Reinforcement. Vertical reinforcement shall consist of at least one no. 4 bar spaced not more than 48 inches (1219 mm). Vertical
reinforcement shall be within 16 8 inches (406 mm) of the ends of masonry walls.
The exception set forth in section R602.3.2, and table R602.3.2, of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
Exception: A In other than seismic design category D0, D1 or D2, a single top plate used as an alternative to a double top plate shall comply
with the following:
1. The single top plate shall be tied at corners, intersecting walls, and at in-line splices in straight wall lines in accordance with table R602.3.2.
2. The rafters or joists shall be centered over the studs with a tolerance of not more than 1 inch (25 mm).
3. Omission of the top plate is permitted over headers where the headers are adequately tied to adjacent wall sections in accordance with table
R602.3.2.
Section R803.2.4 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R803.2.4 Openings In Horizontal Diaphragms. Openings in horizontal diaphragms shall conform with section R503.2.4.
Section R902.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R902.1 General. Except as otherwise provided in this section, roof coverings or roof assemblies on any structure regulated by this code shall be a
fire-retardant roof covering or roof assembly that is listed as a class A assembly in accordance with ASTM E 108 or UL 790. In addition, no wood
shall be used as a roof covering material. Noncombustible non-wood roof coverings may be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's
requirements in lieu of a fire-retardant roofing assembly.
Exception: Roof repairs of less than 10 percent of the total roof area on existing structures in any one year period may be repaired with a roof
covering that meets the same fire retardant standard as the existing roof.
Sections R902.1.1, R902.1.2 and R902.1.3 of the California residential code are hereby deleted.
Section R902.1.5 is added to California residential code to read as follows:
R902.1.5 Class A Roof Covering Requirement. Notwithstanding any other requirement of the Beverly Hills municipal code, no later than July 1,
2014, all wood roof coverings in the city of Beverly Hills shall be either: (1) fire retardant class A; or (2) treated with a fire retardant spray in
accordance with section R902.1.6 and section R902.1.7.
Exceptions:
1. Demolition Or Renovation Permit. Property owners with a non-class A wood roof that, as of July 1, 2014, have applied for or possess a
demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof, shall have until December 31, 2014 to commence
such demolition or renovation and remove the non-class A wood roof; provided however, that such property owner shall submit a signed affidavit, on
a form provided by the city, representing that the non-class A wood roof will be removed by December 31, 2014.
2. Qualified Historical Building Or Property. A qualified historical building or property, as defined in the California historical building code adopted
by reference into the Beverly Hills municipal code, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the California historical building code, as adopted
and amended by the city of Beverly Hills.
Section R902.1.6 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R902.1.6 Fire Retardant Spray For Non-Class A Wood Roofs. If a fire retardant spray is applied on a non-class A wood roof pursuant to section
R902.1.5 above, such fire retardant spray shall comply with the current standards of the California state fire marshal, including but not limited to
ASTM E-84, NFPA 255 and UL 723, and shall be applied by a California licensed contractor, or other qualified applicator. The property owner and
certified applicator shall submit a signed affidavit on a form provided by the city indicating the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 408/797
the certified applicator's warranty period. The fire retardant spray shall be repeated before the end of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness
period or the certified applicator's certification warranty, whichever is shorter; provided, however, that the fire retardant spray need not be repeated if,
before the end of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period or certified applicator's warranty period, a property owner has applied for or
possesses a demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof, and commences such demolition or
renovation and removes the non-class A wood roof within 180 days from the expiration of such effectiveness or warranty period; provided further
however, that the property owner shall submit a signed affidavit, on a form provided by the city, representing that such property owner is not
repeating the fire retardant spray because the non-class A wood roof will be removed within 180 days from the expiration of the manufacturer's
recommended effectiveness period or certified applicator's warranty period, whichever is earlier, of the existing spray.
Section R902.1.7 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R902.1.7 Permits Required. No fire retardant spray shall be applied on a non-class A wood roof within the city without first obtaining a permit from
the city. There will be no charge for such permit, which shall remain valid for the term of the manufacturer's recommended effectiveness period or the
certified applicator's certification warranty, whichever is shorter. The permit shall state the name of the certified applicator, the approved fire retardant
spray material and the permit expiration date. Before a property owner repeats the fire retardant spray in accordance with section R902.1.6, such
property owner shall renew the permit obtained pursuant to this section.
Section R902.1.8 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R902.1.8 Replacement Of Non-Class A Wood Roofs Upon Sale Or Transfer. Notwithstanding section R902.1.5 of the California residential code
as amended, effective after July 1, 2014, all existing non-class A wood roofs shall be replaced with a fire retardant class A non-wood roof before the
sale or transfer of such property for monetary consideration.
Exceptions:
1. Buyer Assumes Responsibility. If the seller and the buyer agree that the buyer shall assume responsibility to replace the wood roof and an
application for a demolition permit or renovation permit involving a reroofing or an alteration or addition to the roof will be submitted, and such
demolition or renovation will commence, and such non-class A wood roof will be removed, within 180 days from the date of title transfer, then the
non-class A wood roof need not be replaced before the sale or transfer of such property, but shall be removed by the buyer within the 180 day period
from the date of title transfer; provided further, that the seller and buyer of such property shall submit a signed affidavit, on a form provided by the
city, representing that the buyer will remove the non-class A wood roof within 180 days from the date of title transfer.
2. Qualified Historical Building Or Property. A qualified historical building or property, as defined in the California historical building code adopted
by reference into the Beverly Hills municipal code, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the California historical building code, as adopted
and amended by the city of Beverly Hills.
Section R902.5 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
R902.5 Equipment Enclosures. Operating equipment, including associated ducting, located on the roof of a building shall be enclosed so as to be
shielded from view in a horizontal plane or lower and so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of title 5, chapter 1 of the Beverly Hills
municipal code. The enclosure finish shall match that of the building exterior walls. Enclosures on buildings with non-residential uses shall be of noncombustible,
opaque material.
Section R1001.3.1 of the California residential code is amended to read as follows:
R1001.3.1 Vertical Reinforcing. For chimneys up to 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, four no. 4 continuous vertical bars adequately anchored into the
concrete foundation shall be placed between wythes of solid masonry or within the cells of hollow unit masonry and grouted in accordance with
section R609. Grout shall be prevented from bonding with the flue liner so that the flue liner is free to move with thermal expansion. For chimneys
more than 40 inches (1016 mm) wide, two additional no. 4 vertical bars adequately anchored into the concrete foundation shall be provided for each
additional flue incorporated into the chimney or for each additional 40 inches (1016 mm) in width or fraction thereof.
Chapter 11 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
Chapter 11 Roof Top Equipment.
R1101.1 Equipment Enclosures. Operating equipment, including associated ducting, located on the roof of a building shall be enclosed so as to be
shielded from view in a horizontal plane or lower and so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of title 5, chapter 1 of the Beverly Hills
municipal code. The enclosure finish shall match that of the building exterior walls.
Chapter 12 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
Chapter 12 Tents, Awnings, Canopies, And Umbrellas.
R1201 Tents, Awnings, Canopies, And Umbrellas - Requirements.
R1201.1 Permits Required. No tent, awning, or canopy in excess of forty (40) square feet shall be erected or maintained on private property within
the city without first obtaining a permit from the city building official. The permit fee shall be as established by resolution of the city council. Unless
otherwise authorized by the city building official, no tent, awning, or canopy in excess of forty (40) square feet shall be erected or maintained on
private property within the city in excess of ten (10) days.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 409/797
R1201.2 Temporary Use. Tents, awnings, or canopies of cloth or pliable material shall be erected only as temporary shelters from the rain or sun
and shall not be used as permanent structures or additions to the main building. Except as authorized by the city council or as otherwise specified in
the municipal code, such structures shall not be used for the purpose of sheltering goods, wares, or merchandise or for the purpose of engaging in
business in any manner thereunder. Such structures shall be permitted only if so constructed and situated, so that in the opinion of the city building
official, the structure will not cause a fire hazard or in any other way be dangerous to life, limb, or property.
Exception: The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the covering of materials stored in a yard with fire-retardant tarpaulins.
R1201.3 Restrictions And Requirements. Any tent, awning, or other pliable material for which a permit is required under this section shall comply
with the following:
1. All city code provisions and regulations shall be complied with;
2. An electrical permit shall be obtained by a duly licensed electrical contractor for any wiring or lighting to be installed;
3. All plastics used shall display approval by the office of the fire marshal of the state;
4. All cloth used shall be incombustible or flame-retardant. Flame-retardant materials shall display the name of the treating agency, the date of the
flame-retardant application, the type of flame-retardant used, and the flame-retardant certificate;
5. A testing flap shall be provided for the use of the fire department inspector;
6. Two (2) means of egress shall be provided for tents or canopies having an area of 1,000 square feet or more. Such means of egress shall be
not less than five (5') feet in width and located not less than one-fifth (1/5) of the perimeter of the structure apart. Each means of egress shall be
provided with exit signs as required by this code.
Chapter 13 is added to the California residential code as follows:
Chapter 13 Permanent Occupancy Of Public Property.
R1301 General.
R1301.1 No part of any structure, or any appendage thereto, shall project beyond the property line of the building site, except as specified in this
chapter and elsewhere in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
R1301.2 Structures or appendages regulated by this code shall be constructed of materials as permitted by this code.
R1301.3 The projection of any structure or appendage shall be the distance measured horizontally from the property line to the outermost point of
the projection.
R1301.4 No provision of this chapter shall be construed to permit the violation of other laws and ordinances regulating the use and occupancy of
public property.
R1302 Below Grade.
R1302.1 Below Grade. Portions of buildings or structures below grade shall not project beyond the property line of the building site except as
otherwise provided in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
R1303 Above Grade.
R1303.1 Streets And Alleys In Residential Zones. Projections beyond property lines adjacent to streets and alleys in residential zones shall not be
permitted.
Chapter 14 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
Chapter 14 Pedestrians.
R1401 Protection Of Pedestrians.
R1401.1 Railings shall be painted, and maintained painted, in a neutral color.
R1401.2 Barriers and fences shall be painted, and maintained painted in a neutral color.
R1401.3 The space under the canopy over the walkway and the approaches thereto shall be kept well lighted with artificial lighting continuously
between sunset and sunrise. An automatic lighting system shall be used.
Chapter 15 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
Chapter 15 Hillside Building District.
R1501 Hillside Building District Established. There is hereby established a hillside building district in the area designated in the `hillside building
district map' as set forth in this code. The specific regulations in this chapter shall apply to the hillside building district.
R1502 Geological And Foundation Investigations Required.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 410/797
R1502.1 Investigations Required. Prior to issuing a building permit for any new building, structure, or addition to an existing building or structure on
a site in the hillside building district where slopes exceed three (3) horizontal to one vertical or where unstable geological or soil conditions are known
or suspected to exist, a geological and foundation investigation shall be conducted, and a report shall be submitted to the city building official by a
geologist and a civil engineer registered in the state; provided, however, the city building official may issue a building permit for an addition to an
existing building or structure without a geological and foundation inspection if such addition is located so as not to be affected by slopes exceeding
three (3) horizontal to one vertical.
R1502.2 Prerequisites To Permit Issuance. Where a geological and foundation investigation required by this section indicates the presence of a
geological hazard, and evidence indicates mitigating measures can offset or eliminate the hazard, the city building official shall issue a building
permit provided all recommended mitigating measures are designed and incorporated into the proposed project and all other requirements of this
code and the municipal code are met.
R1502.3 Denial Of Permits. Where a geological and foundation investigation indicates the presence of a geological hazard, and evidence indicates
no mitigating measures can offset or eliminate the hazard, the city building official shall deny the issuance of a building permit for the proposed
project.
R1503 Foundation Embedment. Where foundations are placed on natural slopes or un-compacted fill, the foundation shall extend through the
natural overburdened or un-compacted fill and rest in undisturbed, un-weathered, firm natural base materials. Foundations shall be designed to resist
any vertical or lateral movement or overburden or fill.
R1504 Yard Drainage. Surface runoff flowing or collecting on building pads and yards shall be directed to catch basins and non-erosive devices to
reduce the hazard of erosion, subsidence, or slippage of the surrounding property. Such devices shall conduct any surface runoff to a street or alley
and shall be designed to accommodate a three (3") inch per hour rainfall.
R1505 Gutters. Eave gutters and downspouts on structures located in the hillside building district shall be provided to collect all roof water and
deposit it in non-erosive devices to a street or alley. Gutters, downspouts, and non-erosive devices shall be sized to accommodate a three (3") inch
per hour rainfall.
Chapter 16 is added to the California residential code to read as follows:
Chapter 16 Additional Requirements In Certain Areas.
R1601 Special Regulations In Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. The following special regulations shall be applicable to all building and
structures used for human occupancy in the very high fire hazard severity zone as defined in the city's fire code.
R1601.1 Exterior walls and eaves shall be of one-hour fire-resistive construction.
Exception: Exterior walls products listed in the Cal-fire wildland urban interface (WUI) products - building materials listing program. Listed products
must comply with state fire marshal standard 12-7A-1.
R1601.2 Buildings or structures constructed over slopes shall have all under-floor and deck areas enclosed, and such enclosures shall be of onehour
fire resistive construction.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 3. California Electrical Code
9-1-301: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California electrical code, including all annexes except annex H, is hereby adopted by reference, and the same shall be known and
may be cited as the electrical code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-302: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE:
The California electrical code is hereby amended as follows:
Subsection 690.13 (A) in the California electrical code is amended to read as follows:
690.13 (A) Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location either on the outside of a building or structure or
inside the nearest point of entrance of the system conductors.
Exception: Installations that comply with 690.31(G) shall be permitted to have the disconnecting means located remote from the point of entry of
the system conductors.
The PV system disconnecting means shall not be installed in bathrooms. Roof mounted PV arrays shall have an electrical disconnect provided within
three-feet (3') from the PV array or before the circuit conduit enters the building structure. A separate disconnect shall be provided for an array
separated by more than six-feet (6') in any direction to another PV array.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 4. California Mechanical Code
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 411/797
9-1-401: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California mechanical code, including all of the appendices except A and E, is hereby adopted by reference, and the same shall be
known and may be cited as the mechanical code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 5. California Plumbing Code
9-1-501: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California plumbing code, including all of the appendices except C, F, and L thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the
provisions of section 9-1-502 of this chapter, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the plumbing code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-
2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-502: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE:
The California plumbing code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 612.3.8 is amended to read as follows:
612.3.8 Backflow Protection. Two check valves are required to be installed at each fire sprinkler riser in NFPA 13D systems and an approved
backflow assembly (DCDA, DCVA, or RPZ) for NFPA 13 systems.
Section D101.1 and table D101.1 (for California) as set forth in Appendix D of the California plumbing code are amended to read as follows:
D101.1 Maximum Rates Of Rainfall For Various Cities.
The rainfall rates in table D101.1 shall be used for design unless higher values are established locally.
TABLE D-101.1
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES
States And Cities
Storm Drainage
60-Minute Duration, 100-Year Return
Inches Per Hour Gallon Per Minute
Per Square Foot
CALIFORNIA
Beverly Hills 3.0 0.031
Eureka 1.5 0.016
Lake Tahoe 1.3 0.014
Los Angeles 2.0 0.021
Lucerne Valley 2.5 0.026
Needles 1.5 0.016
Palmdale 3.0 0.031
Redding 1.5 0.016
San Diego 1.5 0.016
San Francisco 1.5 0.016
San Luis Obispo 1.5 0.016
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 6. Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa And Hot Tub Code
9-1-601: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE:
The uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code, 2012 edition, except for part 1 thereof, published by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the provisions of section 9-1-602 of this chapter, and the same may be cited as the
swimming pool, spa and hot tub code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 13-O-2650, eff. 1-1-2014)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 412/797
9-1-602: AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL, SPA AND HOT TUB CODE:
Section 101.4.1 of the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code is amended to read as follows:
101.4.1 The provisions of this code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocations, replacement, addition to, use, and
maintenance of swimming pools, spas, or hot tub systems within one and two single family residential properties.
Section 301.5 is added to the uniform swimming pool, spa and hot tub code to read as follows:
301.5 Swimming Pool Safety Act. Whenever a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool, toddler pool, or spa, or any
building permit is issued for remodeling of an existing swimming pool, toddler pool, or spa, at a private, single family home, it shall be equipped with
a drowning prevention safety feature and all requirements of the swimming pool safety act as identified by California Health And Safety Code
sections 115920-115929.
(Ord. 13-O-2650, eff. 1-1-2014)
Article 7. Uniform Solar Energy Code
9-1-701: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM SOLAR ENERGY CODE:
The 2012 edition of the uniform solar energy code, including the appendices thereto, published by the International Association Of Plumbing And
Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted by reference and the same shall be known and may be cited as the solar energy code of the city of Beverly Hills.
(Ord. 13-O-2650, eff. 1-1-2014)
Article 8. Code For The Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
9-1-801: TITLE:
These regulations shall be known as the CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, may be cited as such, and will be referred to
herein as "this code". (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-802: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this code to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy
provided by the building code, housing code or otherwise available by law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life,
limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.
The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially
protected or benefited by the terms of this code.
B. Scope: The provisions of this code shall apply to all dangerous buildings and structures, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may
hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-803: ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS, AND REPAIRS:
All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be subject to the provisions of the existing building
code. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-804: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administration: The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the power to render
interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions.
Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.
B. Inspections: The health officer, the fire marshal and the building official are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may
be required to enforce the provisions of this code.
C. Right Of Entry: When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the building official or the building official's
authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, or may exist, in an occupied or unoccupied building or upon a premises a
condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official
may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that credentials be presented
to the occupant, entry requested, and consent to entry is given by someone having apparent authority to provide such consent.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 413/797
If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
"Authorized representative" shall include the officers named in section 9-1-104 of this chapter and their authorized inspection personnel.
D. Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings: All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as
defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with
the procedure specified in this code.
E. Violations: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy
or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.
F. Inspection Of Work: All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and section 9-1-111 of this chapter and the building code.
G. Hearing Officer:
1. General: In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the director of building and safety relative to the
application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a hearing officer position designated by the city manager who is
qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who has no involvement in the enforcement of this
article. The hearing officer may adopt rules of procedure for conducting his or her business and shall render all decisions in writing to the appellant,
with a duplicate copy to the director of building and safety. Appeals to the hearing officer shall be processed in accordance with the provisions
contained in this article. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the hearing officer shall be delivered to the director of building and safety, who
shall make them freely accessible to the public.
2. Limitations Of Authority: The hearing officer shall have no authority relative to interpretation and enforcement of the administrative provisions of this
code nor shall the officer be empowered to waive requirements of this code. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-805: DEFINITIONS:
A. General: The definitions in article 1 of this chapter, and those stated in this section shall apply to this code. For the purpose of this code, certain terms,
phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as also specified in the building code and the housing code.
Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. "Webster's Third New
International Dictionary Of The English Language, Unabridged", copyright 1986, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words
used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the
masculine.
B. Definition Of Dangerous Building:
DANGEROUS BUILDING: Any building or structure, or portion thereof, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described
constitutes a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its
occupants are endangered.
1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
2. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to
not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
3. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (11/2) times the
working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
4. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for
new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
5. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
6. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or
is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (1/2) of that specified in the building code
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings.
7. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.
8. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: a) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; b) faulty construction; c) the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; d) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of
its foundation; or e) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
9. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
10. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (1/3) of the base.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 414/797
11. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty three percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or fifty percent (50%) damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls, or
12. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become: a) an attractive nuisance to children; b) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to c) enable persons to resort thereto for the
purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.
13. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to
such building or structure provided by the technical codes of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or
ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
14. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty six percent (66%) of the: a) strength,
b) fire resisting qualities or characteristics, or c) weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
15. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.
16. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire
resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard,
or pursuant to the Beverly Hills municipal code.
17. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
18. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-806: NOTICES AND ORDERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL:
A. Commencement Of Proceedings: When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that
such building is a dangerous building, the building official may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.
B. Notice And Order: The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:
1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.
2. A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the
building dangerous under the provisions of subsection 9-1-805B of this chapter.
3. A statement of the action(s) required to be taken as determined by the building official.
a. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time
as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
b. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.
c. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within
such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be
secured therefor within sixty (60) days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official
shall determine is reasonable.
4. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified,
the building official: a) will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and b) may proceed to
cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.
5. Statements advising: a) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of
the director of building and safety to the hearing officer, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the director of
building and safety within thirty (30) days from the date of service of such notice and order; and b) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all
right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
C. Service Of Notice And Order: The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and
posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the building official or disclosed from official public
records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder
of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the building official to serve any person
required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any
duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.
D. Method Of Service: Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice
and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized
assessment roll of the county or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a
copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 415/797
The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in
the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.
E. Proof Of Service: Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury
executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt
card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official.
F. Recordation Of Notice And Order: If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely
filed, the building official may file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying: 1) that the building is a
dangerous building and 2) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building
demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate
with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer
dangerous, whichever is appropriate.
G. Repair, Vacation And Demolition: The following standards shall be followed by the director of building and safety in ordering the repair, vacation or
demolition of any dangerous building or structure:
1. Any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one of the following:
a. The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current technical codes; or
b. The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or
c. If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained
against entry.
d. If a building is vacated and secured against entry indicated in subsection G1c of this section, the entire premises where such building is located
shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 7 of the Beverly Hills municipal code. Unless otherwise approved by the
building official, the repairs or demolition of such building shall be commenced within a period not exceeding ninety (90) days from its vacation,
unless the building official authorizes a longer period in writing of cause. If the repairs or demolition are not commenced as indicated, the building
shall then be considered a public nuisance and be abated as provided for in the provision of section 5-7-8 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
2. If the building or structure, or portion thereof, is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public
or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated and then be repaired or demolished as indicated in subsection G1d of this section. The emergency
powers set forth in subsection 9-1-105N of this chapter shall apply in such instances.
H. Notice To Vacate:
1. Notice: Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in this section, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be
in substantially the following form:
ORDER TO VACATE/ORDER TO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice, or to violate an Order to Vacate and/or Order to Not Enter.
Building Official
City of Beverly Hills
2. Compliance: Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under subsection
B of this section, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building
which has been so posted. The building official may, prior to a rescission of an order to vacate and/or an order to not enter, authorize persons in
writing to enter such premises for the purpose of abating dangerous or unlawful conditions therein, and to impose conditions on such entries. No
person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a
certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. No person shall violate an order to vacate and/or an order to not
enter, or any condition of an authorized entry. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-807: APPEALS:
A. Form Of Appeal: Any person entitled to service under subsection 9-1-806C of this chapter may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the
building official under this code by filing at the development services division ("division") a written appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the hearing officer of the City of Beverly Hills".
2. A caption reading: "Appeal of........", giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal.
3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.
4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the
contentions of the appellant.
5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be
reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.
7. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
The appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the service of such order or action of the building official; provided, however, that if
the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 416/797
and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with subsection 9-1-806C of this chapter such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days from the
date of the service of the notice and order of the building official.
B. Processing Of Appeal: Upon receipt of a timely appeal filed pursuant to this section, an informal hearing shall be scheduled to occur before a hearing
officer who shall be appointed by the city manager or designee and who shall be any person having no involvement with the division's issuance of a
notice under this article.
C. Scheduling And Noticing Appeal For Hearing: The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the division's receipt of a timely appeal. Written notice of
the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the building official by first
class mail. Failure of any person to receive a properly addressed notice pursuant to this section shall not affect any appeal hearing.
D. Effect Of Failure To Appeal: Failure of any person to file a timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of this section shall constitute
a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof. In that event, the notice and order shall
be final.
E. Scope Of Hearing On Appeal: Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
F. Staying Of Order Under Appeal: Except for vacation orders made pursuant to subsection 9-1-806H of this chapter, enforcement of any notice and order
of the building official issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. (Ord. 16-O-
2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-808: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
A. General:
1. Record: A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the hearing officer.
2. Reporting: The proceedings at the hearing shall also be reported by a phonographic reporter if requested by any party thereto. A transcript of the
proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor. Such fees shall be as established
by the city council resolution.
3. Continuances: The hearing officer may grant continuances that are requested by an applicant from the division for good cause shown.
4. Oaths; Certification: In any proceedings under this chapter, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to
official acts.
5. Reasonable Dispatch: The hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him or her. Due regard shall be
shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives.
B. Form Of Notice Of Hearing: The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information:
You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the hearing officer at on the day of , 20 , at the hour , concerning your appeal. You may be
present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity
to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you.
C. Conduct Of Hearing:
1. Rules: Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence.
2. Oral Evidence: Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
3. Hearsay Evidence: Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in
itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
4. Admissibility Of Evidence: Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely
in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such
evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
5. Exclusion Of Evidence: Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
6. Rights Of Parties: Each party shall have these rights, among others:
a. To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
b. To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
c. To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;
d. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify;
e. To rebut the evidence; and
f. To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 417/797
7. Official Notice:
a. When Taken: In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may
be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of the board or departments and ordinances of the city or rules and regulations
of the hearing officer.
b. Parties To Be Notified: Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters shall be noted in the record,
referred to therein, or appended thereto.
c. Opportunity To Refute: Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by
evidence or by written or oral presentation of authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the hearing officer.
d. Inspection Of The Premises: The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing,
provided that: 1) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made, 2) the parties are given an opportunity to be
present during the inspection, and 3) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed
and the conclusions drawn therefrom. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer.
D. Method And Form Of Decision: The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the
requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be served upon the appellant(s) and the division by first class mail. The effective date of
the decision shall be as stated therein. A decision is final. Failure to comply with a decision constitutes a violation of this code. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-
20-2017)
9-1-809: ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND SAFETY OR THE HEARING OFFICER:
A. Compliance:
1. General: After any order of the director of building and safety, or hearing officer shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order, or who maintains a dangerous
building, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Maintenance of a dangerous building constitutes an unlawful public nuisance and a violation of this code.
Persons responsible therefor are subject to any remedy set forth in the Beverly Hills municipal code.
2. Failure To Obey Order: If, after any order of the director of building and safety made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom
such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may: a) cause such person to be prosecuted under this
subsection A or b) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 7
of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
3. Failure To Commence Work: Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within thirty (30) days after any final notice and order
issued under this code becomes effective:
a. The director of building and safety shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a
notice reading:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
ORDER TO VACATE / ORDER TO NOT ENTER
DO NOT OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice, or to violate an Order to Vacate and/or an Order to Not Enter.
Director of Building and Safety
City of Beverly Hills
b. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such
notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the director of building and safety have been completed and a certificate of
occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. No person shall violate an order to vacate and/or an order to not enter.
c. The director of building and safety may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary
to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to
cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and cleanup of the lot. Any
such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner outlined in title 5, chapter 7 of the
Beverly Hills municipal code.
B. Extension Of Time To Perform Work: Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such person
to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the director of building and safety may grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional one
hundred twenty (120) days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the director of building and safety determines that such
an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The director of building and safety's authority to
extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and
order.
C. Interference With Repair Or Demolition Work Prohibited: No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered
repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the
provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate
in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the
provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-810: CITY PERFORMANCE OF WORK OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 418/797
A. General:
1. Procedure: Upon an owner's failure to abate a dangerous building in a timely manner, as determined by the building official, that official may initiate
an administrative action pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of the Beverly Hills municipal code to establish the city's right to abate unlawful conditions.
Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by said official, or he/she may employ consultants as deemed reasonably necessary to abate a
dangerous building.
2. Costs: The cost of such abatement actions shall be paid from the repair and demolition fund, and may be made a special assessment or a nuisance
abatement lien against the property involved. The city's abatement cost shall also constitute a personal obligation of the property owner(s).
B. Repair And Demotion Fund:
1. General: The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the repair and demolition fund. Payments
shall be made out of said fund upon the demand of the director of building and safety to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by
this jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings.
2. Transfers: The legislative body may at any time transfer to the repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund of this jurisdiction,
such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of repair or demolition, and any sum so transferred shall be
deemed a loan to the repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for. All funds collected
under the proceedings hereinafter provided for shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition
fund. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 9. Uniform Housing Code
9-1-901: ADOPTION OF UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
There is hereby adopted by reference the 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code published by the International Conference of Building Officials, except
for chapter 16; and the sections and chapters of the state housing law under which local agencies act as the enforcement authority, except for such
portions as amended by section 9-1-902 of this article. (Ord. 02-O-2414, eff. 12-19-2002)
9-1-902: AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM HOUSING CODE:
The Uniform Housing Code adopted pursuant to section 9-1-901 of this article is hereby amended as follows:
Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 203 Hearing Officer.
203.1 General.
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Director of Building and Safety relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a hearing officer position designated by the City Manager who is qualified by
experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who is not an employee of the City. The hearing officer shall
adopt rules of procedure for conducting his or her business and shall render all decisions in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the
Director of Building and Safety. Appeals to the hearing officer shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 1201 of this
code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the hearing officer shall be delivered to the Director of Building and Safety, who shall make them
freely accessible to the public.
Section 203.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
203.2 Limitations of Authority.
The hearing officer shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the officer be empowered to
waive requirements of this code.
Section 401 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended by amending the following definition:
Health officer is the Director of Building and Safety or his or her designee.
Paragraph No. 5 of Section 1101.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
5. Statements advising (i) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action
of the Director of Building and Safety to the Hearing Officer, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the director
of Building and Safety within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right
to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.
Paragraph No. 1 of Section 1201.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
1. A heading in the words: "Before the hearing officer of the City of Beverly Hills"
Section 1201.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
1201.2 Processing of Appeal.
Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the Director of Building and Safety shall present it at the next regular or special meeting with
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 419/797
the hearing officer.
Section 1201.3 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
1201.3 Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing.
As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the hearing officer shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date
shall not be less than 10 days from the date the appeal was filed and no more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the Director of
Building and Safety. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each of the
appellant by the Director of building and Safety either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a
copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.
Section 1301 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1301 General
1301.1 Record.
A record of the entire proceeding shall be made by tape or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the hearing
officer.
1301.2 Reporting.
The proceedings at the hearing shall be also be reported by a phonographic reporter if requested by any party thereto. A transcript of the
proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of fees prescribed therefor. Such fees shall be as established by
the City Council Resolution.
1301.3 Continuances.
The hearing officer may grant continuances for good cause shown.
1301.4 Oaths-Certification.
In any proceeding under this chapter, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
1301.5 Reasonable Dispatch.
The hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him or her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience
and necessity of any parties or their representatives.
Section 1302 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1302 Form of Notice of Hearing.
The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information: "You are hereby notified that a hearing will be
held before the hearing officer at .......... on the ............... day of .............., 20....., at the hour .........., upon the notice and order served upon you. You
may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full
opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefor with the hearing officer.
Section 1303.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1303.1 Filing of Affidavit.
The hearing officer may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a
hearing upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefor
which states the name and address of the proposed witness; specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to
the issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need not be issued when the
affidavit is defective in any particular.
Section 1303.2 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1303.2 Cases Referred to the Hearing Officer.
In cases where a hearing is referred to the hearing officer, all subpoenas shall be obtained through the hearing officer.
Section 1304.7.1 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1304.7.1. What may be noticed.
In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact, which may be judicially
noticed by the courts of this state, or of official records of the department and ordinances of the City.
Section 1304.7.3 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1304.7.3 Opportunity to refute.
Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable opportunity, on request, to refute the officially noticed matters by evidence or by written or
oral presentation of authority, the manner of such refutation to be determined by the hearing officer.
Section 1304.7.4 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1304.7.4 Inspection of the premises.
The hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such
inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made, (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection, and
(iii) the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 420/797
Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the hearing officer.
Section 1305 of the Uniform Housing Code is hereby amended as follows:
SECTION 1305 METHOD AND FORM OF DECISION
Section 1305.1 Hearing before Board Itself. Deleted
Section 1305.2 Hearing by the Examiner. Deleted
Section 1305.3 Consideration of Report by Board - Notice. Deleted
Section 1305.4 Exception to Report. Deleted
Section 1305.5 Disposition by the Board. Deleted
Section 1305.6 Proposed Decision Not Adopted. Deleted
Section 1305.7 Form Of Decision.
The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be complied with.
A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
Section 1305.8 Effective Date Of Decision.
The effective date of the decision shall be as stated therein.
The title of chapter 14 of the uniform housing code is hereby amended as follows:
Chapter 14 Enforcement Of The Order Of The Director Of Building And Safety Or The Hearing Examiner.
Section 1401.1 of the uniform housing code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1401.1 General.
After any order of the director of the building and safety or the hearing officer made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to
whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Section 1401.2 of the uniform housing code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1401.2 Failure To Obey Order.
If, after any order of the director of building and safety made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall
fail, neglect, or refuse to obey such order, the director of building and safety may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under section 1401.1 or (ii)
institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 7 of the Beverly Hills
municipal code.
Paragraph no. 3 of section 1401.3 of the uniform housing code is hereby amended as follows:
3. The director of building and safety may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary
to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, or
removal of the materials, rubble and debris and cleanup of the lot. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof
paid and recovered in the manner outlined in title 5, chapter 7 of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 1502.1 of the uniform housing code is hereby amended as follows:
Section 1502.1 General.
The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the repair and demolition fund. Payments shall be
made out of said fund upon the demand of the director of building and safety to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by this
jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings.
(Ord. 02-O-2414, eff. 12-19-2002)
Article 10. Diversion Of Construction And Demolition Debris
9-1-1001: DIVERSION REQUIREMENTS:
To ensure that the city meets the statutory obligations imposed by the California integrated waste management act (AB 939), the director of building and
safety, in issuing permits for construction, renovation, and demolition projects of a specified magnitude, is authorized to impose and to enforce
requirements related to the salvaging, recycling, and reuse of construction and demolition debris. Those requirements will be established by resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 03-O-2436, eff. 1-15-2004)
Article 11. California Green Building Standards Code
9-1-1101: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California green building standards code, including the appendices thereto, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 421/797
provisions of section 9-1-1102 of this chapter, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the green building standards code of the city of Beverly
Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-1102: AMENDMENTS TO CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
The California green building standards code adopted pursuant to section 9-1-1101 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 102.1.1 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
102.1.1 Electronic Construction Documents. The enforcing agency is authorized to require construction documents, including plans, to be
submitted in an acceptable electronic format.
Section 202 of the California green building standards code is amended by adding a new definition to read as follows:
Landscape Area. The entire lot, including, water features such as pools, spas, ponds, and fountains. `Landscaped area' shall not include the
building footprint, driveways, non-irrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas.
Section 202 of the California green building standards code is amended by adding a new definition to read as follows:
Sustainability. Consideration of present development and construction impacts on the community, the economy, and the environment without
compromising the needs of the future.
Section 4.106.5 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
4.106.5 Landscape Design. Landscaping completed prior to the final inspection shall accomplish one or more of the following:
1. Areas disrupted during construction are restored to be consistent with native vegetation species and patterns.
2. Limit turf areas to the greatest extent possible.
3. Utilize at least 75% native Californian or drought tolerant plant and tree species appropriate for the climate zone region.
4. Hydrozoning irrigation techniques are incorporated into the landscape design.
Section 4.107 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
4.107 Prewiring For Future Solar. Install conduit from the building roof or eave to a location within the building identified as suitable for future
installation of a charge controller (regulator) and inverter.
4.107.1 Off-Grid Prewiring For Future Solar. If battery storage is anticipated, conduit should run to a location within the building that is stable,
weather-proof, insulated against very hot and very cold weather and isolated from occupied spaces.
Section 4.304.2 of the California green building standards code is added to read as follows:
4.304.2 Metering Outdoor Water Use. A landscape water meter provided by the city of Beverly Hills shall be installed for landscape irrigation for the
following:
New construction projects with aggregate landscape area over 500 square feet.
Any construction project for which a new water meter is being requested.
When required by the California department of water resources model water efficient landscape ordinance.
Section 4.305 of the California green building standards code is added to read as follows:
4.305 Water Reuse Systems.
4.305.1 Cooling Towers [N]. Cooling towers shall comply with section 4.305.1.1 or 4.305.1.2.
4.305.1.1 Existing Buildings. Buildings with existing cooling towers shall install cooling towers of a minimum of 6 cycles of concentration
(blowdown) or better upon replacement.
4.305.1.2 New Buildings. New buildings with cooling towers shall install cooling tower types with a minimum of 6 cycles of concentration (blowdown)
or better.
Table 5.106.5.3.3 of the California green building standards code is amended to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 422/797
TABLE 5.106.5.3.3
Total Number Of Actual Parking Spaces Number Of Required EV Charging Spaces
0-9 1
10-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 4
76-100 5
101-150 7
151-200 10
201 and over 6 percent of total1
1. Calculation for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
Section 5.106.11 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
5.106.11 Prewiring For Future Solar. Install conduit from the building roof or eave to a location within the building identified as suitable for future
installation of a charge controller (regulator) and inverter.
Section 5.106.12 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
5.106.12 Off-Grid Prewiring For Future Solar. If battery storage is anticipated, conduit should run to a location within the building that is stable,
weather-proof, insulated against very hot and very cold weather and isolated from occupied spaces.
Section 5.304.7 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
5.304.7 Metering Outdoor Water Use. A landscape water meter provided by the city of Beverly Hills shall be installed for landscape irrigation for the
following:
New construction projects with aggregate landscape area over 500 square feet.
Any construction project for which a new water meter is being requested.
When required by the California department of water resources model water efficient landscape ordinance.
Section 5.305 is added to the California green building standards code to read as follows:
5.305 Water Reuse Systems.
5.305.1 Cooling Towers. Cooling towers shall comply with section 5.305.1.1 or 5.305.1.2.
5.305.1.1 Existing Buildings. Buildings with existing cooling towers shall install cooling towers of a minimum of 6 cycles of concentration
(blowdown) or better upon replacement.
5.305.1.2 New Buildings [N]. New buildings with cooling towers shall install cooling tower types with a minimum of 6 cycles of concentration
(blowdown) or better.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 12. California Energy Code
9-1-1201: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California energy code is hereby adopted by reference, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the energy code of the
city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 13. California Historical Building Code
9-1-1301: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 423/797
The 2016 edition of the California historical building code is hereby adopted by reference, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the historical
building code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 14. California Existing Building Code
9-1-1401: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California existing building code is hereby adopted by reference, excluding sections 1.8.4 through 1.8.10, 1.9.2, chapter 1, division
II, sections 317 through 323, and appendix chapter A4, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the existing building code of the city of Beverly
Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 15. California Referenced Standards Code
9-1-1501: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California referenced standards code is hereby adopted by reference, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the
referenced standards code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Article 16. International Property Maintenance Code
9-1-1601: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The 2015 edition of the international property maintenance code published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to
the amendments set forth in section 9-1-1602 of this chapter, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the property maintenance code of the city
of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-1-1602: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
The international property maintenance code adopted pursuant to section 9-1-1601 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code Of The City Of Beverly Hills, hereinafter referred to as `this code'.
Section 102.3 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
102.3 Application Of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the California building code, California residential code, California existing building code, California mechanical code,
California plumbing code, California electrical code, California fire code, California energy code and California green building standards code.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Beverly Hills municipal code.
Section 103.5 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated
by the Beverly Hills municipal code and/or the adopted schedule of taxes, fees and charges.
Section 108.1 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or
it is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code and provisions of the city of Beverly Hills abatement of
dangerous buildings code.
Section 111 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
111 Means Of Appeal.
111.1 Application For Appeals. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have
the right to appeal to the director of the department, city manager, and city council, respectively. Appeals for unsafe and dangerous buildings shall be
in accordance with the city of Beverly Hills code for the abatement of dangerous buildings and the Beverly Hills municipal code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 424/797
Section 202 of the international property maintenance code is amended by adding the following definitions:
International Building Code shall mean the California building code.
International Energy Conservation Code shall mean the California energy code.
International Existing Building Code shall mean the California existing building code.
International Fire Code shall mean the California fire code.
International Mechanical Code shall mean the California mechanical code.
International Plumbing Code shall mean the California plumbing code.
International Residential Code shall mean the California residential code.
NFPA 70 shall mean the California electrical code.
Section [F]702.4 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
[F]702.4 Emergency Escape Openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the
time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the
use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are not permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings.
Section [F]704.2.2 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
[F]704.2.2 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in group
R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the
individual unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon
activation of one alarm. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. When lowvoltage
systems are required, the fire official may require additional sounder bases installed. Low voltage systems shall be installed per NFPA 72 fire
alarm system requirements.
Exceptions:
Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection
without the removal of interior finishes.
Section [F]704.2.3 of the international property maintenance code is amended to read as follows:
[F]704.2.3 Power Source. In existing construction, new construction, and in newly classified group R occupancies, required smoke alarms shall
receive their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery
backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as
required for overcurrent protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
Exceptions specifically for properties regulated by California residential code:
Smoke alarms shall be permitted to be battery operated when installed in buildings without commercial power.
Interconnection of smoke alarms in existing areas shall not be required where the alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall
or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for hard wiring
and interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Chapter 2
FIRE CODE
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE:
The 2016 edition of the California fire code, including appendices B, BB, C, CC, D, F, and H, is hereby adopted by reference, subject to the amendments
set forth in section 9-2-2 of this chapter, and the same shall be known and may be cited as the fire code of the city of Beverly Hills. (Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-
20-2017)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO FIRE CODE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 425/797
The fire code adopted pursuant to section 9-2-1 of this chapter is hereby amended as follows:
Section 104.3 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
104.3 Right Of Entry. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever the fire code official has
reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon any premises any conditions or violations of this code which make the building or
premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the fire code official shall have the authority to enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
or to perform the duties imposed upon the fire code official by this code. If such building or premises is occupied, the fire code official shall present
credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the fire code official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the fire code official has recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
104.3.1 Warrant. When the fire code official has first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, an owner or
occupant or person having charge, care or control of the building or premises shall not fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to
permit entry therein by the fire code official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code.
Section 104.12 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
104.12 Fire Prevention Bureau Personnel And Police. The chief and members of the fire prevention bureau shall each have the powers of a police
officer in performing their duties under this code as follows:
1. Members of the fire department may act as peace officers only as permitted by section 830.37 of the California Penal Code. All members of the fire
department with the rank of captain or above and all members of the fire prevention bureau who are peace officers as defined in section 830.37 of the
Penal Code and members who have been designated by the fire chief as arson investigators and who have satisfactorily completed the courses of training
required by section 832 of the Penal Code are designated as peace officers for the purposes of section 171c, 171d, 25450, 25455 and 25850 of the Penal
Code while engaged as members of an arson investigating unit, regularly employed and paid as such, in the detection and apprehension of persons who
have violated or who are suspected of having violated any fire law, or while exclusively engaged in the enforcement of law as relating to fire prevention and
fire suppression.
2. When requested to do so by the chief, the chief of police is authorized to assign such available police officers as necessary to assist the fire department
in enforcing the provisions of this code.
Section 106.1 of the California fire code is adopted without modification as published, to read as follows:
106.1 Inspection Authority. The fire code official is authorized to enter and examine any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises in
accordance with section 104.3 for the purpose of enforcing this code.
Section 106.2.3 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
106.2.3 Annual Inspection. All properties located in the very high fire hazard severity zone as identified by the Beverly Hills high fire severity zone shall
be inspected annually for compliance with state and local brush clearance requirements by the fire official.
All B and M occupancies and other occupancies as determined by the fire code official, shall be inspected at least once in a 2 year period but not more
than once a year for state and local fire life safety requirements by the fire code official. Certain occupancies, as determined by the fire code official, shall
be inspected annually.
Exception: Compliance verification inspections frequency to be determined by the fire official as needed.
Section 107.3 of the California fire code is adopted as published without modification to read as follows:
107.3 Recordkeeping. A record of periodic inspections, test, servicing and other operations and maintenance shall be maintained on the premises or
other approved location for not less than 3 years, or a different period of time where specified in this code or referenced standards. Records shall be made
available for inspection by the fire code official, and a copy of the records shall be provided to the fire code official upon request.
The fire code official is authorized to prescribe the form and format of such recordkeeping. The fire code official is authorized to require that certain
required records be filed with the fire code official.
Section 109.4 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
109.4 Violation Penalties And Citations. Persons operating or maintaining an occupancy, premises or vehicle or performing work which requires a
permit by this code, who allow a hazard to exist or fail to take immediate action to abate a hazard on such occupancy, premises or vehicle or who fail to
obtain a permit prior to start of work which requires such a permit under this code, when ordered or notified to do so by the chief, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
109.4.1 Abatement Of Violation. In addition to the imposition of the penalties herein described, the fire code official is authorized to institute appropriate
action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; or to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an
illegal act, conduct business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises.
Section 110.1.3 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
110.1.3 Warning Signs. Whenever the chief shall determine that warning signs are required in the protection of persons or property from injury due to
unauthorized entry into dangerous structures or buildings, he shall order such buildings or structures adequately posted with signs reading, "WARNING
UNSAFE DO NOT ENTER BY ORDER OF THE BEVERLY HILLS FIRE DEPARTMENT."
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain within any such posted structures or building, except that public officers acting in the course of duty,
and representatives of public or private utilities, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
Section 113.1 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
113.1 Fees. A permit, required by this code, shall not be issued until the fees have been paid to the city, nor shall an amendment to a permit be released
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 426/797
until the additional fee, if any, has been paid in accordance with the adopted schedule of fees and charges.
Section 113.5 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
113.5 Refunds. The applicable governing body authority is authorized to establish a refund policy. The refund policy shall be as is established by section
9-1-110 of the Beverly Hills administrative code.
Chapter 3 of the California fire code is adopted in its entirety excluding sections 307.2, 308.1.4, 310, 315.2.
Section 304.1.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
304.1.2 Vegetation. Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property, shall be cut down and removed by the
owner or occupant of the premises. Vegetation clearance requirements shall be in accordance with chapter 49.
[California code of regulation, title 19, division 1, §3.07(b)] Clearances.
(b) Ground Clearance. The space surrounding every building or structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following:
Any person that owns, leases, controls, operates, or maintains any building or structure in, upon, or adjoining any mountainous area or forest-covered
lands, brush covered lands, or grass-covered lands, or any land which is covered with flammable material, shall at all times do all of the following:
(1) Maintain around and adjacent to such building or structure a firebreak made by removing and clearing away, for a distance of not less than 30 feet on
each side thereof or to the property line, whichever is nearer, all flammable vegetation or other combustible growth. This section does not apply to single
specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery, or similar plants which are used as ground cover, if they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from
the native growth to any building or structure.
(2) Maintain around and adjacent to any such building or structure additional fire protection or firebreak made by removing all brush, flammable vegetation,
or combustible growth which is located from 30 feet to 100 feet from such building or structure or to the property line, whichever is nearer, as may be
required by the enforcing agency if he finds that, because of extra hazardous conditions, a firebreak of only 30 feet around such building or structure is not
sufficient to provide reasonable fire safety. Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet from such building or structure and less than 18 inches in
height above the ground may be maintained where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion.
(3) Remove that portion of any tree which extends within 10 feet of the outlet of any chimney or stovepipe.
(4) Cut and remove all dead or dying portions of trees located adjacent to or overhanging any building.
(5) Maintain the roof of any structure free of leaves, needles, or other dead vegetative growth.
(6) Provide and maintain at all times a screen over the outlet of every chimney or stovepipe that is attached to any fireplace, stove, or other device that
burns any solid or liquid fuel. The screen shall be constructed of nonflammable material with openings of not more than 1/2 inch in size.
(7) Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structures shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and
regulations:
(A) Public Resources Code section 4291.
(B) California code of regulations, title 14, division 1.5, chapter 7, subchapter 3, section 1299 (see guidance for implementation "General Guideline To
Create Defensible Space").
(C) California Government Code section 51182.
(D) California code of regulations, title 24, part 9, chapter 49.
Section 308.1.6.4 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
308.1.6.4 Open Flame Gas Fired Decorative Torches. Open flame decorative appliances shall comply with section 308.2 and the following
requirements:
308.1.6.4.1 Installation.
1. All torch burner heads shall be approved by the fire department or shall be listed by an approved testing laboratory or agency. Torch burner heads shall
be installed a minimum of eight feet from the ground level.
2. A radius of ten feet shall be maintained between the torch burner and combustible materials, including all vegetation.
3. Torch flames shall not exceed 24" inches in length, except by special approval of the fire department. Every burner shall be equipped with an approved
automatic pilot light and manually controlled shutoff valve located in the main gas supply line.
4. An approved shutoff valve shall be located at or near the base of the torch, and a labeled secondary shutoff valve shall be located at an easily
accessible remote location.
5. Minimum pipe size of torch standard shall be 1 inch. If length of torch standard exceeds 8 feet, pipe size shall be not less than 11/2 inches.
6. If torch is exposed to mechanical damage or vehicular traffic, adequate protection shall be provided. Torch standards mounted on the ground shall be
imbedded 12 inches into a 15 inch cube of concrete or such other standards that will resist equal force.
Section 308.2.1 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
308.2.1 Open Flame Gas Fired Decorative Torches. Open flame decorative appliances shall comply with section 308.1.6.4 and the following approval
and permit requirements:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 427/797
1. Applicant shall first apply to the Beverly Hills community development department, building and safety for a permit application, and submit two (2) sets of
scale drawings, showing building, property line and public ways. Location of remote shutoff valves should also be shown.
2. Applicant shall submit one (1) copy of plans to the fire department for approval. The torch location, piping, shut offs and clearances shall be shown.
3. If the torch body or flame extends over a public street or sidewalk, applicant shall submit plans for approval to the community development department,
building and safety.
4. Any electrical wiring shall be installed under electrical permit obtained from community development department, building and safety division.
Section 503 of the California fire code is adopted.
Section 504.1 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
504.1 Required Access. Exterior doors and openings required by this code shall be maintained readily accessible for emergency access by the fire
department. An approved access walkway leading from fire apparatus access roads to exterior openings shall be provided when required by the fire code
official. Required access shall have locks with exterior key access and an approved, exterior, door opening hardware. Keys for required access shall be
made readily available with a fire department knox box.
[California Code Of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, §3.05(b)] Fire Department Access And Egress. (Roofs)
(b) Roofs. No person shall install or maintain any security barrier such as barbed wire fencing, razor wire fencing, chain link fencing or any other fencing
material, cable, aerial, antenna or other obstruction on the roof of any commercial establishment in such a manner as to obstruct or render egress or
access hazardous in the event of fire or other emergency.
Exception: Guy wire, rods and aerial antenna masts may be attached to a roof structure having a slope of less than 30 degrees provided there is full
clearance of seven feet or more between the roof and said obstruction. Guy wire or rods required to support aerial or antenna masts may be attached to a
roof structure a lateral distance from the mast not in excess of one-sixth the height of the mast.
Section 505.1 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
505.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address numbers or letters. Each character shall be not less
than 4 inches (102 mm) in height for residential properties and a minimum of 6 inches high for non-residential properties and not less than 0.5 inch
(12.7 mm) in width. They shall be installed on a contrasting background and be plainly visible from the street or road fronting the property. When required
by the city fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by
means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used
to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
505.1.1 Building Numbering Requirements. The entrances to all buildings from public streets shall have the numbers designated by the city building
official conspicuously displayed near the entrance of the structure in a manner that they are in plain view from the street. Structures which have access
from a rear alley, in addition to the numbering required by this section, shall for purposes of emergency response, provide numbering and street
identification which is clearly visible from the rear alley access in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The name of the street and street number as assigned by the city building official shall be visible from the alley and located adjacent to the alley access
to the structure.
2. The address markings shall be placed five (5') feet above the alley surface, with numbers four (4") inches in height and letters two (2") inches in height,
and placed upon the structure, wall, fence, gate, or other appropriate surface so as to be clearly visible.
3. If any property owner shall fail to provide the address identification required by this subsection on the premises, the city may provide and affix such
address identification markings at no cost to the property owner. Where identification markings are provided by the city, no person shall remove, deface, or
modify such markings without the written authorization of the city fire code official.
4. When structure access doors are available from the alley or side street for a single tenant or occupant, the door shall be provided with address
numbering and street name identification including unit numbers or letters in a manner approved by the city fire code official.
Section 506.1.3 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
506.1.3 Locks And Key Switches. An approved key switch or pad lock shall be installed on motorized or lockable gates, perimeter fencing or similar
barricades that obstruct access to a property when required by the fire code official.
Section 604.5.2 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
604.5.2 State Mandated Annual Hi-Rise Inspections. During all state mandated annual hi-rise inspections, main power shall be disconnected from the
building, and the on-site stand-by or emergency generator shall be run during the entire inspection to verify transfer switch operation and the illumination of
all exit signs, means of egress lighting, and all other emergency power loads.
Subsection 901.2.2 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
901.2.2 Hydraulic Water Calculations. All fire sprinkler systems shall be designed with a 10% safety factor for hydraulic water calculations.
Section 903.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
903.2 Where Required.
A. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be required for all occupancies, except detached storage sheds that are
less than five hundred (500) square feet which do not store motor vehicles.
B. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required in all existing buildings if: (i) additions, alterations or repairs are made within any twelve (12)
month period which exceed fifty percent (50%) of the value of such existing building, (ii) an addition is constructed which exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
square footage of the existing building, or (iii) an addition of more than five thousand (5,000) square feet is constructed.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 428/797
C. Areas occupied by the following existing occupancies shall have installed an automatic fire extinguishing system in compliance with this code:
(1). Throughout all existing eating establishments having a floor area in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet, including all related floor area
including but not limited to food preparation and waiting areas.
(2). Throughout bowling alleys.
(3). Throughout public assembly occupancies having an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more persons. If such occupancies are located above the
first floor, the floors below shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system; provided further, public assembly occupancies of three hundred (300) or
more persons placed in buildings existing prior to August 19, 1976, shall not be required to provide an automatic fire-extinguishing system in floors below
such occupancy.
(4). Throughout hotels except those areas used exclusively for lodging.
(5). Throughout retail sales rooms classified as group M and S occupancies if the floor area of all floors exceeds twelve thousand (12,000) square feet,
and in group M and S retail sales and storage occupancies more than three (3) stories in height, and in group M and S occupancies, if such occupancies
are located within the same building or structure as group R-1 occupancies. The area of mezzanines shall be included in determining the areas where
sprinklers are required.
(6). Nightclubs and discos in rooms primarily used for entertaining occupants who are drinking or dining and unseparated accessory uses where the total
area of such unseparated rooms and assembly uses exceeds three thousand (3,000) square feet. For uses to be considered "separated," the separation
shall be not less than is required for a one-hour occupancy separation.
(7). In every story or basement of all buildings if the floor area exceeds fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet and there is not provided at least twenty (20)
square feet of opening entirely above the adjoining ground level in each 50 linear feet or fraction thereof of exterior wall in the story or basement on at
least one side of the building. Openings shall have a minimum dimension of not less than thirty (30) inches. Such openings shall be accessible to the fire
department from the exterior and shall not be obstructed in a manner that fire fighting or rescue cannot be accomplished from the exterior. When openings
in a story are provided on only one side and the opposite wall of such story is more than seventy-five (75) feet from such openings, the story shall be
provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system, or openings as specified above shall be provided on at least two sides of an exterior wall of the
story.
(8). In rooms where nitrate film is stored and handled.
(9). In protected combustible fiber storage vaults as defined in the fire code.
D. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be required for new ambulatory health care facilities (as that term is defined herein) located in an existing
building or portion thereof, and that are classified as a business group B or institutional group I-2.1 occupancy.
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10 of the California fire code (and the subsections therein) are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section 903.2.11 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
903.2.11 Specific Building Areas And Hazards. In all occupancies an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed for building design or hazards in the
location set forth in section 903.2.11.1 through 903.2.11.11.
Section 903.2.11.7 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.2.11.7 Elevator Pits. Approved automatic sprinklers shall be provided in new elevator pits.
Section 903.2.11.8 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.2.11.8 Storage And Use Of Nitrate Film. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new and existing rooms where nitrate film is
stored and handled.
Section 903.2.11.9 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.2.11.9 Fiber Storage Vaults. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in new and existing combustible fiber storage vaults as defined in the
fire code.
Section 903.2.11.10 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.2.11.10 Bowling Alleys. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new and existing bowling alleys.
Section 903.2.11.11 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.2.11.11 Balconies And Decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior overhangs, balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of all
structures that project outward more than 4 feet of exterior wall of the floor immediately below the projection. Balconies and decks built onto a nonsprinklered
structure that projects outward more than 4 feet of exterior wall of the floor immediately below the projection shall be sprinklered.
Section 903.3.1.2 including subsections 903.3.1.2.1 and 903.3.1.2.2 of the California fire code, are deleted and replaced with the following:
903.3.1.2 NFPA 13R Sprinkler Systems. This section including subsections are deleted. NFPA 13R systems are not allowed in the city of Beverly Hills.
Section 903.3.1.3.1 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
903.3.1.3.1 Double Check Valve. Two check valves are required to be installed at each fire sprinkler riser in NFPA 13D systems and an approved
backflow assembly (DCDA, DCVA, or RPZ) for NFPA 13 systems.
Section 903.3.1.3.2 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 429/797
903.3.1.3.2 Fire Sprinkler Riser Assemblies. Where fire sprinklers are required, each separate structure shall have fire sprinkler riser assembly with a
main control valve, separate domestic valves, identification signage, and exterior horn strobe(s). Appropriate spare sprinklers and wrenches shall be
provided in an approved box and location.
Section 903.3.7 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location and size of fire department connection shall be approved by the fire code official and the connection
shall be installed in accordance with section 912.
Section 903.4 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
903.4 Sprinkler System Supervision And Alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler systems, pumps,
tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all NFPA 13 and 13D sprinkler systems shall have all valves locked
in the open position as required by the fire official and be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. Where the combination of new and
existing sprinkler systems totaling 20 sprinkler heads or more on one property are being modified or altered, the entire sprinkler system shall be monitored
off-site by an approved supervising station (central, remote or proprietary).
Exceptions:
1. New and existing sprinkler systems with a combined total of 19 heads or less on one property.
2. Electrical supervision of valves on 13D systems shall not be required.
Section 903.4.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
903.4.2 Alarms. Approved interior audible and audible/visible devices shall be connected to every NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler system in an
approved location(s). Approved, exterior audible/visible devices shall be connected to every NFPA 13 and 13D automatic sprinkler system and installed in
an approved location(s). Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest
orifice size installed in the system. Where a building fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire
alarm system. Approved alarm notification appliances shall be provided throughout as required by the fire code official.
Section 905.11 of the California fire code is added to read as follows:
905.11 Existing Buildings. Existing structures with occupied floors located 3 or more stories above or below the lowest level of fire department access
shall be equipped with standpipes installed in accordance with section 905. The standpipes shall have an approved fire department connection with hose
connections at each floor level above or below the lowest level of fire department access. The fire code official is authorized to approve the installation of
manual standpipe systems to achieve compliance with this section where the responding fire department is capable of providing the required hose flow at
the highest standpipe outlet.
Section 907.2.10.3 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
Section 907.2.10.3 Smoke Alarms. Listed single- and multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 for all new and existing R-occupancies shall
be installed as described in sections 907.2.11.1 through 907.2.11.8 and NFPA 72.
Section 907.2.11.5 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
907.2.11.5 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit in group R
occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual
unit. Physical interconnection of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are installed and all alarms sound upon activation. The
alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. When low-voltage systems are required, the
fire official may require additional sounder bases installed. Low voltage systems shall be installed per NFPA 72 fire alarm system requirements.
Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling
finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the
removal of interior finishes.
Section 907.2.11.6 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
907.2.11.6 Power Source. In existing construction, new construction, and in newly classified group R occupancies, required smoke alarms shall receive
their primary power from the building wiring where such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke
alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
Exception: Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system.
Section 907.5.2.6 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
907.5.2.6 All Use Areas. Visible alarm notification appliances shall be provided in all occupied rooms where ambient noise impairs hearing of the fire
alarm including but not limited to residential home theaters, public dressing, changing or fitting rooms with full height doors or curtains that obstruct seeing
the visible notification appliances, or businesses with rooms where patients await medical care or consultation is provided.
Section 1008.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
1008.2 Illumination Required. The means of egress serving a room or space shall be illuminated at all times that the room or space is occupied.
Exceptions:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 430/797
1. Aisle accessways in group A.
2. Dwelling units and sleeping units in groups R-1, R-2 and R-3.
3. Sleeping units in group I, R-2.1 and R-4 occupancies.
1008.2.1 Illumination Level Under Normal Power. The means of egress illumination level shall be not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking
surface.
Exception: For auditoriums, theaters, concert or opera halls and similar assembly occupancies, the illumination at the walking surface is permitted to be
reduced during performances by one of the following methods provided that the required illumination is automatically restored upon activation of a
premises' fire alarm system:
1. Externally illuminated walking surfaces shall be permitted to be illuminated to not less than 0.2 footcandle (2.15 lux).
2. Steps, landings and the sides of ramps shall be permitted to be marked with self-luminous materials in accordance with sections 1025.2.1, 1025.2.2 and
1025.2.4 by systems listed in accordance with UL 1994.
1008.2.2 Exit Discharge. In group I-2 occupancies where two or more exits are required, on the exterior landings required by section 1010.6.1, means of
egress illumination levels for the exit discharge shall be provided such that failure of any single lighting unit shall not reduce the illumination level on that
landing to less than 1 footcandle (11 lux).
Section 1008.3 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
1008.3 Emergency Power For Illumination. The power supply for means of egress illumination shall normally be provided by the premises' electrical
supply.
1008.3.1 General. In the event of power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two or more means of egress, an emergency electrical system
shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Aisles.
2. Corridors.
3. Exit access stairways and ramps.
4. Parking garages.
1008.3.2 Buildings. In the event of power supply failure in buildings that require two or more means of egress, an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
1. Interior exit access stairways and ramps.
2. Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps.
3. Exit passage ways.
4. Vestibules and areas on the level of discharge used for exit discharge in accordance with section 1028.1.
5. Exterior landings as required by section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways that lead directly to the exit discharge.
1008.3.3 Rooms And Spaces. In the event of power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following
areas:
1. Electrical equipment rooms.
2. Fire command centers.
3. Fire pump rooms.
4. Generator rooms.
5. Public restrooms with an area greater than 300 square feet (27.87 m2).
1008.3.4 Duration. The emergency power system shall provide power for a duration of not less than 90 minutes and shall consist of storage batteries, unit
equipment or an on-site generator. The installation of the emergency power system shall be in accordance with section 2702.
1008.3.5 Illumination Level Under Emergency Power. Emergency lighting facilities shall be arranged to provide initial illumination that is not less than an
average of 1 footcandle (11 lux) and a minimum at any point of 0.1 footcandle (1 lux) measured along the path of egress at floor level. Illumination levels
shall be permitted to decline to 0.6 footcandle (6 lux) average and a minimum at any point of 0.06 footcandle (0.6 lux) at the end of the emergency lighting
time duration. A maximum-to-minimum illumination uniformity ratio of 40 to 1 shall not be exceeded. In group I-2 occupancies, failure of any single lighting
unit shall not reduce the illumination level to less than 0.2 foot-candle (2.2 lux).
Section 1010.1.9.12 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
1010.1.9.12 Access-Controlled Elevator Lobby Egress Doors. When approved by the fire official, the entrance doors within an elevator lobby in a
means of egress of midrise and highrise buildings serving offices that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
section 903.3.1.1 and an approved automatic smoke detection system installed in accordance with section 907, are permitted to be equipped with an
approved entrance and egress access control system which shall be installed in accordance with all of the following criteria:
1. The building is provided throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 431/797
2. A smoke detector is installed on the ceiling on the tenant side of the elevator lobby doors along the center line of the door opening, not less than 1 foot
and not more than 5 feet from the door opening, and is connected to the fire alarm system.
3. A remote master switch capable of unlocking the elevator lobby doors shall be provided in the fire command center for use by the fire department.
4. Locks for the elevator lobby shall be UL and California state fire marshal listed fail-safe type locking mechanisms. The locking device shall automatically
release on activation of any fire alarm device on the floor of alarm (waterflow, smoke detector, manual pull station, etc.) All locking devices shall unlock, but
not unlatch, upon activation.
5. A two-way voice communication system, utilizing dedicated lines, shall be provided from each locked elevator lobby to the 24-hour staffed location on
site, annunciated as to location. Operating instructions shall be posted above each two-way communication device.
Exception: When approved by the fire chief, two-way voice communication system to an off-site facility may be permitted where means to remotely unlock
the access controlled doors from the off-site facility are provided.
6. Provide an approved momentary mushroom shaped palm button connected to the doors and installed adjacent to each locked elevator lobby exit door
which will release the door locks when operated by an individual in the elevator lobby. The locks shall be reset manually at the door. Mount palm button so
that center line is 48 inches (1219 mm) above finish door.
Provide a sign stating:
IN CASE OF EMERGENCY, PUSH PALM
BUTTON. DOOR WILL UNLOCK AND
SECURITY ALARM WILL SOUND.
PROCEED TO EXIT.
The sign lettering shall be 3/4-inch (19.1 mm) high letters by 1/8-inch (3.2 mm) width stroke on a contrasting background.
7. Loss of power to that part of the access control system which locks the doors shall automatically unlock the doors.
Section 1023.9 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
1023.9 Stairway Identification Signs. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in an interior exit stairway and ramp connecting more than two
stories designating the floor level, the terminus of the top and bottom of the interior exit stairway and ramp and the identification of the stair or ramp. The
signage shall also state the story of, and the direction to, the exit discharge and the availability of roof access from the interior exit stairway and ramp for
the fire department. The sign shall be located 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor landing in a position that is readily visible when the doors are in the open
and closed positions. Signs shall be installed on the interior of the stairways on each floor and on the exterior door of each stair door at the ground level, to
identify each stair landing and indicate the upper and lower termination of the stairway. Floor level identifications and markings shall remain consistent
throughout the entire property or building including, but not limited to lobbies, hallways, parking levels, and basement levels.
In addition to the stairway identification sign, raised character and Braille floor identification signs that comply with chapter 11B shall be located at the
landing of each floor level, placed adjacent to the door on the latch side, in all enclosed stairways in buildings two or more stories in height to identify the
floor level. At the exit discharge level, the sign shall include a raised five pointed star located to the left of the identifying floor level. The outside diameter of
the star shall be the same as the height of the raised characters.
Section 1023.9.1 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
1023.9.1 Signage Requirements. Stairway identification signs shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. The signs shall be a minimum size of 18 inches (457 mm) by 12 inches (305 mm).
2. The letters designating the identification of the interior exit stairway and ramp shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches (38 mm) in height.
3. The number designating the floor level shall be a minimum of 5 inches (127 mm) in height with 3/4-inch (19 mm) strokes and located in the center of the
sign. The mezzanine levels shall have the letter "M" preceding the floor level. Basement levels shall have the letter "B" preceding the floor number.
4. All other lettering and numbers shall be a minimum of 1 inch (25 mm) in height.
5. The stairway's upper terminus, such as ROOF ACCESS or NO ROOF ACCESS, shall be placed under the stairway identification in 1-inch-high (25 mm)
block lettering with 1/4-inch (6 mm) strokes.
6. The lower and upper terminus of the stairway shall be placed at the bottom of the sign in 1-inch-high (25 mm) block lettering with 1/4 inch (6 mm)
strokes.
7. Characters and their background shall have a nonglare finish. Characters shall contrast with their background, with either light characters on a dark
background or dark characters on a light background.
8. When signs required by section 1022.8 are installed in interior exit enclosures of buildings subject to section 1024, the signs shall be made of the same
materials as required by section 1024.4.
9. Signs shall also be installed on the exterior of all ground level stairway doors.
Section 1031.10 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
1031.10 Existing Unsafe Means Of Egress. The building official or fire official may require unsafe means of egress requirements to comply with section
1008, when the minimum number of exits are not readily available or are restricted during an emergency.
Section 1031.11 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 432/797
1031.11 Fire Escape Maintenance. Fire escapes shall be kept clear and unobstructed at all times and shall be maintained in a good working order.
Section 3103.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
3103.2 Approval Required. Tents and membrane structures having an area in excess of forty (40) square feet and canopies in excess of forty (40) square
feet shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without first obtaining a permit and approval from the fire code official.
Section 3103.5 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
3103.5 Use Period. Unless otherwise authorized by the city building official, no tent, awning, canopy or temporary membrane structure in excess of forty
(40) square feet shall be erected or maintained on private property within the city in excess of ten (10) days.
Section 3103.6 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
3103.6 Construction Documents. A detailed site and floor plan for tents or membrane structure 40 square feet or more shall be provided with each
application for approval. Applications for approval shall be provided to the reviewing authority 10 days before the tent or membrane structure is to be
erected. The tent or membrane structure floor plan shall indicate details of means of egress facilities, seating capacity, arrangement of the seating and
location and type of heating and electrical equipment.
Section 4902.1 of the California fire code is amended by adding the following definitions:
Vegetative Growth. Any native brush, or weeds, or grass, or specimen native shrub, or any live, or dead organic material as designated by the fire chief.
Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. That area included within the boundaries described and set forth in a map maintained by the fire chief on file in the
office of the fire prevention bureau.
Native Brush. All varieties of vegetative growth other than trees, that are indigenous to and found within the very high fire hazard severity zone except
those plants that are identified as `fire resistive plants' in a list established and maintained by the fire chief.
Non-Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. That area within the city limits not included within the boundaries described and set forth in a map maintained
by the fire chief on file in the office of the fire prevention bureau.
Specimen Native Shrub. An individual shrub that is within the definition of `native brush' and that is trimmed up one-third of its height or six (6') feet above
the ground, whichever is less, and from the vicinity of which has been removed all dead wood, duff, and combustible litter; and that is not among those
plants identified as `extremely hazardous native brush' in a list established and maintained by the fire chief.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, including an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
Fuel Modification Zone. The area existing between one hundred (100') feet and two hundred (200') feet, in any direction from any structure, unless
otherwise specified by the chief.
Section 4904.3 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
4904.3 Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map. The city of Beverly Hills city council hereby designates very high fire hazard severity zones as
recommended by the director of the California department of forestry and fire protection and as designated on a map titled very high fire hazard severity
zone, May 1, 2008 and retained on file at the office of the fire marshal, 445 North Rexford Drive.
Section 4906.2 of the California fire code is amended to read as follows:
4906.2 Application. Buildings and structures located in the following areas shall maintain the required hazardous vegetation and fuel management:
1. All unincorporated lands designated by the state board of forestry and fire protection as state responsibility area (SRA) including:
a. Moderate fire hazard severity zones.
b. High fire hazard severity zones.
c. Very-high fire hazard severity zones.
2. Land designated as very-high fire hazard severity zone by the Beverly Hills high fire zone map shall comply with section 4906.3.1.
3. Land not designated as very-high fire hazard severity zone of the Beverly Hills high fire zone map shall be known as non-high fire hazard severity zones
and shall comply with chapter 49 and Beverly Hills amendments of the California fire code.
Sections 4906.3.1 and 4906.3.2 are added to the California fire code to read as follows:
4906.3.1 Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Required Maintenance. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining buildings or
structures in, upon or adjoining very high fire hazard severity zone fire areas, and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent (within 200 feet) to
such buildings or structures, shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
1. All native brush, weeds, grass, and hazardous vegetation situated within one hundred feet (100') of any structure, regardless of whether said structure is
located upon such land or upon adjacent land shall be maintained at a height of not more than three inches (3") above the ground.
2. Reduce the fuel load within the fuel modification zone (100' to 200') around any structure regardless of whether said structure is located upon such land
or upon adjacent land.
Exception: Specimen native shrubs may be retained throughout the first 100 feet provided they are: spaced at a distance not less than eighteen feet (18')
from other native shrubs, brush or structures; maintained free of dead wood and litter; and trimmed up at least six feet (6') from the ground or 1/3 of their
height, whichever is less.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 433/797
3. All native brush, weeds, grass and hazardous vegetation within ten feet (10') of any combustible fence shall be maintained at a height of not more than
three inches (3") above the ground.
4. Remove all trees, shrubs, bushes, and other growing vegetation or portions thereof, adjacent to or overhanging any structure shall be kept free of dead
limbs, branches, and other combustible matter.
5. All trees shall be trimmed up five feet (5') from the ground and maintained so that no portion is closer than ten feet (10') from the outlet of any chimney.
6. Maintain five feet (5') of vertical clearance between roof surfaces and portions of trees overhanging any building or structure.
7. All roof structures shall be kept free of substantial accumulations of leaves, needles, twigs, and other combustible matter.
8. Remove all cut vegetation and debris and legally dispose of. All vegetation, native or otherwise, shall be maintained so as not to constitute a fire hazard
or public nuisance.
9. Clear all hazardous vegetation and other combustible growth within the first 100 feet surrounding all structures. Reduce the amount and/or modify the
arrangement of hazardous vegetation within the fuel modification zone.
10. Prune the branches from the lower third of any native plants kept in this area. If the plant is over 18 feet in height, only the lower six feet (6') must be
pruned. Heavy brush must be `trimmed up' so that all foliage in the lower third of the plant is removed. Remove any dead plants (leave the lowest 3" and
root structure to help prevent erosion).
11. Remove dead material from live plants, trees, or other vegetation.
12. Remove or process all cut vegetation as follows: may be machine processed and left on the property to a maximum depth of three inches (3"), so long
as none of the material is left within one hundred feet (100') of any structure. Machine processed material shall not be placed within ten feet (10') of usable
road surfaces or driveways.
13. Maintain all landscape vegetation, including, but not limited to, conifers (e.g., cedar, cypress, fir, juniper, and pine), eucalyptus, acacia, palm and
pampas grass in such a condition as not to provide an available fuel supply to augment the spread or intensity of a fire.
4906.3.2 Non-Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Required Maintenance. Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining buildings or
structures in, upon or adjoining high or moderate fire hazard severity zones fire areas, and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent (within 200
feet) to such buildings or structures, shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
1. Remove all trees, shrubs, bushes, and other growing vegetation or portions thereof, adjacent to or overhanging any structure shall be kept free of dead
limbs, branches, and other combustible matter.
2. All roof structures shall be kept free of substantial accumulations of leaves, needles, twigs, and other combustible matter.
3. Remove all cut vegetation and debris and legally dispose of. All vegetation, native or otherwise, shall be maintained so as not to constitute a fire hazard
or public nuisance.
4. Remove dead material from live plants, trees, or other vegetation.
5. Maintain all landscape vegetation, including, but not limited to, conifers (e.g., cedar, cypress, fir, juniper, and pine), eucalyptus, acacia, palm and
pampas grass in such a condition as not to provide an available fuel supply to augment the spread or intensity of a fire.
Section 4906.4 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
4906.4 Authority Of The Fire Chief To Modify Brush Clearing Requirements. If the fire chief determines in any specific case that difficult terrain,
danger of erosion, or other unusual circumstances make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions of this section undesirable or
impractical, he may suspend the enforcement thereof and require reasonable alternative measures. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed
to preclude the chief from requiring more than the minimum specific requirements set forth above when the chief determines that conditions exist which
necessitate greater fire protection measures.
Section 4906.5 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
4906.5 Issuance Of Brush Clearance Notice. In addition to any other remedies for violations provided by law, including those remedies set forth in this
code, the fire department may issue a "vegetation clearance notice" to the record owner and any tenant, lessee or other possessor of the affected
properties, specifying the condition(s) required to be corrected, and setting forth a date by which corrective action must be taken. The fire department may
take corrective action at the owner's expense in the event the required correction is not completed. If the owner fails to pay the cost incurred by the fire
department to correct such condition(s) following notice of the cost and an opportunity to be heard, the city council may make the expense a lien upon the
property where such condition exists.
Section 4906.6 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
4906.6 Clearance Of Brush Or Vegetative Growth From Roadways. All native brush, weeds, grass and hazardous vegetation situated within ten (10')
feet of the outer edge or edges of the usable road surface of any highway, street, alley or driveway serving more than one residence shall be maintained at
a height of not more than three (3") inches above the ground.
Section 5601.1.3 is added to the California fire code to read as follows:
5601.1.3 Fireworks Prohibited. No person shall manufacture, store, offer for sale or discharge any fireworks in the city; provided further, fireworks may
be discharged in conjunction with a city sponsored event.
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 434/797
Chapter 3
RUBBISH STORAGE REQUIREMENTS
9-3-1: RUBBISH STORAGE AND HANDLING FACILITIES:
A. General: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, every building erected or constructed in the city shall have provided therein, or immediately
adjacent thereto, space for the processing and storage of rubbish which space shall be maintained for that exclusive use. For commercial uses, rubbish
shall be stored in a rubbish room or in a completely enclosed container, as part of power operated rubbish processing equipment. For residential uses,
rubbish storage, within or under a building, shall be within a rubbish room. Rubbish storage space, rubbish rooms, and rubbish processing equipment
shall be of sufficient size to facilitate the adequate handling of rubbish accumulations generated by the occupancy.
B. Storage Space Requirements: No rubbish storage space or rubbish room shall be required for a single-family residence located on a property that abuts
an alley unless such property which abuts an alley does not receive trash pick up from the alley and the public works director determines that a rubbish
storage space or rubbish room is needed.
C. Existing Buildings: Any building lawfully existing prior to March 1, 1981, which is nonconforming to the requirements of this section, shall be made to
conform to the requirements of this section when additional floor area is added thereto or a new use is established therein.
D. Rubbish Quantities Generated: Occupancies or uses shall be assumed to generate, but not necessarily be limited to, the generation of rubbish in the
following quantities:
Loose Volume
1. Commercial:
Offices 1 cubic foot per day per 700 square feet of gross floor area
Retail 1 cubic foot per day per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Grocery markets 2 cubic feet per day per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Restaurants 1.5 cubic feet per day per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Hotels (full service) 3 cubic feet per day per person
Hotels (residential) 0.5 cubic foot per day per room
2. Residential:
Single-family residences 2 cubic feet per day plus 2 cubic feet per day per 5,000 square feet
of land, or fraction thereof
Apartments and condominiums
1.5 cubic feet per day per dwelling unit plus 1 cubic foot per 5,000 square feet of land, or fraction thereof
3. Unspecified Uses: Rubbish quantities generated by unspecified uses, not fitting into the categories set forth in subsections D1 and D2 of this section,
shall be determined by the director of building and safety and the director of public works.
E. Rubbish Storage Spaces; Number required:
1. Commercial uses:
a. One space; and
b. Additional spaces shall be required when the rubbish generated, as set forth in subsection D1 of this section, exceeds the capacity of the
containers used and the frequency of collection. The number of spaces shall be subject to approval by the director of building and safety.
2. Multiple-family residential uses:
a. One space for the first ten (10) units; and
b. One space for each additional ten (10) units, or major fraction thereof.
3. Single-family residential uses:
a. One space; and
b. Additional spaces shall be required when rubbish generated as set forth in subsection D2 of this section exceeds forty (40) cubic feet. Additional
space shall be added at the rate of six (6) square feet for each four (4) cubic feet, or major fraction thereof.
F. Rubbish Space Size And Dimensions:
1. Commercial and multiple-family residential uses:
a. Where no rubbish processing, such as compacting, shredding, or baling, is anticipated, each space shall contain not less than forty (40) square
feet of floor area. The minimum inside dimensions shall be eight feet by five feet (8' x 5').
b. Where more than one rubbish space is required, such spaces shall be arranged so that all rubbish containers are accessible for the deposit of
rubbish and are accessible for the removal of the containers without moving any other container.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 435/797
c. Where compactors or other rubbish processing equipment is used, the space requirements shall be such as to provide a minimum of three feet (3')
of clear space on all sides and shall be based on the quantity generated, as set forth in subsection D of this section. Compaction shall assume a
volume reduction ratio of three to one (3:1).
d. All rubbish spaces shall have a clear minimum height of seven feet (7'). Where rubbish processing equipment is used, the space dimensions shall
be sufficient so as to not inhibit the service or removal of the equipment or rubbish containers.
2. Single-family residential uses: Each space shall contain not less than forty (40) square feet of floor area with a minimum clear horizontal dimension
of two and one-half feet (21/2') and a clear height dimension of not less than seven feet (7').
G. Rubbish Storage Standards:
1. Rubbish Processing Equipment: Where rubbish processing equipment, such as a compactor, shredder, or baling machine, is used, the size of the
equipment shall be commensurate with the amount of rubbish generated and the frequency of collection. Containers receiving rubbish from a
compactor shall be enclosed and leakproof. Any area within or under a building which contains rubbish processing equipment shall be equipped with
an automatic fire sprinkler system. Where rubbish processing equipment is used, such equipment shall not generate sound audible to adjacent
properties in excess of the levels set forth in title 5, chapter 1 of this code.
2. Rubbish Rooms: Walls and floors shall be constructed of durable materials, such as concrete tile, or masonry, approved by the director of building
and safety. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be of two (2) hour fire resistive rating. Doors shall be of sufficient width to accommodate standard width
bins and shall have one and one-half (11/2) hour fire resistive rating. The rooms shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system adequate
to cover all portions of the room.
3. Rubbish Chutes: Rubbish chutes shall be of masonry construction, shall have an automatic fire sprinkler located at the topmost point, and shall have
not less than one hour fire protected openings.
4. Rubbish Storage Space Outside Of Buildings:
a. Multiple-family residential uses: Rubbish storage space not provided inside a building in the multiple-family residential zones shall be located in a
rear yard. Such spaces shall be paved with a material, such as concrete, tile, or masonry, approved by the director of building and safety. Such
spaces shall have the same area, dimensions and accessibility as set forth in subsection F1 of this section and shall be screened from view with a
five foot (5') high masonry wall and solid gates, which gates shall be of sufficient width to accommodate standard width bins.
b. Single-family residential uses: Rubbish storage areas shall be paved with a material, such as concrete, tile or masonry, approved by the director of
building and safety, such areas shall not be located in any yard abutting a street where a setback is required by title 10, chapter 3 of this code.
Where rubbish storage areas are visible from a street, such areas shall be screened from view by a five foot (5') high opaque wall or fence.
H. Location And Access; Commercial And Multiple-Family Residential Uses:
1. Where an alley abuts a property, and a building is required to have rubbish storage facilities, such facilities shall be directly accessible to the alley.
Access and distance shall be subject to approval by the director of building and safety and the public works director. Access areas shall be paved
and sufficient in dimension to allow the easy removal of the largest container.
2. Where no alley is available, rubbish facilities shall be directly accessible from a street. The access shall be paved and subject to approval by the
director of building and safety and the public works director.
3. Where rubbish storage floor surfaces are below or above surrounding grade, access shall be by ramps not to exceed a slope of one in twelve (12).
4. Where on site loading spaces are provided, rubbish storage facilities shall be directly accessible to such loading spaces. (Ord. 89-O-2083, eff. 12-
21-1989; amd. Ord. 92-O-2141, eff. 6-5-1992)
Chapter 4
WATER REGULATIONS
Article 1. Water Conserving Plumbing Fixtures
9-4-101: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This article shall be known as the WATER CONSERVING PLUMBING FIXTURE REGULATIONS of the city of Beverly Hills. The council of the city of
Beverly Hills, in order to effectively address potential problems concerning existing water supplies and ever increasing wastewater flow in the sewage
system, hereby implements a citywide conservation program. (Ord. 91-O-2115, eff. 5-3-1991)
9-4-102: SCOPE:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential, commercial, and industrial buildings in the city of Beverly Hills that use water in showers, water
closets, or urinals. (Ord. 91-O-2115, eff. 5-3-1991)
9-4-103: DEFINITIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 436/797
A. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The building and safety division of the city of Beverly Hills.
CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP: The transfer, sale or exchange of a fee interest in any residential or commercial real property located in the city of
Beverly Hills or served by the environmental utilities division of the city of Beverly Hills. "Change of ownership" shall not mean:
1. The transfer, sale, or exchange of real property between spouses, including, but not limited to, transfers to a trustee for the beneficial use of a
spouse, or the surviving spouse of a deceased transferor, or by a trustee of such a trust to the spouse of the trustor; transfers to a spouse which
take effect upon the death of a spouse; transfers to a spouse or former spouse in connection with a property settlement agreement or decree of
dissolution of a marriage or legal separation; the creation, transfer, or termination, solely between spouses, of any co-owner's interest; and the
distribution of a legal entity's property to a spouse or former spouse in exchange for the interest of the spouse in the legal entity in connection
with a property settlement agreement or a decree of dissolution of a marriage or legal separation.
2. The transfer, sale, or exchange of real property between parents and their children, including, but not limited to, voluntary transfers or transfers
resulting from a court order or judicial decree.
3. The transfer, sale, or exchange of real property pursuant to state foreclosure proceedings.
4. The transfer, sale, or exchange of real property to a revocable or irrevocable living trust.
EXISTING PLUMBING FIXTURE: Any toilet using more than 1.6 gallons of water per flush, urinals using more than 1.0 gallons of water per flush,
showerheads with a flow capacity of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute, faucets that emit more than 2.2 gallons of water per minute, or a
residential reverse osmosis system not equipped with shutoff valves.
FLUSHOMETER TANK: A tank integrated within an air accumulator vessel which is designed to discharge a predetermined quantity of water to
fixtures for flushing purposes.
FLUSHOMETER VALVE: A device which discharges a predetermined quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes and is actuated by direct
water pressure.
LOW FLOW FAUCET: A faucet that allows a maximum flow rate of 2.2 gallons per minute.
LOW FLOW SHOWERHEAD: A showerhead that allows a maximum flow rate of 2.5 gallons per minute.
RETROFIT OR RETROFITTING: The replacement of existing plumbing fixtures with water conserving plumbing fixtures.
TRANSFEREE: Any person, persons, or entity to whom a transfer, sale or exchange of any real property is made.
TRANSFEROR: Any person, persons, or entity transferring, selling or exchanging a fee interest in any real property.
ULTRA LOW FLOW URINAL: A urinal that discharges no more than 1.0 gallons of water per flush for flushing purposes.
ULTRA LOW FLOW WATER CLOSET: A water closet that discharges no more than 1.6 gallons of water per flush for flushing purposes.
WATER CLOSET: A flush toilet, a flushometer tank, or a flushometer valve operated toilet.
WATER CONSERVATION AFFIDAVIT: A signed, written statement and declaration by the transferor which declares that water conserving plumbing
fixtures have been installed prior to change of ownership or will be installed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the change of ownership.
WATER CONSERVING PLUMBING FIXTURES: Any ultra low flow water closet, ultra low flow urinal or waterless urinal, low flow showerhead, low
flow faucet, or residential reverse osmosis systems equipped with shutoff valves.
WATERLESS URINAL: A waterless urinal, approved for use by the administrative authority pursuant to the requirements of the California plumbing
code as an alternative and equivalent (or superior) urinal system, with a vertical trap design that incorporates a cylinder or trap filled with a thin layer
of liquid sealant sitting atop the drain area of the urinal. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
9-4-104: NEW CONSTRUCTION:
A. No building permit shall be issued for any new building unless all showerheads, water closets and urinals meet the following requirements:
1. Faucets: All faucets shall be equipped with low flow faucets.
2. Showerheads: All showers shall be equipped with low flow showerheads.
3. Water Closets: All water closets shall be ultra low flow water closets.
4. Urinals: All urinals shall be ultra low flow urinals or waterless urinals. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
9-4-105: REPLACEMENT FIXTURES:
If any person replaces a showerhead, faucet, toilet, or urinal in any building served by the environmental utilities division of the city of Beverly Hills, then
that showerhead, faucet, toilet, or urinal shall be replaced with a low flow showerhead, low flow faucet, ultra low flow water closet or, in the instance of a
urinal, an ultra low flow urinal or a waterless urinal. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
9-4-106: REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 437/797
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to reduce sewer flows and decrease the use of imported, potable water in the city of Beverly Hills by
establishing water conservation plumbing standards for plumbing fixtures retrofitted prior to change of ownership.
B. Notification And Retrofit Requirements Prior To Change Of Ownership:
1. Prior to a change of ownership, the transferor shall give written notice of the requirements of this section to the transferee. Where an escrow
agreement has been executed in connection with a change of ownership, the transferor shall give written notice of the requirements of this section to
the transferee prior to the close of escrow.
2. Prior to a change of ownership or within one hundred eighty (180) days following a change of ownership, the transferor shall retrofit all existing
plumbing fixtures in the building and shall sign a water conservation affidavit. If an escrow agreement has been executed in connection with a
change of ownership, the transferor shall submit the signed water conservation affidavit to escrow prior to the close of escrow. The cost of
compliance with this section may be borne by the transferor, transferee, or both. The transferor of property subject to this section shall provide the
transferee with confirmation of compliance with the requirements of this section in the transfer, sale, or exchange agreement.
C. Retrofit Exemption: Notwithstanding section 9-4-108 of this article, the administrative authority may grant an exemption from this section if it is
determined that a water conserving plumbing fixture is unavailable to match a well defined historic architectural style (e.g., Victorian or mission) fitted
with authentic plumbing fixtures in a local, state or federally designated building of historic significance.
D. Verification Of Compliance:
1. The transferor shall sign the water conservation affidavit, and, where an escrow agreement has been executed in connection with the change of
ownership, shall submit the water conservation affidavit to escrow prior to the close of escrow.
2. If retrofitting occurs within one hundred eighty (180) days following a change of ownership, the transferee shall submit a water conservation affidavit
confirming that the retrofitting has been completed.
3. The administrative authority shall maintain copies of all executed water conservation affidavits so as to provide future verification of previously
installed water conserving plumbing fixtures.
4. Water conservation affidavits shall be provided to those who voluntarily install water conserving plumbing fixtures.
E. Obtaining Permit: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all transferors shall obtain a plumbing permit and comply with all plumbing permit
requirements when installing water conserving plumbing fixtures pursuant to this section. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
9-4-107: REQUIREMENTS UPON ALTERATION OF BUILDINGS:
If any person obtains a building permit to repair, alter, or remodel a single-family or two-family residential building, and the building permit valuation for the
repair, alteration or remodeling exceeds thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), or if any person obtains a building permit to repair, alter or remodel a
multiple-family residential, commercial or industrial building, and the building permit valuation for the repair, alteration or remodeling exceeds seventy
thousand seven hundred thirty dollars ($70,730.00), then all showerheads, water closets and urinals in such repaired, altered or remodeled building shall
be replaced by low flow showerheads, low flow water closets and ultra low flow urinals. Fixtures with flushometer valves may be retrofitted rather than
replaced, if such retrofitted fixtures meet the performance standards of the low flow and ultra low flow fixtures required by this section.
Commencing on July 1, 1991, the building permit valuation amounts set forth in this section shall be adjusted on July 1 of each year based upon the
engineering news record construction cost index for the Los Angeles metropolitan area (ENR), or its successor. The director of building and safety shall
compute the percentage difference between the ENR on July 1 of each year and the ENR for the previous July 1. The director shall then adjust by such
percentage the building permit valuations set forth in this section. The adjusted amounts shall be rounded to the nearest dollar, and these amounts shall
constitute the building permit valuations set forth in this section. Should the ENR be revised or discontinued, the director shall use the revised index or a
comparable index as approved by the city council for determining fluctuations in the cost of construction. (Ord. 91-O-2115, eff. 5-3-1991)
9-4-108: EXEMPTION:
The director of the administrative authority may exempt any person from the requirements of sections 9-4-105 and 9-4-106 of this article if the director
determines that compliance with the requirements of those sections will cause existing wastewater systems to malfunction or will cause a danger to any
person's health or safety. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
9-4-109: PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT:
A. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation to violate, cause the violation of, or maintain a violation of any section of this
article.
B. It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation to remove or cause the removal of water conserving plumbing fixtures contrary
to the provisions of this article.
C. In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, any provision of this article may be enforced by an injunction issued by the superior court upon a
suit brought by the city of Beverly Hills.
D. Any provision of this article may be enforced pursuant to the administrative penalty process set forth in title 1, chapter 3 of this code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 438/797
E. No liability shall arise, nor shall any action be brought or maintained against, any agent of any party to a transfer of title, including any person or entity
acting in the capacity of an escrow officer, for any error, inaccuracy, or omission relating to compliance with this article. Except as otherwise provided in
this article, this section shall not be deemed to create or imply a duty upon a licensee, as defined in section 10011 of the State Business and
Professions Code, or upon any agent of any party to a transfer of title, including any person or entity acting in the capacity of an escrow officer, to
monitor or ensure compliance with this article, or to notify any person of requirements to comply with this article.
F. Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation that violates, causes the violation of, or maintains a violation of any provision in this article is
guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties imposed by this Code.
G. The administrative authority is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 09-O-2561, eff. 2-6-2009)
Article 2. Water Use Efficiency Regulations
9-4-201: PERMANENT WATER USE RESTRICTIONS AND WATER WASTE PREVENTION:
A. Permanent Water Use Restrictions; Exceptions:
1. The following permanent water use restrictions are in effect at all times. It shall be unlawful to:
a. Water or irrigate, or allow watering or irrigation of any outdoor plant on private property or parkways other than between the hours of five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. As used in this article, "plants" shall include plants, flowers, lawns, shrubs and trees. Outdoor plants may
also be referred to as "outdoor landscaping".
b. Water or irrigate, or allow watering or irrigation of outdoor landscaping in a manner that causes or allows water flow or runoff onto an adjoining
sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter, ditch or adjacent property.
c. Apply potable water to outdoor landscaping during, and within forty eight (48) hours after, measurable rainfall, which includes at a minimum any
amount of rainfall that generates run-off or puddles.
d. Use, or allow the use of, potable water in decorative water features, including but not limited to fountains, pools, ponds, cascades, waterfalls, and
streams, that do not recirculate the water.
e. Allow a loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system. A water user shall
have the obligation to repair any such breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions within seven (7) days of notification by the Beverly Hills Public Works
Department unless the Director of Public Works or their designee makes other arrangements with the water user.
f. Serve, or allow service of, drinking water to a customer other than upon request in eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to
restaurants, hotels, cafes, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased.
g. Fail to provide written notice to all hotel or motel patrons of their right to refrain from being provided with laundered towels and linens on a daily
basis. The notice shall consist of clear language and shall be prominently displayed in each room at all times.
h. Fail to abide by any State law or regulation concerning water conservation.
2. All washdown activities are prohibited at all times, except as follows:
a. Washdown of the exterior of vehicles in residential areas with the use of a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle equipped
with an automatic shutoff valve; or with an alternative plan that promotes water conservation and is first approved in writing by the Director of
Public Works.
b. Washdown of the exterior of vehicles as part of a commercial enterprise with the use of a reclaimed water system (a system that initially uses
potable water and then collects the runoff, treats the runoff, and uses the runoff for nonpotable uses for multiple cycles) that promotes water
conservation and achieves at least a twenty percent (20%) reduction of water consumption and is first approved in writing by the Director of Public
Works. Vehicles (including garbage trucks and those used to transport food) that are required to have exteriors washed pursuant to State laws or
regulations are exempt from this regulation.
c. Washdown of residential buildings and other structures with the use of a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle equipped with
an automatic shutoff valve; or with a reclaimed water system. Washdown can be performed no more than four (4) times a year.
d. Washdown of commercial buildings with the use of a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle equipped with an automatic
shutoff valve; or with a reclaimed water system. Washdown can be performed no more than two (2) times per month for retail, office and
commercial building frontages, provided that washdown may be performed more than two (2) times per month, but no more than necessary, to
comply with health and safety laws and regulations for the building frontages of establishments that offer food and/or beverages to customers.
e. Washdown, or allow the washdown of, residential sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, and alleys except where
necessary to alleviate health and safety hazards, and then only with a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle equipped with an
automatic shutoff valve; or by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container.
f. Washdown of sidewalks for retail, office, and commercial buildings with the use of a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle
equipped with an automatic shutoff valve; or use of a reclaimed water system. Washdowns can be performed no more than two (2) times per
month for sidewalks adjoining establishments that offer food and/or beverages to customers, provided that washdown may be performed more
than two (2) times per month, but no more than necessary, to comply with health and safety laws and regulations.
g. Washdown of outdoor pavement areas of food establishments with the use of a low-volume, high-pressure nozzle or water efficient nozzle
equipped with an automatic shutoff valve; or use of a reclaimed water system. Washdowns can be performed no more than necessary to comply
with health and safety laws and regulations. As used herein, "pavement" means and includes, but is not limited to, ground covering of concrete,
stone, brick, tile, or similar substance. (Ord. 18-O-2761, eff. 11-16-2018)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 439/797
Article 3. Emergency Water Conservation Plan
9-4-301: AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER:
A. The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this article in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare under the following conditions:
1. In the event of an unforeseeable disaster or water emergency such as an earthquake, reservoir failure or other major disruption in the water supply,
the City Manager is authorized to implement the emergency provisions of this article.
2. In the event of a foreseeable water emergency, such as an extended drought, the City Manager is authorized to implement the applicable provisions
of this article, after holding a public hearing before the City Council.
B. The City Manager is authorized to determine and declare that a water shortage emergency exists in any or all parts of the City of Beverly Hills and upon
such determination, to promulgate such regulations, rules and conditions relative to the time of using water, the purpose or purposes for which it may
be used and such other necessary limitations as will, in his or her opinion, relieve the water shortage in such part or parts of the City.
C. The City Council may review and affirm, reverse, or modify any determination made or regulations, rules or conditions promulgated by the City Manager
pursuant to this article.
D. All references to the City Manager in this article shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 92-O-2139, eff. 4-2-1992)
9-4-302: GENERAL PROHIBITION; PENALTY SURCHARGE; APPLICABILITY:
A. No person shall use or permit the use of water from the City for residential, commercial, industrial, governmental, or any other purposes in violation of
any provision of this article or in an amount in excess of the use that is permitted by the water conservation stages defined below.
B. A penalty surcharge may be assessed for water usage contrary to the provisions of this article or any water conservation measure adopted by the City
Council in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
C. The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons, customers and property served by the City of Beverly Hills, Public Works Department - Utilities
Division wherever situated. (Ord. 15-O-2677, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-303: DECLARATION OF WATER CONSERVATION STAGES:
A. Water conservation stages shall be determined by the amount of water available or the potential for water interruption. The City Manager shall monitor
the supply and demand for water by customers. When the City Manager finds that the guidelines for initiation of any stage, as set forth in this article,
have been satisfied, he or she shall recommend to the City Council that a resolution to declare the appropriate water conservation stage be adopted.
B. The City Council may modify by resolution any of the requirements contained in the stages of water conservation set forth in section 9-4-304 of this
article if the City Council determines that the modification is in the best interests of the City or is appropriate to promote compliance with any regulation
mandated by the State Water Board.
C. The resolution by the City Council implementing or terminating conservation stages shall be published within ten (10) days after its adoption at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City and the implementing resolution shall be posted in at least three (3) public places and shall
continue to be posted until such time as the restrictions of each stage are repealed by resolution of the City Council.
D. Except as otherwise may be provided by this article or a resolution adopted by the City Council, any prohibitions on the use of water shall become
effective immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Except as otherwise may be provided by a resolution
adopted by the City Council, any provisions requiring a percentage reduction in the use of water shall become effective at the first full billing period
commencing on or after the date of such publication. (Ord. 15-O-2677, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-304: REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER CONSERVATION STAGES:
A. Stage A Requirements:
1. A stage A shortage shall be declared when the City Manager determines that a five percent (5%) reduction in potable water use is required.
2. Stage A compliance shall consist of voluntary implementation of water conservation elements in addition to those stated in section 9-4-201 of this
chapter, including, without limitation, further reduced irrigation, notification of hotel and restaurant patrons of water conservation goals, and use of
reclaimed water for construction purposes.
B. Stage B Requirements:
1. A stage B shortage shall be declared when the City Manager determines that a ten percent (10%) reduction in potable water use is required.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 440/797
2. Stage B compliance elements shall include the following mandatory elements:
a. All public restrooms in the City and private bathrooms in hotels shall notify patrons and employees of water conservation goals;
b. Except for single-family and multi-family residential users in tier 1 who will remain in tier 1 for the next billing cycle, all users shall reduce water
usage to ninety percent (90%) of the amount in the baseline period as determined by the City Council.
3. Violation by any person of the stage B mandatory requirements shall constitute an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). The violation of each element, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and
shall be punished accordingly.
C. Stage C Requirements:
1. A stage C shortage shall be declared when the City Manager determines that a twenty percent (20%) reduction in potable water use is required.
2. Stage C compliance elements shall include the following mandatory elements:
a. All public restrooms in the City and private bathrooms in hotels shall notify patrons and employees of water conservation goals;
b. Except for single-family and multi-family residential users in tier 1 who will remain in tier 1 for the next billing cycle, all users shall reduce water
usage to eighty percent (80%) of the amount in the baseline period as determined by the City Council.
3. Violation by any person of the stage C mandatory requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Water supply through irrigation water services may be terminated for continued excessive use. The
violation of each element, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punished accordingly.
D. Stage D Requirements:
1. A stage D shortage shall be declared when the City Manager determines that a thirty percent (30%) or higher reduction in potable water use is
required.
2. Stage D compliance elements shall include the following mandatory elements:
a. All public restrooms in the City and private bathrooms in hotels shall notify patrons and employees of water conservation goals;
b. Landscape irrigation shall be restricted to selected days and times as determined by the City Manager, unless such irrigation uses reclaimed
wastewater;
c. Refilling of swimming pools, spas or ponds shall be prohibited unless required for health or safety reasons;
d. Exterior washdown of vehicles shall be prohibited unless:
(1) Using a reclaimed water system;
(2) Performed in accordance with an alternative plan that promotes water conservation and is approved in writing by the Director of Public Works
or his/her designee; or
(3) Required to meet laws or governmental regulations to protect health and safety, such as the cleaning of garbage trucks and vehicles to
transport food.
e. Water usage from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain the public health, safety
and welfare;
f. Except for single-family and multi-family residential users in tier 1 who will remain in tier 1 for the next billing cycle, users shall reduce water usage
to seventy percent (70%) of the amount in the baseline period as determined by the City Council;
g. Exterior washdown of buildings shall be prohibited unless:
(1) Using a reclaimed water system and such washing is done: a) no more than once per month for retail building frontage; b) no more than twice
per year for office and commercial buildings; c) no more often than is necessary to comply with health laws and regulations for the building
frontage of food service uses; or d) no more than once per year for residential structures solely for the purpose of preparing a residential
structure for painting.
(2) Using a commercial glass and window cleaner.
h. Exterior washdown of sidewalks and the pavement of outdoor dining areas shall be prohibited unless using a reclaimed water system and such
washing is done no more often than is necessary to comply with health laws and regulations.
3. Violation by any person of the stage D mandatory requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not
to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Continued excessive use may result in termination of water supply through irrigation water services
and/or restriction of water supply through domestic meters. The violation of each element, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a
separate offense, and shall be punished accordingly.
4. For purposes of this article, "reclaimed water system" shall mean a system that initially uses potable water and then collects the runoff, treats the
runoff, and uses the runoff for nonpotable uses for multiple cycles.
E. Stage E Requirements:
1. A stage E shortage shall be declared when the City Manager determines that a catastrophic interruption of potable water supply has occurred or is
foreseen.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 441/797
2. The City Manager shall have emergency water allocation authority in the case of a stage E declaration. This authority shall include the authority to
interrupt service to any property or City service zone in order to provide the maximum water supply for human health and safety needs.
3. In allocating water, the City Manager shall give first priority to health and safety needs of water utility customers. Subsequent water uses are
prioritized to provide water supply first to maintain and expand commerce within the City, then to enhance the aesthetics of the environment, and
then to facilitate construction activities.
4. Violation by any person of the stage E emergency water conservation regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and six (6) months in jail. Continued excessive use may result in termination of
water supply through irrigation water services and/or restriction of water supply through domestic meters. The violation of each element, and each
separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 18-O-2761, eff. 11-16-2018)
9-4-305: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
A. The City shall give notice of violation to the person committing a violation of this article as follows:
1. Notice of violation of any water usage percentage reduction provisions shall be given in writing by regular mail.
2. Notice of violation of any other mandatory requirement listed in section 9-4-304 of this article shall be given in writing in the following manner:
a. By giving the notice to the customer personally; or
b. If the customer is absent from or unavailable at the premises at which the violation occurred, by leaving a copy with some person of suitable age
and discretion at the premises and sending a copy through the regular mail to the address at which the customer is normally billed; or
c. If a person of suitable age or discretion cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place at the premises at which the violation
occurred and also sending a copy through the regular mail to the address at which the customer is normally billed.
B. The notice shall contain a brief description of the facts of the violation, a statement of the possible penalties for each violation and a statement informing
the customer of his or her right to a hearing on the merits of the violation pursuant to section 9-4-306 of this article. (Ord. 92-O-2139, eff. 4-2-1992)
9-4-306: HEARINGS:
Any person receiving notice of a violation of any water usage percentage reduction provision set forth in section 9-4-304 of this chapter shall have the right
to request a hearing to appeal the imposition of the water penalty surcharge. The City Council shall establish the appeal procedures by resolution. (Ord.
09-O-2567, eff. 6-27-2009)
9-4-307: ADDITIONAL WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES:
After holding a public hearing before the City Council, the City Manager may order implementation of water conservation measures including, or in addition
to, those set forth in section 9-4-304 of this chapter, in order to encourage proper potable water use or to meet water conservation goals, regardless of
supply. (Ord. 92-O-2139, eff. 4-2-1992)
9-4-308: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the City to curtail the supply of water to any customer when such water is required by that customer to
maintain an adequate level of public health and safety. (Ord. 09-O-2567, eff. 6-27-2009)
Article 4. Water Efficient Landscaping
9-4-401: PURPOSE:
Water is a precious commodity of limited supply. In accordance with the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act ("Act"), the purpose and intent of this
article is to:
A. Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;
B. Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, and maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new residential or commercial
development projects and when landscaped areas are altered by more than fifty percent (50%) in total area;
C. Promote water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes; and
D. Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest
practical amount.
Accordingly, this article is intended to be as effective in conserving water as is the Department of Water Resources State model landscaping ordinance set
forth in Government Code section 65595 and shall be known as the WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 442/797
9-4-402: APPLICABILITY:
Except as set forth in section 9-4-404 of this article, this article shall apply to all landscaped areas of new residential or commercial development projects,
including city projects and facilities, all new installations of landscaped area irrigation systems, and all altered landscaped areas, whether proposed as part
of projects subject to plan reviews by any design or other reviewing body, or as part of projects not subject to review. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-403: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
ALTERED LANDSCAPED AREA: A landscaped area, including landscaped areas of public property or facilities, that has been altered by more than fifty
percent (50%) in total area.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: The document required under section 9-4-411 of this article.
CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by a recognized professional trade
organization or other educational organization.
DEPARTMENT: The department of community development.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department of community development or his/her designee.
ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE ("ETWU"): The total water used for the landscape subject to this article determined pursuant to the formula set forth in
the landscape regulations. The ETWU is based upon such factors as the local evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscaped area, the types of plants
and the efficiency of the irrigation system.
IRRIGATION AUDIT: An in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation
audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff
that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.
LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The documents required under section 9-4-405 of this article required to be submitted to the department of
community development for review and approval.
LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS: Rules and regulations adopted by the director of community development for the implementation and enforcement of
provisions of this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect.
LANDSCAPED AREA: The entire lot, including, water features such as pools, spas, ponds, and fountains. "Landscaped area" shall not include the building
footprint, driveways, nonirrigated portions of parking lots, hardscapes such as decks and patios, and other nonporous areas.
MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE ("MAWA"): The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area or altered landscaped
area determined pursuant to the formula set forth in the landscape regulations. The MAWA is based upon the local reference evapotranspiration rate, the
ETo adjustment factor and the size of the landscaped area or altered landscaped area.
PROJECT APPLICANT: The person or entity submitting a landscape documentation package. A project applicant may include the property owner and/or
an agent of the owner.
SMART IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: A weather based device that automatically controls an outdoor irrigation system by using weather, site or soil
moisture data as a basis for determining an appropriate watering schedule or utilizing prevailing weather conditions, current and historic
evapotranspiration, soil moisture levels, and other relevant factors to adapt water applications to meet the actual needs of the plants.
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET: The document described in section 9-4-410 of this article. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-404: EXCEPTIONS:
This article shall not apply to:
A. Projects which involve alterations or additions to, or retrofits of, existing residential, commercial or public structures or facilities, unless the landscaped
area is altered as defined in section 9-4-403 of this article.
B. Projects with a landscaped area of less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
C. Landscaping that is part of a property listed on any applicable local, state or national register of historic places.
D. Plant collections as part of gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-405: REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prior to issuance of a building permit for any project that involves landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article, the project
applicant must submit a landscape documentation package for review and approval by the community development department ("department"). The
landscape documentation package shall include the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 443/797
1. Project information as required by the landscape regulations;
2. Landscape design plan as described in section 9-4-406 of this article;
3. Irrigation design plan as described in section 9-4-407 of this article;
4. Water efficient landscape worksheet as described in section 9-4-410 of this article;
5. A soils management report as described in section 9-4-409 of this article;
6. Grading design plan as described in section 9-4-408 of this article; and
7. Payment of the fee as prescribed by city council upon submittal of the landscape documentation package.
If the landscaped area or altered landscaped area subject to this article is a stand alone project or does not otherwise require a building permit or
formal planning or other commission approval or review, the landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the department for review and
approval prior to the commencement of landscape improvements.
B. The documents listed in subsection A of this section shall be prepared and signed by a landscape architect, landscape designer, or irrigation designer,
as appropriate, except that the soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soil and plant laboratory. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-406: LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN:
A. Landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article shall be carefully designed and planned to ensure the efficient use of water. The
project applicant shall submit to the department a landscape design plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the
landscape regulations.
B. The landscape design plan shall comply with or include the following:
1. A description of the plant material. Any plant may be selected for the landscape provided that the estimated applied water use in the landscaped
area or altered landscaped area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.
2. Landscape design plans for projects in the city's very high fire hazard severity zones areas shall address fire safety and prevention. The project
applicant shall ensure that the defensible space required by this code is maintained and shall avoid fire prone plant materials and mulches.
3. Invasive species of plants shall be prohibited near parks, buffers, greenbelts and open spaces and are generally discouraged for landscape use.
4. The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned
developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as a
group.
5. Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where
twenty five percent (25%) means one foot (1') of vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 +
slope percent).
6. Recirculating water systems shall be used as a source for water features.
7. The surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
8. Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
9. A minimum two inch (2") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
ground covers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.
10. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.
11. The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.
12. Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report, if any, and what is appropriate for the plants selected.
(Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-407: IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN:
A. An irrigation system and its related components for landscaped areas and altered landscaped areas subject to this article shall be carefully designed
and planned to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. The project applicant shall submit to the department an irrigation design
plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations.
B. An irrigation design plan shall comply with or include the following:
1. Smart irrigation controllers or other self-adjusting irrigation controllers shall be required for all irrigation systems. The controller must be able to
accommodate all aspects of the landscape and irrigation design plans.
2. All irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid excessive pressure. Water pressure regulators are required. Static water pressure, dynamic or
operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the time of day the system will operate. These pressure and flow
measurements shall be conducted at the design stage, if available, or prior to installation, if not available at the design phase.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 444/797
3. If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulators, or booster pumps, or other
devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
4. Sensor (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspends irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required
on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions.
5. High flow check valves, or other technology to interrupt operations in high flow conditions created by irrigation system damage or malfunction, shall
be required.
6. The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto
nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
7. Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
8. The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-408: GRADING DESIGN PLAN:
A. Grading of a project site that contains a landscaped area or altered landscaped area subject to this article, shall be designed to minimize soil erosion,
runoff and water waste. The project applicant shall submit to the department a grading design plan that meets the criteria set forth in this section and
the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations.
B. The landscape grading plan shall indicate finished configurations and elevations of the landscaped area including: 1) height of graded slopes; 2)
drainage patterns; 3) pad elevations; 4) finish grade; and 5) stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
C. To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, grading shall avoid disturbing natural drainage patterns and avoid soil compaction in landscaped areas or
altered landscaped areas subject to this article. All irrigation and normal rainfall should remain within the property lines so as not to drain onto
nonpermeable hardscapes.
D. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for a project which includes landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this
article, can satisfy this requirement. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-409: SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT:
The project applicant shall submit to the department a soil management plan that meets the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations. (Ord. 09-O-
2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-410: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET:
A. The project applicant shall complete and submit to the department a water efficient landscape worksheet that meets the criteria set forth in this section
and the criteria set forth in the landscape regulations.
B. The water efficient landscape worksheet shall contain two (2) sections: 1) a hydrozone information table and 2) a water budget calculation for the
landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article. The water budget calculation shall include the maximum applied water allowance
and the estimated total water use. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-411: CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION:
A. Upon completion of the installation of the landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article, the project applicant shall submit a
certificate of completion, in the form provided by the city, for review and approval by the director. The certificate of completion shall be executed by
either the licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor or the certified irrigation designer that signed any of the documents submitted as
part of the landscape documentation package.
B. The certificate of completion shall certify and/or include the following:
1. The landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article have been installed in conformance with the landscape documentation
package, the water efficient landscaping ordinance and the landscape regulations;
2. The automatic controller has been set according to the irrigation schedule described in section 9-4-412 of this article;
3. Documentation that the soil management report recommendations, if any, have been implemented;
4. The irrigation audit report; and
5. The landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
C. The director shall approve the certificate of completion if it is determined the project conforms to the provisions of this section. If the director determines
that the certificate of completion is incomplete or does not conform to the provisions of this section, the director shall:
1. Notify the project applicant in writing that the certificate of completion has been denied and include a statement of reasons; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 445/797
2. Notify the project applicant in writing that the certificate of completion is incomplete with an indication of additional information necessary. The project
applicant may resubmit the certificate of completion for review by the director.
D. The project applicant shall provide a copy of the approved certificate of completion to the property owner within seven (7) days of its approval. (Ord. 09-
O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-412: IRRIGATION SCHEDULE:
The project applicant shall prepare an irrigation schedule in accordance with the landscape regulations that evaluates and manages the amount of water
required to maintain plant health. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-413: LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE:
The project applicant shall prepare a landscape and irrigation maintenance plan in accordance with the landscape regulations to ensure the efficiency of
water use. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-414: IRRIGATION AUDIT:
A. For landscaped areas or altered landscaped areas subject to this article, the project applicant shall prepare an irrigation audit report as set forth in the
landscape regulations.
B. For all existing landscaped areas installed prior to January 1, 2010, irrigation audits shall be prepared as set forth in the landscape regulations. (Ord.
09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-415: IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY:
A. New irrigation systems installed, whether or not part of a landscaped area or altered landscaped area subject to this article, shall be designed,
maintained and managed to meet or exceed the average irrigation efficiency set forth in the landscape regulations.
B. New irrigation systems installed as stand alone projects shall comply with sections 9-4-407, 9-4-410, 9-4-411, 9-4-412, 9-4-413 and 9-4-414 of this
chapter. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-416: ALTERNATIVE WATER EFFICIENT USE:
Alternative methods of using water efficiently such as the use of potable water, rainwater or other alternative water systems are encouraged. (Ord. 09-O-
2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-417: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A. Landscape and grading design plans shall be developed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the stormwater and urban runoff control
provisions set forth in article 5 of this chapter.
B. Rain gardens, cisterns, and other landscape features and practices that increase rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or on site
storage are encouraged. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-418: WATER WASTE PREVENTION:
Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation, such as runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar conditions where water flows onto
adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots or structures is prohibited. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-419: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The director of community development shall have the power and authority to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation and enforcement of
provisions of this article, and when duly promulgated, such rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
9-4-420: ADMINISTRATION AND APPEAL PROCESS:
The director shall have the duty and authority to administer and enforce this article. The project applicant or property owner may appeal any other decision
made by the director pursuant to this article by filing with the director within fifteen (15) days of the date of written notification of the action at issue. The
appeal shall be held pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Beverly Hills administrative code set forth in chapter 1, article 1 of this title. (Ord. 16-O-
2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 446/797
9-4-421: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided for in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. In addition, the city building official may deny
any project subject to this article its certificate of occupancy or equivalent until the certificate of completion has been submitted, reviewed and approved by
the city. (Ord. 09-O-2574, eff. 1-1-2010)
Article 5. Stormwater And Urban Runoff Pollution Control
9-4-501: FINDINGS:
The city council finds and declares that:
A. The federal clean water act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the waters of the United States
by extending national pollutant discharge elimination system (hereinafter "NPDES") requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharged into
municipal storm drain systems.
B. Stormwater and urban runoff flow from individual properties onto streets, then through storm drains passing through the city.
C. The city is a copermittee under the "waste discharge requirements for municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) discharges within the coastal
watersheds of Los Angeles County, except those discharges originating from the city of Long Beach MS4" (order no. R4-2012-0175), NPDES permit
no. CAS004001, effective December 28, 2012, issued by the California regional water quality control board - Los Angeles region, and any successor
permit to that permit (the "municipal NPDES permit") and, as a copermittee under the municipal NPDES permit, the city is required to implement and
enforce the requirements contained in the municipal NPDES permit, to control discharges to and from those portions of the MS4 over which it has
jurisdiction, and to hold dischargers to the MS4 accountable for their contributions of pollutants and flows.
D. Part III, section A of the municipal NPDES permit requires the city to prohibit, in the portion of the MS4 for which it is an owner or operator,
nonstormwater discharges into the MS4, except where such discharges are identified and in compliance with part III, section A of the municipal NPDES
permit.
E. In order to control, in a cost effective manner, the quantity and quality of stormwater and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable, the adoption
of reasonable regulations, as set forth herein, is essential. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-502: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this article is to promote the future health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and the water quality of the receiving
waters of the county and surrounding coastal areas by:
1. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;
2. Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and thereby reducing the level of contamination of stormwater and dry weather runoff into the
MS4; and
3. Regulating nonstormwater discharges to the MS4.
B. The intent of this article is to protect and enhance the quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the city in a manner consistent with the
federal clean water act, the California Porter-Cologne water quality control act and the municipal NPDES permit.
C. This article is also intended to provide the city with the legal authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the MS4 over which
it has jurisdiction as required by the municipal NPDES permit, and thereby fully and timely comply with the terms of the municipal NPDES permit.
D. This article also sets forth requirements for the construction and operation of certain "commercial development", "new development" and
"redevelopment" and other projects (as further defined herein), which requirements are intended to ensure compliance with the stormwater mitigation
measures prescribed in the current version of the municipal NPDES permit, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
E. This article authorizes an authorized enforcement officer to define and adopt applicable best management practices (BMPs) and other stormwater
pollution control measures, to grant emergency self-waivers from municipal NPDES permit requirements, as provided herein in order to conduct repairs
of essential public service systems and infrastructure in emergency situations, to cite violations and to impose fines pursuant to this article. This article
also authorizes the authorized enforcement officer to carry out inspections, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance and noncompliance with the provisions of this article and the municipal NPDES permit. Except as otherwise provided herein, the authorized
enforcement officer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-503: DEFINITIONS:
Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this article shall be defined as that term is defined in the current municipal NPDES permit, or if it is
not specifically defined in the municipal NPDES permit, then as such term is defined in the federal clean water act, as amended, and/or the regulations
promulgated thereunder. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this article:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 447/797
AREA SUSCEPTIBLE TO RUNOFF: Any surface directly exposed to precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation which path leads off the
parcel on which the surface is located.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The director of public works or his or her designee.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY: A facility that is categorized in any one of the following standard industrial classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014,
5511, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539 (as amended).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or
nonstormwater discharges to receiving waters or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or nonstormwater discharged to the receiving water.
Examples of BMPs may include public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper
sludge or waste handling and disposal, among others.
BIOFILTRATION: A LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental infiltration
and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction. Therefore, the term
"biofiltration" as used in this article is defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant
reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the regional board's executive officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention
systems with an underdrain and bioswales.
BIORETENTION: A LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy or ground cover, and through evapotranspiration
and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two foot (2') top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel
filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in this article, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not
include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the municipal NPDES permit as
biofiltration.
BIOSWALE: A LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass or other dense, low growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect
stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense vegetation for a period of several minutes.
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to,
hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other
business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, to public warehouses and other light industrial complexes.
COMMERCIAL MALL: Any development on private land comprised of one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise,
with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not limited
to, mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers.
CONSTRUCTION: Constructing, clearing, grading, or excavation that results in soil disturbance. Construction includes structure tear down and demolition.
It does not include routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor repair or restoration work, maintain
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility; emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health
and safety (including fire prevention); interior remodeling with no outside exposure of construction material or construction waste to stormwater;
mechanical permit work; sign permit work; or clearing or grubbing of vegetation for landscape maintenance which is not associated with a larger
construction project. See definition of Routine Maintenance.
CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT: The NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities,
order no. 2009-0009-DWQ (NPDES no. CAS000002), adopted September 2, 2009, revised by order no. 2010-0014-DWG and any successor permit to
that permit.
CONTROL: To minimize, reduce, eliminate, or prohibit by technological, legal, contractual or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an activity or
activities.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-family, multiunit
or planned unit development); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for
future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it
include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.
DIRECTLY ADJACENT: Situated within two hundred feet (200') of the contiguous zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural
stability of the environmentally sensitive area.
DIRECTOR: The director of public works or his or her designee.
DISCHARGE: When used without qualification, means the discharge of a pollutant.
DISCHARGE OF A POLLUTANT: Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source or, any
addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other
floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term "discharge of a pollutant" includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United
States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state,
municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately
owned treatment works.
DISCHARGING DIRECTLY: Outflow from a drainage conveyance system that is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject property,
development, subdivision, or industrial facility, and not commingled with the flows from adjacent lands.
DISCRETIONARY PROJECT: Shall be defined in the same manner as in California code of regulations title 14, section 15357 of the guidelines for
implementation of the California environmental quality act, as amended, and means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when
the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine.
DISTURBED AREA: An area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation, unless solely for the purposes of landscape maintenance or
fire prevention.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA (ESA): An area in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 448/797
their special nature or role in an ecosystem, and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments1. Areas subject to
stormwater mitigation requirements are areas designated as significant ecological areas by the county of Los Angeles (Los Angeles County significant
areas study, Los Angeles County department of regional planning (1976) and amendments); an area designated as a significant natural area by the
California department of fish and game's significant natural areas program, provided that area has been field verified by the department of fish and game;
an area listed in the basin plan as supporting the rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE) beneficial use; and an area identified by the city as
environmentally sensitive.
FLOW THROUGH BMPs: Modular, vault type "high flow bioretention" devices contained within impervious vault with an underdrain or designed with an
impervious liner and an underdrain.
HILLSIDE: Property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is
twenty five percent (25%) or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Any manmade conveyance that is connected to the MS4 without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type
connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the MS4.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 that is prohibited under local, state or federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. This includes all
nonstormwater discharges, except authorized nonstormwater discharges; conditionally exempt nonstormwater discharges; and nonstormwater discharges
resulting from natural flows specifically identified in part III.A. of the municipal NPDES permit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any manmade or modified surface that prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying soil, resulting in
runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development. Examples of places that
commonly exhibit impervious surfaces include parking lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of these areas
commonly results from paving, compacted gravel, and compacted earth.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: Land development that is set aside for industrial development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport facilities,
especially where more than one transport modalities coincide: highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks, which have
offices and light industry.
INFILTRATION: The downward entry of water into the surface of the soil.
INSPECTION: The entry and the conducting of an on site review of a facility and its operations, at reasonable times, to determine compliance with specific
municipal or other legal requirements. The steps involved in performing an inspection, include, but are not limited to:
A. Preinspection documentation research;
B. Request for entry;
C. Interview of property owner, resident and/or occupant(s);
D. Property walk-through;
E. Visual observation of the condition of property;
F. Examination and copying of records as required;
G. Sample collection (if necessary or required);
H. Exit discussion (to discuss preliminary evaluation) as appropriate; and
I. Report preparation, and if appropriate, recommendations for coming into compliance.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): Building or landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.
MATERIAL: Any substance including, but not limited to, garbage and debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal waste;
sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals.
MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT: "Waste discharge requirements for municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) discharges within the coastal watersheds
of Los Angeles County, except those discharges originating from the city of Long Beach MS4" (order no. R4-2012-0175), NPDES permit no. CAS004001,
effective December 28, 2012, issued by the California regional water quality control board - Los Angeles region, and any successor permit to that permit.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM OR MS4: A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
A. Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer
district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and
approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 449/797
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
D. Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR section 122.2.
NPDES PERMIT: Any waste discharge requirements issued by the regional board or the state water resources control board as an NPDES permit
pursuant to California Water Code section 13370 (other than the municipal NPDES permit).
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 or from the MS4 into a receiving water that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
PARKING LOT: Land area or a facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry or personal use, with a lot size
of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty five (25) or more parking spaces.
POLLUTANT: Those pollutants defined in section 502(6) of the federal clean water act (33 USC 1362(6)), or incorporated into California Water Code
section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides, slag, ash, and
sludge);
B. Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium; and nonmetals such as phosphorus and arsenic;
C. Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);
D. Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters, flora or
fauna of the state;
E. Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show facilities);
F. Substances having characteristics such as pH less than 6 or greater than 9, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of fecal coliform, or
fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus;
G. The term "pollutant" shall not include uncontaminated stormwater, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water
treatment facility. The term "pollutant" also shall not include any substance identified in this definition, if through compliance with the BMPs available,
the discharge of such substance has been reduced or eliminated to the maximum extent practicable. In an enforcement action, the burden shall be
on the person who is the subject of such action to establish the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable through
compliance with the BMPs available.
PROJECT: All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing activities. The term "project" is not limited to "project" as defined under the California
environmental quality act under California Public Resources Code section 21065.
RAINFALL HARVEST AND USE: A LID BMP system designed to capture runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from elsewhere
within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the harvested water can be used for irrigation or nonpotable uses. The harvested water may also
be used for potable water uses if the system includes disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building department.
REDEVELOPMENT: Land disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition or replacement of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious
surface area on an already developed site for all project categories except single-family residential projects. For existing single-family dwelling and
accessory structures, redevelopment is the creation, addition, or replacement of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface.
Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to, the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition: a) the expansion of a
building footprint; b) addition or replacement of a structure; c) replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and d)
land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and
safety.
REGIONAL BOARD: The California regional water quality control board - Los Angeles region.
RESTAURANT: A facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC code 5812).
RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLET: Any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE: Includes, but is not limited to, projects conducted to:
A. Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of facility;
B. Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities;
C. Carry out road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 450/797
D. Update existing lines and facilities, including the replacement of existing lines with new materials or pipes, to comply with applicable codes,
standards and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased capacity;
E. Repair leaks;
F. Conduct landscaping activities without changing existing or natural grades; and
G. Conduct brush cleaning and grubbing for fire prevention.
Routine maintenance does not include construction of new lines or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards, and
regulations. New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines.
RUNOFF: Any runoff, including stormwater and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry
weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.
SUSMP: The Los Angeles countywide standard urban stormwater mitigation plan ("SUSMP").
SIMPLE LID BMP: A BMP constructed above ground on a single-family residential home that can be readily inspected by a homeowner or inspector.
Simple LID BMPs do not require an operation and maintenance plan per the municipal NPDES permit. Examples of such BMPs include, but are not limited
to, vegetated swales, rain barrels and aboveground cisterns, rain gardens, and pervious pavement.
SITE: The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or
activity.
SOURCE CONTROL BMP: Any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational practices that
aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That part of precipitation (rainfall or snow melt) which travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from
impervious, semipervious or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases.
STRUCTURAL BMP: Any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g.,
canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs.
TREATMENT: The application of engineered systems that use physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include,
but are not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation.
TREATMENT CONTROL BMP: Any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration,
biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process.
URBAN RUNOFF: Surface water flow produced by nonstormwater resulting from residential, commercial, and industrial activities involving the use of
potable and nonpotable water. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-504: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. Illicit Discharges And Connections: No person shall commence, establish, use, maintain, or continue any illicit connection to the MS4 or any illicit
discharge to the MS4. This prohibition against illicit connections applies to the use, maintenance, or continuation of any illicit connection, whether that
connection was established prior to or after the effective date of this article.
B. Littering: No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left, or maintained or kept, any refuse,
rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet,
catch basin, conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a pollutant.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or other body of water within the city. This subsection shall not apply to
refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers or other appropriate receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste
pick up and disposal.
C. Blowing Debris: No person shall use or operate any mechanical device to blow leaves, dirt, or other debris in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk,
parkway, or other public right of way.
D. Disposal Of Landscape Debris: No person shall intentionally dispose of leaves, dirt or other landscape debris into a storm drain.
E. Industrial Activities: No person shall conduct any industrial activity in the city without obtaining all permits required by state or federal law, including an
NPDES general industrial activity stormwater permit when required. Persons conducting industrial activities within the city should refer to the most
recent edition of the "Industrial/Commercial Best Management Practices Handbook", produced and published by the California Stormwater Quality
Association ("CASQA"), for specific guidance on selecting best management practices for reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges from industrial
activities.
F. Nonstormwater Discharges: All nonstormwater discharges into the MS4 are prohibited unless those discharges are:
1. In compliance with a separate NPDES permit;
2. Pursuant to a discharge exemption by the regional board, the regional board's executive officer, or the state water resources control board;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 451/797
3. Associated with emergency firefighting activities (i.e., flows necessary for the protection of life or property);
4. Natural flows as defined in the municipal NPDES permit;
5. Conditionally exempt nonstormwater discharges as defined in accordance with the municipal NPDES permit; or
6. Authorized as a temporary nonstormwater discharge by USEPA pursuant to sections 104(a) or 104(b) of the comprehensive environmental
response, compensation, and liability act (CERCLA).
G. Prohibited Discharges: Prohibited discharges include, but are not limited to:
1. The discharge of wash waters to the MS4 from commercial auto washing or from gas stations, auto repair garages, or other types of automotive
service facilities when those facilities are cleaned;
2. The discharge of water to the MS4 from mobile auto washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile commercial and
industrial operations;
3. Discharges to the MS4 from areas where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are visibly leaking oil, fluid, or
antifreeze, is undertaken;
4. Discharges of runoff to the MS4 from storage areas of materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and from uncovered
receptacles containing hazardous materials;
5. Discharges to the MS4 of commercial/residential swimming pool filter backwash;
6. Discharges to the MS4 of runoff from the washing of toxic materials from paved or unpaved areas;
7. Discharges to the MS4 from washing impervious surfaces in industrial or commercial areas, unless specifically required by the state's, or the city's,
or Los Angeles County's health and safety codes, or permitted under a separate NPDES permit;
8. Discharges to the MS4 from the washing out of concrete or cement laden wash water from concrete trucks, pumps, tools, and equipment;
9. Discharges to the MS4 of any pesticide, fungicide, or herbicide banned by the USEPA or the California department of pesticide regulation or
discharges of a product registered under the federal insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide act to any waste stream that may ultimately be released to
waters of the United States unless specifically authorized under an NPDES permit. This requirement is not applicable to products used for lawn and
agricultural purposes;
10. The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for municipal trash disposal where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a
direct or indirect discharge to the MS4.
H. Discharges In Violation Of The Municipal NPDES Permit: Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the municipal NPDES permit,
either separately or in combination with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s)
causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from all losses, liabilities, claims, or
causes of actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-505: EXEMPTED DISCHARGES, CONDITIONALLY EXEMPTED DISCHARGES OR DESIGNATED DISCHARGES:
Discharges from those activities specifically identified in, or pursuant to, part III.A.1-3 of the municipal NPDES permit as being exempted discharges,
conditionally exempted discharges, or designated discharges shall not be considered a violation of this article, provided that any such discharges are
consistent with part III.A of the municipal NPDES permit and:
A. Applicable BMPs developed pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified
discharges;
B. The discharger meets all notification, reporting and recordkeeping requirements; and
C. The discharger has conducted all applicable monitoring requirements. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-506: REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING PROPERTIES:
Owners and occupants of property and owners of businesses within the city shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Storage Of Materials, Machinery, And Equipment:
1. Machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to runoff or exposed to stormwater shall be placed on a pad of
absorbent material to contain leaks, spills or small discharges and shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other maintenance related
pollutants are not discharged to the MS4.
2. Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous
materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff.
B. Removal Of Debris And Residue:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 452/797
1. All motor vehicle parking lots located in areas susceptible to runoff shall be swept, at minimum, on a monthly basis to remove debris. Such debris
shall be collected and properly disposed of. Lots with more than ten (10) parking spaces and all public parking facilities shall also be vacuum swept,
at minimum, on a quarterly basis, to remove chemical residue.
2. Fuel and chemical residue or other types of potentially harmful material, such as animal waste, garbage or batteries, which is located in an area
susceptible to runoff, shall be removed immediately and disposed of properly. Household hazardous waste may be disposed of through the city's
household hazardous waste program or at any other appropriate disposal site and shall not be placed in a trash container.
C. Septic Waste: No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste in an area where a discharge to city
streets or the MS4 may or does occur.
D. Use Of Water: Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted
washing down of paved impervious areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable, and diverted so that flow is directed to landscaped
areas for infiltration where possible.
E. Food And Liquid Wastes: Food and liquid wastes generated by nonresidential food service and food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of
and in a manner so such wastes are not discharged to the MS4.
F. Best Management Practices: BMPs shall be used in areas exposed to stormwater for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels, chemicals, fuel and
chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality.
G. Maintenance Of Structural BMPs: Structural BMPs required by the city, county of Los Angeles, or any state or federal agency shall be properly operated
and maintained, as specified by an approved SUSMP or stormwater mitigation plan, or as otherwise determined by the authorized enforcement officer.
Records and documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the director upon request. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-507: REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL AND CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES:
A. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general NPDES permit addressing
such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. environmental protection agency, the state water resources control board, or the regional board, shall
comply with all requirements of such permit and the provisions of this article. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit shall comply
with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof of compliance with any such NPDES permit may be required in a form acceptable to the
authorized enforcement officer, or designated representative, prior to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other type of
permit or license issued by the city.
B. Nonstormwater discharges to the MS4 from industrial, commercial, or construction activities in violation of any applicable NPDES permit or the
provisions of this article are prohibited.
C. Industrial and commercial dischargers and dischargers associated with construction activities shall implement effective BMPs, including source control
BMPs, in accordance with table 10 of part VI.D.6.f of the municipal NPDES permit unless a particular pollutant generating activity does not occur on a
facility's site. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-508: PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND
REDEVELOPMENT; LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT:
A. Objective: The provisions of this section establish requirements for construction activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment
projects to comply with the current municipal NPDES permit (order no. R4-2012-0175), to lessen the water quality impacts of development by using
smart growth practices, and integrate LID practices and standards for stormwater pollution mitigation through means of infiltration, evapotranspiration,
biofiltration, and rainfall harvest and use.
B. Scope: This section contains requirements for stormwater pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the
city to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures, and to develop LID principles and requirements, including, but not limited to, the
objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies, alternative compliance measures from the LID requirements for projects that demonstrate
technical infeasibility to retain the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) on site or where an opportunity exists for regional groundwater
replenishment as defined in the municipal NPDES permit, and collect funds for projects that are granted alternative compliance measures. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this section.
C. Applicability: This section applies to the following new development and redevelopment projects which are subject to city conditioning and approval:
1. New Development Projects:
a. All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious
area;
b. Industrial parks with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area;
c. Commercial malls with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of surface area;
d. Retail gasoline outlets with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area;
e. Restaurants (SIC 5812) with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 453/797
f. Parking lots with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious area or with twenty five (25) or more parking spaces;
g. Single-family hillside residential developments or redevelopments;
h. Street and road construction of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area shall follow USEPA guidance regarding
managing wet weather with green infrastructure: green streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable. Street and
road construction applies to stand alone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects;
i. Automotive service facilities (SIC 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface
area;
j. Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to a significant ecological area (SEA), where the development will:
(1) Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and
(2) Create two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more of impervious surface area.
2. Redevelopment Projects: Redevelopment projects in the foregoing subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds (pursuant to the municipal
NPDES permit), which include:
a. Land disturbing activities which create, add, or replace five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already
developed site excluding single-family dwellings and accessory structures.
b. Land disturbing activities which create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area on existing singlefamily
dwellings and accessory structures.
c. Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty percent (50%) of the impervious surface of a previously existing development, and
the existing development was not subject to postdevelopment stormwater quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.
d. Where redevelopment results in an alteration to less than fifty percent (50%) of the impervious surface of a previously existing development, and
the existing development was not subject to postdevelopment stormwater quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and
not the entire development.
e. Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or
replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet of impervious surface.
D. LID Standards Manual: The director shall prepare, maintain, and update, as deemed necessary and appropriate, a manual ("LID Standards Manual"),
which shall include urban and stormwater runoff quantity and quality control development principles and technologies for achieving compliance with the
provisions of this section. The "LID Standards Manual" shall also include technical feasibility and implementation parameters, as well as other rules,
requirements, and procedures as the director deems necessary, for implementing the provisions of this chapter.
E. Specific Requirements:
1. New Single-Family Hillside Homes: To the extent that the city may lawfully impose conditions, mitigation measures, or other requirements on the
development or construction of a single-family home in a Hillside Area, a single-family Hillside home development or redevelopment project shall
implement mitigation measures to:
a. Conserve natural areas;
b. Protect slopes and channels;
c. Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;
d. Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and
e. Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability.
2. New Development And Redevelopment Projects: New development and redevelopment projects are required to control pollutants and runoff volume
from the project site by minimizing the impervious surface area and controlling runoff through infiltration, bioretention, and/or rainfall harvest and use
in that preferred order, in accordance with the standards set forth in the municipal NPDES permit and the "LID Standards Manual". High removal
efficiency BMPs shall comply with the standards and requirements of the "LID Standards Manual".
3. Project Plans: An applicant for a new development or a redevelopment project identified in this article shall incorporate into the applicant's project
plans a stormwater mitigation plan which includes those BMPs necessary to control stormwater pollution from the completed project. Structural or
treatment control BMPs (including, as applicable, postconstruction treatment control BMPs) set forth in project plans shall meet the design standards
set forth in the municipal NPDES permit and the "LID Standards Manual".
4. New Development/Redevelopment Project Performance Criteria:
a. All new development and redevelopment projects, unless otherwise exempted herein or in the municipal NPDES permit, shall comply with part
VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit.
b. Postconstruction BMPs to mitigate stormwater pollution are required for all new development and redevelopment projects identified in this article
unless alternative measures are allowed as provided in part VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit.
c. BMPs must be implemented to retain on site the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv), defined as runoff from either: 1) the 0.75 inch, 24-
hour rain event; or 2) the 85th percentile, 24-hour event, as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map,
whichever is greater.
d. BMPs shall meet the design specifications and on site retention potential outlined in the part VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit and the "LID
Standards Manual".
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 454/797
e. Single-family Hillside home development projects are exempt from the new development/redevelopment project performance criteria of part
VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit unless they create, add, or replace ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area.
f. Street and road construction projects of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of impervious surface area are exempt from the new
development/redevelopment project performance criteria of part VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit but shall adhere to the city's green streets
policy.
g. Projects unable to retain one hundred percent (100%) of the SWQDv on site due to technical infeasibility as defined in the municipal NPDES
permit must implement alternative compliance measures in accordance with part VI.D.7.c of the municipal NPDES permit. When, as determined by
the city, one hundred percent (100%) on site retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or fully. The infeasibility shall be
demonstrated in the submitted stormwater mitigation plan. The technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are not
limited to:
(1) The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inches per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain
an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining SWQDv on site;
(2) Locations where seasonal high groundwater is within five (5) to ten feet (10') of surface grade;
(3) Locations within one hundred feet (100') of a groundwater well used for drinking water;
(4) Locations with potential geotechnical hazards;
(5) Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for
compliance with the on site volume retention requirement.
h. If partial or complete retention is technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate 1.5 times the portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not
reliably retained on site, biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the design specifications provided in the municipal NPDES permit of part VI.D.7.c.
i. Additional alternative compliance options such as off site infiltration may be available to the project site. The project site should contact the city to
determine eligibility.
j. The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained or biofiltered on site must be treated on site to reduce pollutant loading. BMPs must be selected
and designed to meet pollutant specific benchmarks as required per the municipal NPDES permit. Flow through BMPs may be used to treat the
remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of:
(1) 0.2 inch per hour, or
(2) The 1-year, 1-hour rainfall intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal map, whichever is greater.
F. Issuance Of Discretionary Permits: No discretionary permit may be issued for any new development or redevelopment project identified in this section
until the authorized enforcement officer confirms the project plans comply with the applicable requirements of this section.
G. Issuance Of Certificates Of Occupancy: As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for new development or redevelopment projects identified
in this article, the authorized enforcement officer shall require property owners or their representative(s) to build all the stormwater pollution control
BMPs and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and consistent with the stormwater mitigation plan and to
submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the
municipal NPDES permit, the stormwater mitigation plan, and other applicable regulatory requirements.
H. Information Provided By Owners: With the exception of simple LID BMPs (as defined in this article) implemented on single-family residences, consistent
with part VI.D.7.d(iii) of the municipal NPDES permit, project owners shall provide an operation and maintenance plan, monitoring plan where required,
and verification of ongoing maintenance provisions for LID practices and treatment control BMPs including, but not limited to: final map conditions, legal
agreements, covenants, conditions or restrictions, CEQA mitigation requirements, conditional use permits, and/or other legally binding maintenance
agreements. These maintenance records must be kept on site for treatment BMPs implemented on single-family residences.
I. Transfer Of Properties Subject To Requirement For Maintenance Of Structural And Treatment Control BMPs:
1. The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions
requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either: a) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment
control BMP or b) to replace an existing structural or treatment control BMP with new control measures or BMPs meeting the current standards of the
city and the municipal NPDES permit. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of
transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control
BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection.
2. For residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by the
community association, appropriate arrangements shall be made with the association regarding the responsibility for maintenance.
3. If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the
developer until the dedication is accepted. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-509: FEES:
Fees for plan reviews, inspections, violations, corrections, and tasks associated with this article may be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-510: STORMWATER AND NONSTORMWATER RUNOFF POLLUTION EDUCATION PROGRAM:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 455/797
The department of public works, along with other city departments, shall conduct an informational program to educate the public about the dangers of
stormwater and urban runoff pollution and the means of controlling such pollution. The program shall educate residents and business persons who operate
within the city about the contents of this article. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
9-4-511: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance: A violation of any provision of this article is declared to be a public nuisance, and the city attorney is authorized
to abate such violation by means of a civil action in addition to whatever other remedies are available to the city under this code and other applicable
laws, rules or regulations. Additionally, the following conditions shall be considered a public nuisance:
1. Any failure to comply with any applicable planning and land development program requirement set forth in section 9-4-508 of this chapter or the
municipal NPDES permit; or
2. Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the applicant's
successor in interest; or
3. Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved stormwater
mitigation plan or an approved SUSMP or approved SWPPP (stormwater pollution prevent plan or similar type of approved water quality
improvement plan), this chapter, or the municipal NPDES permit.
B. Cost: The above listed conditions are hereby determined to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, are declared and deemed a public
nuisance, and may be abated or restored by any authorized enforcement officer, and a civil or criminal action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the city attorney. The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the
property and the cost thereof shall be invoiced to the owner of the property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance abatement
costs. If any violation of this article constitutes a seasonal or recurrent nuisance, the authorized enforcement officer shall so declare. The failure of any
person to take appropriate annual precautions to prevent stormwater pollution after written notice of a determination under this section shall constitute
a public nuisance and a violation of this article.
C. Inspections:
1. Inspections By Authorized Enforcement Officer: Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this section, or
whenever an authorized enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any construction site any condition which
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement officer may, upon consent or upon obtaining an inspection
warrant, enter such construction site at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this section.
2. Basis: Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection process as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives
of this article, including, but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, discharges of
nonstormwater to the MS4, discharges which are not pursuant to an NPDES permit, or similar factors.
3. Right To Inspect: Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, an authorized enforcement officer shall obtain either the consent
of the owner, his/her authorized representative or the occupant of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search
warrant.
4. Entry To Inspect: An authorized enforcement officer may enter property to investigate the source of any discharge to any public street, inlet, gutter,
storm drain or any other part of the MS4 located within the jurisdiction of the city.
5. Compliance Assessments: An authorized enforcement officer may inspect property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this article, including,
but not limited to: a) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property;
b) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants; c) investigating the natural slope at the location, including
drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems; d) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface
runoff or through a storm drain system; e) locating any illicit connection or the source of prohibited discharge; f) evaluating compliance with any
permit issued relating to a discharge to the stormwater drainage system.
6. Portable Equipment: For purposes of verifying compliance with this article, an authorized enforcement officer may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer,
tank truck or other mobile equipment.
7. Records Review: An authorized enforcement officer may inspect all records of the owner or occupant of property relating to chemicals or processes
presently or previously occurring on site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety
data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans,
monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, prohibited discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential
contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system.
8. Sample And Test: An authorized enforcement officer may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing),
process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of
determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. An authorized enforcement officer may investigate the
integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the property using appropriate
tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. An authorized enforcement officer may take photographs or videotape,
make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.
9. Monitoring: An authorized enforcement officer may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring or sampling any discharge or
potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system.
10. Test Results: The owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, receive copies of all monitoring and
test results conducted by an authorized enforcement officer.
D. Concealment: Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of such provision.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 456/797
E. Civil Actions: In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the city.
In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:
1. A temporary and/or permanent injunction.
2. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for
the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection E.
3. Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation.
4. Compensatory damages for loss or destruction of water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.
F. Administrative Enforcement Powers: In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, any authorized enforcement
officer has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:
1. Cease And Desist Orders: When an authorized enforcement officer finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this
article, the officer may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that
those persons not complying shall:
a. Comply with the requirement;
b. Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and
c. Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring.
2. Notice To Clean: Whenever an authorized enforcement officer finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste
or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may
result in pollutants entering the MS4 or a nonstormwater discharge to the MS4, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent
property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she
may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice.
G. Penalties: Except as otherwise specifically provided, any violation of this article may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, infraction, or pursuant to the
administrative citation procedures set forth in title 1 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
H. Permit Revocation: To the extent the city makes a provision of this article or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or
license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this code.
I. Burden Of Proof: In an enforcement action, the burden of proof shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that the reduction or
elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable has been accomplished through compliance with the best management practices
available, including applicable monitoring, notifications and reporting requirements.
J. Remedies: Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies
provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 15-O-2678, eff. 6-18-2015)
Footnote 1: PRC § 30107.5.
Article 6. Water Supply
9-4-601: TITLE AND PURPOSE:
This article shall be known and cited as the WATER SUPPLY ORDINANCE of the city of Beverly Hills. The city council of the city of Beverly Hills hereby
enacts this article in order to regulate, manage, conserve, protect and preserve the city's water supply in such a manner that the city's water supply,
including, but not limited to, the ground water resources within the jurisdiction of the city, will remain a viable resource and be put to the most efficient and
beneficial use by the city and its inhabitants, while also safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-
1999)
9-4-602: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
ACTIVE WELL: A water well that is routinely operated and supplies greater than or equal to five percent (5%) of the water supply requirement of the
property upon which it is located.
BASIN: The Hollywood, Santa Monica, and unadjudicated portions of the Central ground water basins, as defined in bulletin 118 of the Department of
Water Resources, as amended from time to time.
BASIN DRAINAGE AREA: The area from which surface water or subsurface water flows over or into the basin. The basin drainage area includes, without
limitation, all lands overlying the basin and the Santa Monica Mountains to the north of the basin.
CONTAMINATION: Shall have the meaning set forth in California Water Code section 13050.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 457/797
DEWATERING: The removal of ground water from below the surface of the ground through pumping, drainage, evaporation, seepage or any other active
or passive process, other than removal for application to beneficial use, as that term is defined under State law.
EMERGENCY: One of the following circumstances:
A. An imminent threat of or actual contamination or pollution of the ground water of the City; or
B. Jeopardy to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the City; or
C. An immediate threat of substantial loss of personal or real property within the City.
EXPORT: The extraction of ground water from land overlying the basin within the plan area for use on land outside the plan area.
EXTRACTION: The act of obtaining ground water by pumping or by some other controlled means.
GROUND WATER: All water that can be or is produced from beneath the ground surface, but does not include water which flows in known and definite
channels.
INACTIVE WELL: A well that is not routinely operating but capable of being made operable with a minimum effort.
MODIFICATION OR REPAIR: Shall only mean the deepening of an existing well, or reperforation, sealing or replacement of an existing well casing.
PERSON: Includes a governmental entity, unless that entity is exempt from the application of this article pursuant to State or Federal law.
PLAN AREA: Those lands within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Beverly Hills as well as those lands within the City's retail water service area,
as it may exist from time to time.
POLLUTION: Shall have the meaning set forth in California Water Code section 13050.
PREMISES: Any improvement to land, including, but not limited to, any building, structure, roadway, tunnel, tank or excavation.
RECHARGE: The process or action by which water reaches the saturated zone of the basin, where it is available for extraction. Recharge may occur
through either percolation or injection.
REENTRY OF A WELL: The process of cleaning out by drilling, jetting, or any other method an abandoned or inactive well.
WELL OR WATER WELL: Any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting water from the ground. "Well" or "water well"
shall not include:
A. Oil and gas wells, or geothermal wells constructed under the jurisdiction of the California State Department of Conservation, except those wells
converted to use as water wells; or
B. Wells used for the purpose of dewatering excavation during construction; or
C. Wells used for the purpose of stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.
Words not otherwise defined in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in California Department of Water Resources bulletin nos. 74-81 and
74-90, as each may be amended. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006; Ord. 19-O-2777, eff. 5-3-2019)
9-4-603: USE OF GROUND WATER:
A. Prohibited Without A Permit: No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the City shall extract ground
water from the basin for beneficial use, as that term is defined pursuant to California law, unless:
1. On the effective date of this section, there is a ground water extraction well on the property that has been in operation within the previous five (5)
years and for which filings have been made pursuant to California Water Code section 4999 et seq., within that five (5) year period; or
2. The person has obtained prior approval from the City by applying for and obtaining a ground water use permit, in accordance with this article.
B. Permit Procedures: The Director of Public Works may issue ground water use permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this Code.
C. Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by section 4-1-102 of this Code and any other information the Director of Public Works
may deem necessary in order to determine whether a ground water use permit should be issued, an application for a ground water use permit shall
include all of the following information:
1. The applicant's name and address;
2. The location of the property for which a ground water use permit is sought, including the street address and assessor's parcel number(s);
3. A description of the legal interest the applicant has in the property (e.g., owner, lessee, renter) and the name and address of the owner of the
property if the applicant is not the owner;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 458/797
4. A description of the ground water extraction well(s) to be used as the source of the ground water supply, including:
a. Whether the well(s) is already in existence or will be drilled or constructed in the future; and
b. Whether a well permit was issued for drilling or construction of the well(s), according to section 9-4-605 of this article, and a copy of any permit
thus issued;
5. A detailed description of the proposed beneficial use of ground water by the applicant, including the place of use, purpose of use (i.e., domestic,
irrigation, power, frost protection, Municipal, mining, industrial, fish and wildlife preservation and enhancement, recreational, water quality, stock
watering, heat control or other type of use according to State law), manner of use, season of use, and maximum and average quantities of use on
annual and gallons per minute bases.
D. Standards For Permit Issuance: The Director of Public Works may issue a ground water use permit if he or she finds that the application is for a
reasonable and beneficial use of water, the applicant has applied for water service from the City and the City has declined to offer water service to the
applicant in lieu of the applicant's use of ground water, use of the ground water would not be injurious to public health based on the quality of the water,
and the applicant has satisfied the general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this Code.
E. Reporting Requirement: Any ground water use permit shall be conditioned upon the permittee's reporting the amount of ground water extracted and
used as required by the Director of Public Works.
F. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The Director of Public Works may revoke or suspend a ground water use permit in accordance with title 4,
chapter 1, article 1 of this Code, or if the permittee does not use any ground water or report any ground water usage for a period exceeding five (5)
years. (Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-604: MULTIPLE WATER SUPPLY:
A. Prohibited Without Permit: No person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any premises in the city shall supply the premises
with potable water received from the city and concurrently supply the premises with potable water received from a water well located on the premises
or a water well located on any other premises located within the boundaries of the city, unless:
1. On the effective date of this article, the premises is receiving potable water from the city and concurrently receiving potable water from an active well
located on the property; or
2. The person has obtained prior approval from the city by applying for and obtaining a multiple water supply permit, in accordance with this article.
B. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue multiple water supply permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
C. Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by section 4-1-102 of this code and any other information the director of public works
may deem necessary in order to determine whether a multiple water supply permit should be issued, an application for a multiple water supply permit
shall include all of the following information:
1. The applicant's name and address;
2. The location of the property to which concurrent water supply is sought, including the street address and assessor's parcel number(s);
3. A description of the legal interest the applicant has in the property (i.e., owner, lessee, renter) and the name and address of the owner of the
property if the applicant is not the owner; and
4. A detailed description of the water supply sources, other than the city, from which the property will be supplied. Such description shall include:
a. The name and address of the person supplying the water, and the legal description of the property from which the water is supplied;
b. A plot plan (scale 1/4 inch equals 20 feet) indicating the location of the supply source and detailing the delivery and piping system providing for
receipt of the water to the property;
c. A statement from the person supplying the water describing the legal basis of their water rights and authority to deliver water from their source off
the respective property;
d. The uses to which all water supplied to the property will be put; and
e. A detailed description of the need for concurrent water supplies to the property, including the reasons why water service from the city alone is
inadequate to meet the water requirements of the applicant.
D. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a multiple water supply permit if the director finds that the applicant has satisfied
the general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code.
E. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The director of public works may revoke or suspend a multiple water supply permit in accordance with title 4,
chapter 1, article 1 of this code. Upon notification by the city that a multiple water supply permit is suspended or revoked, the city may terminate city
water service to the property, if the premises continues to receive water supplied from a water well located on the property or a water well located on
any other property located within the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-605: WELLS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 459/797
A. Registration Of Wells: Any person operating a well within the city shall register the well within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this section on a
form to be provided by the department of public works. The registration shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. The name and address of the operator;
2. The address of the property upon which the well is located;
3. The approximate location of the well on the property; and
4. The purpose of ground water use.
B. Metering Of Wells: No person shall operate a well within the city unless the well is equipped with a waterflow measuring device or meter, or unless the
city council has expressly exempted the well from this requirement.
C. Annual Extraction Statements: Any person operating a well within the city shall file with the department of public works, on a form to be provided by the
department of public works, an annual extraction statement. The statement shall be signed by the operator under penalty of perjury and shall
summarize the amount of percolating ground water extracted by the operator within the preceding water year or an alternatively designated annual
reporting period. The statement shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information:
1. Total extraction in acre-feet of water from the well;
2. The types of use and the acreage served by the well compared to the number of acres owned, leased or controlled by the operator; and
3. The method of measuring or computing ground water extractions.
D. Permit Required For Installation, Modification Or Destruction Of Wells: No person shall drill, install or construct a well; inactivate a well; modify or repair
an existing, inactive or abandoned well; reenter an abandoned or inactive well; or destroy an existing, inactive or abandoned well within the boundaries
of the city, unless:
1. The person has obtained prior approval from the city by applying for and obtaining a well permit in accordance with this article for the specific work to
be performed; or
2. The well is supplying water to land within the city on the effective date of this section, provided that the well is used for the same purpose as on the
effective date of this section, and provided that the well is maintained, operated, and used in accordance with the standards and provisions of this
article.
E. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue well permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
F. Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by section 4-1-102 of this code and any other information the director of public works
may deem necessary in order to determine whether a well permit should be issued, an application for a well permit shall include all of the following
information:
1. The applicant's name and address;
2. The name of the person who will perform the work on the well;
3. A statement that the person who is to perform the work on the well is licensed under the provisions of chapter 9 of division 3 of the California
Business and Professions Code as a well drilling contractor, including the number of such license, and that such license is in full force and effect and
a certificate satisfying the requirements of section 38000 of the Labor Code; or, a statement that the applicant is exempt from these provisions and
the basis of the claimed exemption(s);
4. The estimated or proposed depth of the well, casing material, sealing material, sealing method, use of the well, and drilling method to be used;
5. A description of the proposed method by which the work is to be performed;
6. The location of the property and well site, including the street address and assessor's parcel number(s); and
7. A plot plan (scale 1/4 inch equals 20 feet) indicating the location of the well with respect to the following items:
a. Property lines;
b. Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage or industrial wastes within a two hundred foot (200') radius of the proposed well;
c. Perennial, seasonal, natural or artificial water bodies or watercourses, including, if applicable, the location of the 100-year floodplain;
d. The drainage pattern of the property;
e. Existing wells on the property, whether put to domestic, industrial, agricultural or other use;
f. Access roads and easements (including water, sewer, utility, and roadway easements);
g. The approximate ground level elevation of well site above mean sea level and the source of said information;
h. Existing and/or proposed structures; and
i. Animal or fowl enclosures, pens, paddocks, stockyards within a two hundred foot (200') radius of the proposed well site.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 460/797
G. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a well permit if the director finds that the applicant has satisfied the general
criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code, and:
1. That the proposed well complies with the design and spacing requirements adopted by the city with respect to wells;
2. That water service from the city is not available to serve the reasonable water requirements of the property on which the well is proposed to be
located; and
3. The proposed well and its attendant uses will not unreasonably impair the rights of other operators, or the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the city or its customers.
H. Guarantee Of Performance: Prior to the issuance of a well permit, the person drilling the well shall post with the city a cash deposit or bond to
guarantee compliance with the terms of this article and the applicable permit. Such deposit or bond shall be in the amount deemed necessary by the
director of public works to include, but not be limited to, the remedy of improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated cost of such work. Eighty
five percent (85%) of the deposit or bond shall be returned to the permittee when the work has been completed to the satisfaction of the city; the
remaining fifteen percent (15%) of the bond shall be returned after one year of satisfactory well operation as determined by the city. These percentages
may vary to cover special conditions and circumstances in order to guarantee performance and compliance with this article. Licensed well drilling
contractors shall not be required to post a bond or deposit guaranteeing performance.
I. Performance Of Work: All work pursuant to a well permit shall be performed in accordance with those standards for constructing, drilling, installing, or
inactivating a well; modifying or repairing an existing, inactive or abandoned well; reentering an abandoned or inactive well; or destroying an existing,
inactive or abandoned well set forth in bulletin nos. 74-81 and 74-90 published by the California department of water resources.
J. Scope Of Permit: A well permit issued for construction of a well covers the construction of one complete well. If the well driller proposes to change the
site of the well from that shown on the site plan of a permit, the change in site must be preapproved by the city prior to drilling.
K. Abandoned Or Inactive Wells: Any operator of a well that abandons the well after the effective date of this article shall give written notice of the
abandonment to the department of public works within sixty (60) days after the abandonment. An abandoned well shall be properly destroyed in
accordance with the requirements of California department of water resources bulletin nos. 74-81 and 74-90. An inactive well shall be considered
abandoned and proper destruction required when it has been operated for less than eight (8) hours of pumping in any twelve (12) month period, or if it
is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be made functional, or if it is a monitoring well from which no data has been taken for a period of twenty four
(24) months, unless a well permit for inactivation is applied for and obtained in accordance with this article before expiration of the twelve (12) month
inactive period. An inactive well must be maintained in accordance with the requirements of California department of water resources bulletin nos. 74-
81 and 74-90.
L. Multiple Water Supply: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no person shall drill, install or construct a well; modify or repair an existing,
inactive or abandoned well; or reenter an abandoned or inactive well, if that action will result in a violation of section 9-4-604 of this article.
M. Emergency: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in the event of an emergency, a person may construct, drill, and install a well, inactivate
a well, modify or repair an existing, inactive or abandoned well, reenter an abandoned or inactive well; or destroy an existing, inactive or abandoned
well without the well permit required by this section, provided that:
1. Such work is performed in conformance with the standards set forth in this article;
2. The city is notified of such emergency work no later than the following city working day from initiation of such emergency work; and
3. An application for the required permit is made within three (3) city working days after initiation of such emergency work.
N. Exemptions: The operator of an active well from which less than 1.5 acre-feet per year is extracted is exempt from the provisions of this section, except
that the operator must still register the well in accordance with subsection A of this section. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff.
11-3-2006)
9-4-606: TRANSFER TO NONADJOINING PARCEL:
A. Permit Required: An operator of a well shall not sell, lease or otherwise transfer water from one legal parcel to a nonadjoining legal parcel without
obtaining prior approval from the city by applying for and obtaining a water transfer permit, in accordance with this article.
B. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue water transfer permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
C. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a water transfer permit if the director finds that the nonadjoining parcel is not
concurrently receiving water service from the city and that the applicant has satisfied the general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code.
D. Limit On Amount Transferred: The well operator may only transfer up to the average amount of the water which was consumptively used annually in the
five (5) year period proceeding the calendar year in which the transfer is requested. If the well was in operation for less than five (5) years prior to the
request for transfer, the director may establish a limit on the amount of water which may be transferred based on the amount of water consumptively
used from the well in the years immediately prior to the request or the average amount of water consumptively used annually from similar wells in the
area.
E. Other Conditions On Transfers: The well operator shall comply with any other conditions imposed by the city to avoid injury to existing lawful users and
the environment. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 461/797
9-4-607: EXPORT FROM BASIN OR PLAN AREA:
A. Permit Required: No person shall export ground water from the basin or the plan area without obtaining prior approval from the city by applying for and
obtaining a water export permit, in accordance with this article. Exports existing on the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the provisions
of this section.
B. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue water export permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
C. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a water export permit if the director finds that the applicant has satisfied the
general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code, has obtained all necessary permits required by law, and has demonstrated that a surplus of water exists
capable of safe export without injury to existing beneficial uses of ground water within the basin or plan area.
D. Time Limit On Water Export Permits: All water export permits shall be valid for a specified period of time.
E. Reduction Or Suspension Of Export: All water export permits shall declare that they are subject to the right of Beverly Hills to further condition, reduce
or suspend the permit where necessary to protect beneficial uses of water within the basin or the plan area. The city may reduce or suspend any export
of water whenever the export is determined to be causing an unreasonable interference with the ability of the city to meet its retail water supply needs
or any other material injury within the basin or the plan area, or whenever the plan area is in an overdraft condition and alternative water supplies are
not available to rectify the condition. The city council shall conduct a public hearing prior to terminating or reducing exports from the basin to consider
other appropriate measures to address the overdraft conditions and to consider information presented by any affected well operator. (Ord. 99-O-2327,
eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-608: STORAGE OR RECAPTURE OF IMPORTED OR DEVELOPED WATER:
A. Permit Required: No person shall operate a project to store and recapture imported or developed water within the basin without obtaining prior approval
from the city by applying for and obtaining a storage and recapture permit, in accordance with this article.
B. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue storage and recapture permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
C. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a storage and recapture permit if the director finds that the applicant has
satisfied the general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code.
D. Exemption: Storage and recapture facilities existing on the effective date of this section shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 99-O-
2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-609: ACTIVITIES DEGRADING OR CONTAMINATING WATER SUPPLY:
No person shall undertake any activity within three hundred feet (300') of a well used to supply domestic uses that could materially degrade or contaminate
a domestic water supply. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-610: DEWATERING:
A. Prohibited Without A Permit: No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the city shall cause the
dewatering of the basin or the basin drainage area, by the extraction, diversion, transportation or movement of water from, through or across the
premises, unless the person has obtained prior approval from the city by applying for and obtaining a dewatering permit, in accordance with this article.
This requirement applies to all dewatering, including any dewatering commenced prior to the effective date of this section, for which all responsible
parties shall apply for a permit by November 1, 2006.
B. Use In Lieu Of Dewatering: Unless impracticable, all persons shall place all extracted ground water to reasonable and beneficial use rather than
causing the dewatering of the basin. For purposes of this section, "impracticable" shall mean technically infeasible or requiring the expenditure of a
greater amount than the replenishment fee described in subsection G of this section. The beneficial purposes to which extracted ground water may be
placed include:
1. Recharging the ground water to the basin;
2. Placing the ground water to reasonable and beneficial use on the property, including irrigation or other nonpotable use, subject to the permitting
requirements of section 9-4-603 of this article; or
3. Delivering the ground water to the city for treatment and use by the city, including the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of all facilities necessary for conveyance of the water to the city's water treatment plant, at no cost to the city.
C. Permit Procedures: The director of public works may issue dewatering permits in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
D. Permit Application: In addition to any other information required by section 4-1-102 of this code and any other information the director of public works
may deem necessary in order to determine whether a dewatering permit should be issued, an application for a dewatering permit shall include all of the
following information:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 462/797
1. The applicant's name and address;
2. The location of the property on which dewatering will occur;
3. A description of the legal interest the applicant has in the property (e.g., owner, lessee, renter) and the name and address of the owner of the
property if the applicant is not the owner;
4. A detailed description of the purpose or purposes for which the dewatering is proposed. Such description shall include:
a. The activity or activities that will necessitate the dewatering of the basin;
b. The method by which the dewatering will be effected;
c. The estimated duration of the dewatering, including beginning and ending dates;
d. The estimated amount of water that will be dewatered from the basin, including the amount estimated to be dewatered daily;
e. A statement that the dewatering site is in compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations;
5. A declaration that the applicant shall pay to the city the replenishment fee described in subsection G of this section.
E. Standards For Permit Issuance: The director of public works may issue a dewatering permit if it finds that the alternatives described in subsection B of
this section in lieu of dewatering are impracticable, and the applicant has satisfied the general criteria of section 4-1-103 of this code.
F. Permit Conditions: Any dewatering permit shall be conditioned upon the permittee's reporting the amount of ground water dewatered as required by the
director of public works and paying the replenishment fee described in subsection G of this section.
G. Replenishment Fee: In the event that the recharge of dewatered ground water to the basin is impracticable, the permittee shall pay to the city an annual
fee based upon the cost of replacing the dewatered ground water, as recommended by the director of public works and determined by the city council.
The fee may be set based upon either direct or in lieu replenishment of the basin by the city, and may account for the treatment of water or stranded
capital facilities of the city, at the discretion of the city council. The amount of dewatered ground water subject to the fee shall be measured or
estimated by the permittee according to a method approved by the director of public works.
H. Exemption: Persons owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any R-1 property in the city that have, as of the effective date of this
section, a valid national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit are exempt from the requirements of this section.
I. Revocation Or Suspension Of Permit: The director of public works may revoke or suspend a dewatering permit in accordance with title 4, chapter 1,
article 1 of this code. (Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-611: PERMIT ISSUANCE AS DISCRETIONARY ACT:
The issuance of permits pursuant to this article shall be deemed a discretionary act, and issuance shall be in the sole discretion of the director of public
works given the standards and policies set forth in this article. In approving discretionary permits, the director of public works is hereby authorized to
impose any reasonable conditions, modifications, or limitations on any part of the application which are deemed necessary to eliminate or substantially
mitigate any significant adverse impact on the environment, the city's ground water resource and other city water supply sources, or the health and safety
of the inhabitants of the city and to otherwise carry out the purpose and goals of this article. As a discretionary act, issuance of a permit requires
compliance with the California environmental quality act2. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-612: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMITS:
The director of public works may revoke or suspend permits issued pursuant to this article in accordance with title 4, chapter 1, article 1 of this code. (Ord.
99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-2006)
9-4-613: RIGHT OF ENTRY TO INSPECT:
The city shall have the right to enter upon any property at any reasonable time to make inspections and examinations for the purposes of enforcement of
this article, subject to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure section 1822.50 et seq. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-3-
2006)
9-4-614: APPEALS FROM DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
Any person whose application for a permit pursuant to this article has been denied, or whose permit has been suspended or revoked, by the director of
public works may appeal to the city council in accordance with title 1, chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 99-O-2327, eff. 6-4-1999; amd. Ord. 06-O-2506, eff. 11-
3-2006)
Footnote 1: Pub.Res.C. § 30107.5.
Footnote 2: Pub.Res.C. § 21000 et seq.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 463/797
Chapter 5
SEISMIC SAFETY PROGRAM
Article 1. General Provisions
9-5-101: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes
on existing unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings. The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for structural seismic resistance and
established primarily to reduce the risk of loss of life or injury. Compliance with this chapter will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury nor necessarily
prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated buildings. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
9-5-102: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions, in addition to those found in the Building Code shall govern the construction of this chapter:
BEARING WALL: Any wall supporting a floor or roof where the total superimposed load exceeds one hundred (100) pounds per linear foot, and any
unreinforced masonry wall over six feet (6') in height supporting any weight including its own weight.
BEVERLY HILLS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE: The Beverly Hills Administrative Code provisions set forth in chapter 1, article 1 of this title.
BUILDING: Any structure, or contiguous or interconnected structures, intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. For the purpose of the
structural analysis pursuant to subsection 9-5-202A of this chapter, "building" shall also mean an entire structure or a portion thereof which will respond to
seismic forces as a unit.
CIVIL ENGINEER OR PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A civil or professional engineer licensed pursuant to the rules and regulations of the California
Business and Professions Code.
CROSSWALL: A wood framed wall sheathed with any of the materials specified in technical appendix tables TA-9-5-3 or TA-9-5-4.
ESSENTIAL BUILDINGS OR FACILITIES: Those structures or buildings which, in the opinion of the Director of Building and Safety, must be safe and
usable after an earthquake for emergency purposes in order to protect the health and safety of the general public. Such facilities shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
A. Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery or emergency treatment areas.
B. Fire and police stations.
C. Municipal government disaster operation and communications centers.
EXTERNAL HAZARD: An object attached to or forming the exterior facade of a building which may fall onto pedestrians or occupants of adjacent
buildings. Examples of this type of hazard include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Nonstructural exterior wall panels, such as those composed of masonry infill or decorative precast concrete.
B. Parapets.
C. Marquees, awnings or other rooflike projections from a building.
D. Masonry or stone wall veneers and wall ornamentations, including cornices or other decorative appendages.
E. Masonry chimneys.
F. Tile roofs.
G. Wall signs and exterior lighting fixtures hung from building exteriors.
H. Fire escapes or balconies.
HAZARDOUS BUILDINGS OR FACILITIES: Structures housing, supporting or containing sufficient quantities of toxic or explosive substances to be
dangerous, in the opinion of the city of Beverly Hills fire chief, to the safety of the general public if released.
HIGH RISK BUILDING: Any nonessential building having an occupant load of one hundred (100) occupants or more except that a high risk building shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 464/797
not include the following:
A. Any building having exterior walls braced with masonry walls or wood frame crosswalls which are spaced less than forty feet (40') apart in each story
and which are full story height with a minimum length of one and one-half (11/2) times the story height, or
B. Any building used for its intended purpose, as determined by the director of building and safety, for less than twenty (20) hours per week.
LOW RISK BUILDING: Any nonessential building having an occupant load of less than twenty (20) occupants.
MEDIUM RISK BUILDING: Any building, not classified as a high risk, hazardous or essential building as defined in this section, having an occupant load of
twenty (20) occupants or more.
OCCUPANT LOAD: The total occupant load of a building as determined by using the provisions set forth in section 3302(a) of the uniform building code or
the actual maximum number of occupants in that building as determined by the director of building and safety if that number is less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the number determined by using the building code.
POINTING: The partial reconstruction of the bed joints of an unreinforced masonry wall.
UNIFORM BUILDING CODE: The uniform building code as adopted and amended by the city of Beverly Hills in this title.
UNREINFORCED MASONRY BEARING WALL BUILDING: A building that contains unreinforced masonry bearing walls.
UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALL: A masonry wall in which the area of reinforcing steel is less than twenty five percent (25%) of the minimum required
by the uniform building code for reinforced masonry and is constructed wholly or partially with any of the following materials:
A. Unreinforced brick masonry.
B. Unreinforced concrete masonry.
C. Hollow clay tile.
D. Adobe or unburned clay masonry.
WALL CLASSES: Existing unreinforced masonry walls which are classified by their shear strength, quality of construction and state of repair, deterioration
and weathering. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992; amd. Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-5-103: SCOPE:
A. All buildings having at least one reinforced masonry bearing wall shall comply with the requirements of this chapter except:
1. Detached one- or two-family dwellings and apartment houses containing less than five (5) dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes.
2. School buildings inspected for building safety purposes by the state of California.
3. Historic buildings or structures which have been listed on the state or national historic building register, or have received a rating of 4E or better by
the Beverly Hills historic resources survey and which are seismically strengthened according to the provisions of part 8 of title 24 of the California
code of regulations (state historical building code). Buildings not already strengthened according to the provisions of the state historical building code
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to buildings which meet the requirements of, or have been structurally upgraded in substantial accordance with,
either: 1) division 88 of article 1 of chapter 9 of the Los Angeles City municipal code, or 2) the 1973, or later, edition of the uniform building code. The
determination regarding whether a building meets such requirements shall be made by the director of building and safety.
C. Design strengthening methods other than those required by this chapter, may be accepted by the director of building and safety under the criteria set
forth in subsection 9-1-105M of this title.
D. This chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems unless necessary to comply with other
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992; amd. Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
9-5-104: APPLICABILITY OF UNIFORM BUILDING CODE:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the uniform building code as adopted and modified by the city of Beverly Hills, shall apply to all construction
and alterations performed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
9-5-105: ESSENTIAL AND HAZARDOUS FACILITIES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 465/797
This chapter shall not apply to "essential facilities" and "hazardous facilities" as defined in this chapter. Such facilities shall meet the uniform building code
requirements for new construction by January 1, 1995. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
Article 2. Required Strengthening Of Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings;
General And Administrative Requirements
9-5-201: RATING CLASSIFICATIONS:
A. The director of building and safety shall categorize each building within the scope of this chapter in one of the rating classifications set forth in section 9-
5-301, table 9-5-1 of this chapter. The total occupant load of the entire building shall be used to determine the rating classification except that for
purposes of this chapter, portions of buildings constructed to act independently when resisting seismic forces, and having exits pursuant to section
3303 of the uniform Building Code with independent travel paths, may be placed in separate rating classification. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
9-5-202: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Structural Analysis: The owner of each building within the scope of this chapter shall, upon service of a notice as provided in section 9-5-203 of this
article, and within the time limits set forth in this section, cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by a California state licensed engineer or
California state licensed architect and, if the building does not comply with the minimum requirements of this chapter, the owner shall cause it to be
structurally altered to conform to such standards or shall cause the building to be demolished. All analyses and structural alterations for seismic
resistance shall be performed in substantial compliance with the standards set forth in the "Technical Appendix: Required Strengthening Of
Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings", adopted by the city council and incorporated herein by reference. The technical appendix shall be kept
on file in the office of the department of building and safety and shall be made available to the public.
1. The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting a structural analysis, or
plans for demolition to the director of building and safety within the stated time limits set forth in this subsection A1. These time limits shall begin to
run from the date the notice is served in accordance with section 9-5-203 of this article.
The owner shall submit an analysis or plans for demolition or wall anchors that fall within one of the following categories:
a. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after service of the notice, the owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall submit a structural
analysis which shall demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this chapter or is exempt from this chapter; or
b. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after service of the notice, the owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall submit a structural
analysis and plans for structural alterations of the building to comply with this chapter; or
c. Within two hundred seventy (270) days after service of the notice, the owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall submit plans for the
demolition of the building.
d. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection A1d, within one hundred eighty (180) days after service of the notice, the owner of a building
within the scope of this chapter shall submit plans for the installation of wall anchors in accordance with the requirements specified in technical
appendix section TA-9-5-6. This subsection A1d shall not apply to any building designated in rating classification I or any building designated in
rating classification II which has an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more.
2. Each structural analysis prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewed by the director of building and safety, or his designee, who shall have
the sole discretion to determine the adequacy of the analysis. The director shall determine that an analysis is adequate if the director determines that
the analysis meets the purposes and requirements of this chapter. The city may hire independent consultants to assist with the review of these
analyses. If the director of building and safety determines that the submitted report is inadequate, the specified inadequacies shall be immediately
corrected by the property owner's engineer or architect to the satisfaction of the director of building and safety. In no case shall such corrections
extend the time for compliance with the schedule set forth in subsection A1 of this section and table 9-5-2, section 9-5-301 of this chapter.
3. After plans submitted pursuant to subsection A1b, A1c or A1d of this section are approved by the director of building and safety, the owner shall:
a. Give notice by certified mail within thirty (30) days to all adjacent property owners having a common boundary with the subject building, as shown
on the last equalized assessment role, that the subject unreinforced masonry bearing wall building has been determined to be within the scope of
this chapter; and submit proof of delivery of such notice within fifteen (15) days after compliance with this requirement;
b. Submit a construction management plan satisfactory to the director of building and safety for all structural alterations, demolitions and
reconstructions; and
c. Obtain a building permit and thereafter commence and complete the required construction or demolition within the time limits set forth in table 9-5-
2, section 9-5-301 of this chapter.
4. If an owner has installed wall anchors pursuant to subsection A1d of this section, the owner shall thereafter comply with subsection A1b or A1c of
this section and the time limits contained in this subsection A4 shall apply. However, this subsection A4 shall not apply to any building designated in
rating classification I and any building designated in rating classification II which has an occupant load of three hundred (300) or more.
a. Within one year and two hundred seventy (270) days from the service of the notice, the owner shall submit plans for either structural alterations
pursuant to subsection A1b of this section or demolition pursuant to subsection A1c of this section;
b. The building permit must be obtained within two (2) years from the date of service of the notice;
c. All structural alterations or demolition shall begin within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of the building permit; and
d. Completion of all work must be made within four (4) years from the date of service of the notice.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 466/797
5. Documentation that a building qualifies for an exemption from this chapter shall be submitted to the director of building and safety before a building
may be relieved of the requirements of this chapter pursuant to this section. The director of building and safety may require additional tests,
inspections or reports to substantiate the claim of exemption.
B. Information Required On Plans For Structural Alterations: The following construction information shall be included in the plans for structural alterations
prepared pursuant to subsection A1b of this section:
1. A description of the building including:
a. The street address,
b. The types of uses within the building, with separate uses that generate different occupant loads indicated on a plan showing the square footage of
each different use,
c. The date of original construction, if known, and the date, if known, of any subsequent construction, and
d. The name and address of the original designer and contractor, if known, and the name and address of the designer and contractor, if known, for
any subsequent additions or substantial structural alterations;
2. Accurately dimensioned floor and roof plans showing existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof framing members and sheathing
materials. The plans shall indicate all existing and new crosswalls and their materials of construction. The location of the crosswalls and their
openings shall be fully dimensioned or drawn to scale on the plans;
3. Accurately dimensioned wall elevations showing openings, piers, wall classes, thicknesses, heights, wall shear test locations, and cracks or
damaged portions requiring repairs;
4. The general condition of the mortar joints and, if necessary, where the joints require pointing;
5. Where the exterior face is veneer, the type of veneer, its thickness, bonding and ties, if any, to the structural wall masonry;
6. The type of interior wall and ceiling surfaces;
7. The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof when used in the design;
8. The extent and type of external hazard corrections, including corrections to parapets, which were previously performed, if any;
9. Repair details, if any, of cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry walls required to resist forces specified in this chapter;
10. The design method used;
11. All crosswalls and shear walls; and
12. All other plans, sections and details necessary to define required retrofit construction specified in this chapter.
C. Historic Structure Review: Prior to the issuance of a demolition or building permit for work required pursuant to this chapter, the owner of a historic
building or structure which has been listed on the state or national historic building register, or has received a rating of 4E or better by the Beverly Hills
historic resources survey, must provide photographs and documentation of the subject building to the architectural commission sufficient to enable the
architectural commission to determine the historical or cultural significance of the subject building. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
9-5-203: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Service Of Notice:
1. The director of building and safety shall issue a notice as provided in this section to the owner of each building within the scope of this chapter. The
notice shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll. Service may also be made upon the person, if any, in apparent control of the building.
B. Priority Of Service Of Notice: In order to avoid construction conflicts, the notices which trigger the time limits provided in this article shall be mailed to
property owners in phases as set forth in table 9-5-3, section 9-5-301 of this chapter. The owners of the buildings housing the largest occupant loads
shall be served first. The minimum time period prior to the service of the notice shall be measured from the effective date of the initial ordinance
establishing this chapter. The director of building and safety may, upon receipt of a written request from an owner, notify such owner of the need to
bring the building into compliance with this chapter prior to the normal service date for such building set forth in this chapter provided that the director
determines that the notice will not lead to construction conflicts.
C. Contents Of Notice: The notice shall specify that the building has been determined by the director of building and safety to be within the scope of this
chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this chapter. The notice shall specify the rating classification of the
building and shall be accompanied by a copy of section 9-5-202 of this article, which sets forth the owner's alternatives and time limits for compliance.
D. Recordation: At the time that the director of building and safety determines that the structural analysis of a building within the scope of this chapter is
adequate and the building requires seismic safety renovations, the director shall record in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder a certificate
stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter and requires seismic safety renovations. The certificate shall also state that the
owner thereof has been notified of the need to structurally analyze the building and structurally alter or demolish the building if compliance with this
chapter has not been demonstrated.
Once the building has been structurally altered so that it is capable of resisting minimum seismic forces as set forth in this chapter, or has been
demolished, the director of building and safety shall record in the office of the Los Angeles County recorder a certificate indicating that the subject
building is no longer classified within the scope of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 467/797
E. Appeals:
1. The owner or person in charge or control of the building may appeal the director of building and safety's decisions or determinations relative to the
application and interpretation of this chapter to the seismic safety appeals board as established by section 2-2-1301 of this code.
2. Such appeal shall be filed with the board within sixty (60) days from the service date of the notice or within sixty (60) days of the date of the subject
decision. The appeal shall contain a statement of facts on which the appeal is based sufficient to enable the board to understand the nature of the
controversy, the basis of the appeal and the relief requested.
3. Upon receipt of such appeal, the board shall, by United States mail, notify adjacent property owners having a common boundary line with the subject
building. Such property owners shall be given a period of ten (10) days from the date the notice was mailed to comment on the appeal, in writing, to
the board.
4. The board shall prepare a written decision regarding the appeal stating all determinations and findings thereof in a clear and concise manner.
F. Enforcement: If the owner, or person in charge or control of a building fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter within any of the time limits set
forth in subsection 9-5-202A of this article, the director of building and safety shall verify that the record owner of the building has been properly served
with notice of the applicability of this chapter. If the notice has been property served on the record owner, then the director of building and safety may
order that the entire building be vacated and that the building remain vacated until compliance with this chapter has been achieved. If compliance with
this chapter has not been accomplished within ninety (90) days after the date that the building has been ordered vacated, or such additional time as
may be granted by the seismic safety appeals board, the director of building and safety may order its demolition in accordance with the provisions for
abatement of a nuisance contained in title 5, chapter 7 of this code. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-5-204: INCENTIVE PLAN FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
A. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the owners of all nonresidential buildings which are altered or reconstructed during the process of
complying with the seismic safety requirements set forth in this chapter shall be entitled to a waiver of the following requirements and fees provided that
there is no change in the use of such building that would require provision of additional parking pursuant to this code:
1. Development plan review requirements of title 10, chapter 3, article 31 of this code;
2. Park and recreational facilities tax requirements pursuant to title 3, chapter 1, article 7 of this code;
3. Street and alley dedication and improvement requirements pursuant to title 10, chapter 6 of this code; and
4. Fine arts ornamentation requirements pursuant to title 3, chapter 1, article 8 of this code.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, and as an incentive to maintain the existing scale of buildings within the city, the following provisions
shall apply to those buildings that are remodeled or reconstructed at the same time that seismic safety measures are constructed pursuant to this
chapter:
1. If the remodeled or reconstructed building is located within the minimum existing setback and the maximum existing height of the existing building,
and the remodeled or reconstructed building does not have a greater floor area than the existing building, then the owner shall receive an exemption
from any provision contained in title 10, chapter 3 of this code that would require the provision of additional parking or compliance with zoning
requirements that were not applicable to the existing building because the zoning requirements were adopted after construction of the existing
building provided, however, that the owner shall not be exempt from the architectural review requirements and procedures of title 10, chapter 3,
article 30 of this code.
2. If the remodeled or reconstructed building includes an addition to the existing building that does not exceed seven hundred (700) square feet in area
or thirty five feet (35') in height, and the remodeled or reconstructed building does not otherwise exceed the minimum existing setback and maximum
existing height of the existing building and does not otherwise have a greater floor area than the existing building, then the owner shall be exempted
from any provision of this code that would require additional parking. However, in order to receive such exemption, the owner must pay a fee for the
cost of construction of additional off street parking spaces at a rate to be calculated pursuant to subsection F of this section.
3. If the remodeled or reconstructed building includes an addition to the existing building that exceeds seven hundred (700) square feet in area, but the
total floor area ratio of the remodeled or reconstructed building does not exceed 1.33, and the height of the addition does not exceed thirty five feet
(35'), then the owner shall be exempted from any provision of this code that would require provision of additional parking. However, in order to
receive such exemption, the owner must pay a fee for the cost of construction for additional parking spaces to be calculated pursuant to subsection F
of this section.
C. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not be applicable to owners of nonresidential buildings if remodeling or renovation that
accompanies seismic safety measures includes an addition to the building that exceeds seven hundred (700) square feet in area and the total floor
area ratio of the remodeled or reconstructed building exceeds 1.33 or the height of the addition exceeds thirty five feet (35').
D. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not be applicable to a building unless, before remodeling, reconstruction, or demolition, the
owner of the building to be remodeled or reconstructed provides photographs and documentation showing the minimum existing setback and maximum
existing height of the building. Additionally, if an owner elects to demolish the building pursuant to subsection 9-5-202A1c of this article, the owner must
commence reconstruction within one year after demolition or the provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not be applicable to the
reconstruction of the building. Finally, the provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply unless reconstruction is completed within two
(2) years after demolition. In particular cases of special circumstances, the director of building and safety may grant an extension of these time limits.
E. Notwithstanding section 10-3-2732 of this code, if remodeling or reconstruction of a building altered pursuant to subsection B of this section results in
the permanent removal of any existing on site parking spaces, the owner may pay an in-lieu fee for the cost of constructing an equivalent number
parking spaces at a rate to be calculated pursuant to subsection F of this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 468/797
F. For the purposes of this article, the construction cost for any additional or replacement parking spaces shall be established at five thousand two hundred
fifty dollars ($5,250.00) per space for buildings remodeled or reconstructed pursuant to subsection B1 or B2 of this section. For buildings remodeled or
reconstructed pursuant to subsection B3 of this section, the construction cost for additional or replacement parking spaces shall be established at nine
thousand nine hundred dollars ($9,900.00) per space. Payment of said fees shall be made prior to the issuance of the building permit for structural
alterations approved by the director of building and safety as provided in section 9-5-202 of this article. The foregoing construction cost shall be revised
annually by the director of building and safety on July 1 of each year to reflect any change in the cost of construction from the previous year based on
the engineering news record construction cost index for the Los Angeles area.
G. Building owners whose unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings, as defined by section 9-5-102 of this chapter, were in existence on or after
January 1, 1990, and who structurally upgraded their buildings in accordance with either: 1) division 88 of article 1 of chapter 9 of the Los Angeles City
Municipal Code, or 2) the 1973, or later, edition of the Uniform Building Code, shall be eligible for the incentive plan for nonresidential buildings as set
forth in this section, provided that alterations or reconstructions are conducted within the schedule set forth in table 9-5-3, section 9-5-301 of this
chapter, and provided that all requirements of this section that can be applied to previously completed alterations or reconstructions have been met to
the satisfaction of the director of building and safety. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
9-5-205: NOTIFICATION OF TENANTS, INCOMING TENANTS AND PROSPECTIVE BUYERS:
Once the director of building and safety determines that a building is within the scope of this chapter and the director determines that a structural analysis
prepared pursuant to section 9-5-202 of this article is adequate, the building owner shall notify each tenant, incoming tenant and prospective buyer, in
writing, that a structural analysis has been prepared as prescribed by this chapter. The notice shall include a description of the purpose of the analysis,
and a statement that the analysis is available for inspection in the offices of the department of building and safety. The notice shall be sent within thirty (30)
days after the date that the analysis is determined to be adequate by the director of building and safety. The owner shall deliver this notice to each
incoming tenant before that tenant signs an agreement to occupy space in the owner's building. The owner shall deliver this notice to any prospective
buyer of the building before that prospective buyer signs an agreement to buy the building. Proof of delivery of all notices shall be submitted within fifteen
(15) days after compliance with this requirement.
This notice shall continue to be delivered pursuant to this section until a building is demolished, determined to be exempt from this chapter, or determined
to be in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
Article 3. Remedies
9-5-301: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or other law, the city may seek injunctive relief or require a building to be vacated in order to
prevent a continuing violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
TABLE 9-5-1
RATING CLASSIFICATIONS
Type Of Building Classification
Essential building I
Hazardous building I
High risk building II
Medium risk building III
Low risk building IV
TABLE 9-5-2
TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE
Structural alterations 1 year 180 days2 2 years2
Building demolition 1 year - 180 days2
Wall anchors 180 days 270 days1 1 year1
Notes:
1. Measure from date of service notice.
2. Measured from date of building permit issuance.
Required
Action By Owner
Obtain Building
Or Demolition
Permit Within1 Commence Construction Within Complete Construction Or Demolition Within
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 469/797
TABLE 9-5-3
SERVICE PRIORITIES
I (highest priority) n/a n/a
II-A 300 or more 180 days2
II-B 200 to 299 1 year
II-C 150 to 199 11/2 years
II-D 100 to 149 2 years
III-A 50 to 99 31/2 years
III-B 20 to 49 4 years
IV (lowest priority) Less than 20 5 years
Notes:
1. Measured from date of adoption of initial seismic safety ordinance.
2. Seismic renovation shall be completed by January 1, 1995.
(Ord. 92-O-2153, eff. 10-23-1992)
Article 4. Standards For Seismic Strengthening Of Existing Wood -Frame Buildings
With Soft, Weak Or Open Front Walls
9-5-401: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to promote the public welfare and safety by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes
on existing wood-framed multi-story buildings with soft, weak or open front walls. Generally, this type of structure consists of partial tuck under parking on
the first floor level with living space in the floors above. In past earthquakes many of these types of structures have performed poorly and collapsed
causing loss of life, personal injury, and substantial property damage. This article creates minimum standards intended to mitigate the risk of collapse and
improve the performance of these buildings during earthquakes, reducing, but not necessarily preventing, the loss of life, injury and damage to property.
(Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-402: DEFINITIONS:
Notwithstanding the applicable definitions, symbols and notations in the Building Code, the following definitions shall apply for the purposes of this article:
BUILDING CODE: Is the current Building Code adopted by the City of Beverly Hills.
CRIPPLE WALL: Is a wood-framed stud wall extending from the top of the foundation wall to the underside of the lowest floor framing.
GROUND FLOOR: Is any floor within the wood-frame portion of a building whose elevation is immediately accessible from an adjacent grade by vehicles
or pedestrians. The ground floor portion of the structure does not include any floor that is completely below adjacent grades.
OPEN-FRONT WALL LINE: Is an exterior wall line lacking sufficient vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system, which then requires tributary
seismic forces to be resisted by diaphragm rotation, or requires excessive cantilever beyond parallel lines of shear walls. Diaphragms that cantilever more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the distance between the first two (2) adjacent parallel lines of lateral force resisting elements from which the diaphragm
cantilevers shall be considered excessive. Cantilevers shall not exceed more than six feet (6'). Diaphragm cantilevers or exterior balconies of six feet (6')
or less in width shall not be considered excessive cantilevers.
OWNER OR BUILDING OWNER: Is the person, individual(s), agent, firm, corporation, or entity having legal possession, equitable interest in the property,
or rights to sanction evaluation or retrofit of a building.
QUALIFIED HISTORICAL BUILDING: Is any building designated or currently in the process of being designated as a "qualified historical building" as
defined in part 8, title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
RETROFIT: Is an improvement of the seismic lateral force resisting system by alteration of the existing structural elements or addition of new structural
elements.
SEISMIC DESIGN GUIDELINES: Are current guidelines developed by the building official, which are intended to calibrate, delineate and detail technical
requirements to be used for the retrofitting of buildings subject to this article.
SOFT WALL LINE: Is a wall line, the lateral stiffness of which is less than what is required by story drift limitations or deformation compatibility
requirements of this article. In lieu of the engineering analysis required by this article to determine whether a wall line's lateral stiffness is less than the
aforementioned story drift limitations or deformation compatibility requirements, a soft wall line may be defined as a wall line in a story where the wall
Rating Classification Occupant Load
Maximum Periods For
Service Of Notice1
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 470/797
stiffness is less than seventy percent (70%) of the stiffness of the exterior wall above for the direction under consideration.
STORY: As used in this article, is defined as the portion of a structure between the tops of two (2) successive finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost
story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the roof structural element, but also includes any basement or underfloor space of a building exceeding
four feet (4') in height.
STORY STRENGTH: Is the total strength of all seismic-resisting elements sharing the same story shear in the direction under consideration.
WALL LINE: Is any length of a wall along a principal axis of the building used to provide resistance to lateral loads.
WEAK WALL LINE: Weak wall line is a deficiency of a wall line at the ground floor in which the wall strength is less than eighty percent (80%) of the
strength of the wall above in the direction under consideration. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-403: SCOPE:
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all existing buildings of wood-frame construction, or wood-frame portions thereof, where:
1. A permit for construction of a new building was applied for before January 1, 1978, or if no permit can be located, the structure is determined by the
City building official to have been built under Building Code standards enacted prior to January 1, 1978, and
2. The ground floor or basement portion of the structure contains parking or other similar open floor space that causes soft, weak, or open-front wall
lines and there exists one or more stories above.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Building Code, compliance with this article shall not require existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or firesafety
systems to be altered to comply with existing code unless they constitute a hazard to life or property. The existing electrical, plumbing,
mechanical or fire-safety systems shall comply with the current Building Code if the seismic retrofit interferes or alters any of these systems. (Ord.
18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-404: COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS:
The owner of each building within the scope of this article shall cause an investigation of the existing construction and a structural analysis to be made of
the building by a registered civil or structural engineer in the State of California, or a qualified architect licensed by the State of California, and if the
building does not meet the minimum standards specified in this article, that shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards within the
time limits stated in this article.
The owner of each building within the scope of this article, which has been analyzed to demonstrate compliance or structurally altered to comply with the
minimum earthquake standards in this article, shall maintain such building in conformity with the requirements of this article in effect at the time of such
analysis or structural alteration.
Buildings within the scope of the article may not be added to or structurally altered or otherwise remodeled without first complying with the provisions of
this article unless the building official determines that the alterations are minor in nature.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, a building that is found to be within the scope of this article and is not brought into
compliance with this article in the time frame indicated in subsection 9-5-405B, table A of this article, shall be declared unsafe and subject to the
requirements of section 203 of the Uniform Administrative Code.
This provision shall not apply if alteration or repair work has commenced to bring the building into compliance with requirements of this article, and such
work is proceeding in accordance with the time limits set forth in any order of the building official. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-405: TIME PERIOD FOR COMPLIANCE/PRIORITIZATION:
A. Engineering Report: Within the time limits shown in subsection B, table A of this section, the owner of any building that may be subject to the provisions
of this article shall engage an engineer or architect to submit a properly completed screening form to the Development Services Division. The
screening form is intended to demonstrate whether the structure conforms to the earthquake design provisions contained in this article. Minimum form
requirements shall be as specified by the building official. Buildings determined to be outside of the scope of this article based on the screening form,
shall not be required to retrofit.
B. Plan, Permits And Construction: If the screening form concludes the structure is within the scope of this article, the structure shall be strengthened to
comply with the standards of this article within the time periods shown in table A of this subsection B. Minimum plan requirements and necessary
permits shall be as specified by the building official.
TABLE A
TIME LIMITS FOR OWNER
Required
Action By
Owner Submit Screening Form Submit Retrofit Plans Obtain Building Permit
Commence Construction
Complete Construction
Retrofit 6 months from date the
notice is served to the
owner
1 year from date the
notice is served to the
owner
2 years from date the
notice is served to the
owner
2.5 years from date the
notice is served to the
owner
3 years from date the
notice is served to the
owner
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 471/797
C. Priority Designations: The department shall prioritize its enforcement of this article as defined in table B of this subsection C.
TABLE B
PRIORITY DESIGNATION
Priority Description
Priority I Buildings with 3 or more stories
Priority II Buildings with 2 stories, with 6 or more units
Priority III Buildings not falling within the definition of priority I or II
(Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-406: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Issuance Of Order: When the City determines that a building is within the scope of this article, the City shall issue an order as described in subsection B
of this section to the owner of the building.
B. Contents Of Order: The order shall specify that the building has been determined by the building official to be within the scope of this article and,
therefore, is required to meet the seismic strengthening provisions of this article. The order shall specify the building type classification and shall set
forth the owner's alternatives and time limits for compliance.
C. Service Of Order: The order shall be in writing and shall be given by USPS certified mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
D. Failure To Receive Order: Failure of any owner to receive such notice shall not relieve the owner from compliance with this article.
E. Appeal From Order: The owner of the building may appeal the building official's determinations relative to the application and interpretation of this article
to an Administrative Hearing Officer appointed pursuant to section 1-3-317 of this Code. Such appeal shall be filed with the building official within the
earlier of sixty (60) days from the service date of the notice or within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination being appealed. The building
official shall promptly forward the written appeal to the appointed Hearing Officer who shall schedule a public hearing to occur not less than fifteen (15)
days, nor more than sixty (60) days after receipt of the written appeal. The appeal shall contain a statement of the facts on which the appeal is based
sufficient to enable the Hearing Officer to understand the nature of the controversy, the basis of the appeal and the relief requested. Upon receipt of
such appeal, the building official shall, by USPS certified mail, provide notice of the hearing to adjacent property owners having common boundary line
with the subject building. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1-3-318 of this Code. The
building official, or legal representative, shall present the City's case. Within thirty (30) days of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare and serve
by USPS certified mail, a written decision regarding the appeal stating all determinations and findings thereof in a clear and concise manner. The
Hearing Officer shall sustain the appeal, with or without conditions, or deny the appeal. The Hearing Officer's decision shall be final. If the appeal is
denied, it is the appellant's responsibility to immediately comply with this article. If the appeal is sustained with conditions, then, in addition to any other
applicable violations of this article, it shall be a violation of this article for the appellant to fail to comply with those conditions. The compliance periods
set forth in section 9-5-405, table A of this article, shall not be deemed tolled or extended as a result of filing any appeal that is denied.
F. Recordation: Once a building that was determined to be within the scope of this article has failed to comply with the requirements of this article within
the time limits provided in subsection 9-5-405B, table A of this article, the building official shall record in the Office of the Los Angeles County Recorder
a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this article and requires seismic retrofit. The certificate shall also state that the owner
thereof has been notified of the need to retrofit the building. Once the building has been retrofitted to comply with this article, the building official shall
record a certificate indicating that the subject building no longer is in violation of this article.
G. Extensions: The building owner may request an extension to the time period for compliance set forth in subsection 9-5-405B, table A of this article. An
application for extension may only be filed after the owner has submitted a Screening Report to the City and the Retrofit Plans have been approved by
the City. The building owner has the burden of proof to establish with substantial evidence that good cause for the extension exists. The building owner
must also provide a new proposed schedule for compliance, and plan to comply with the provisions of this article during that timeframe. Upon good
cause shown, the building official may approve, approve with modifications or deny the extension request for an extension that is commensurate with
the justification for the extension. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-407: OCCUPANCY AND TENANT ADVISORY:
A. Notification To Tenants And Occupants: When the building official determines that a building is within the scope of this article per field survey, the owner
shall advise in writing all current and prospective tenants, subtenants, lessees, sublessees, or any other person(s) entitled to the use and/or occupancy
of the building of such determination. With respect to current and prospective tenants, subtenants, lessees, sublessees, or other person(s) entitled to
the use and/or occupancy of the building, the property owner shall advise such persons of the building official's determination in writing. Upon
compliance with this article the owner shall provide a letter of notification to the tenants indicating the current status of the building. The language of the
written notifications shall be as specified by the building official.
B. Construction Means And Method Plan: The building owner shall comply with subsection 9-1-108L of this title. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-408: QUALIFIED HISTORICAL BUILDINGS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 472/797
Buildings designated as historical or architecturally significant landmarks on national, State or local historical registers shall also comply with the provisions
of this article. At the building official's discretion, modifications to the standards set forth in this article may be permitted when such modifications are
consistent with the provision of the California Historical Building Code. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-409: ANALYSIS AND DESIGN:
A. Scope Of Analysis: As required by this article, the alteration, repair, replacement or addition of structural elements and their connections shall meet the
strength and stiffness in conformance with the Building Code except as modified herein. The lateral-load-path analysis shall include the resisting
elements and connections from the wood diaphragm immediately above any soft, weak or open wall lines to and including the foundation. Stories
above the weak wall line shall be considered in the analysis but need not be modified. Engineer shall investigate existing conditions as applicable for
the required analysis, including performing initial material testing and as-built of existing conditions. Minimum investigation requirements shall be
specified by the building official.
B. Design Base Shear And Design Parameters: The design force in a given direction shall not be less than seventy five percent (75%) of the design base
shear as determined based on the seismic provisions of ASCE 7 and design provisions as specified by the current Seismic Design Guidelines. The
structure shall be analyzed and/or strengthened in order to mitigate the weak, open-front, and/or soft wall line deficiencies defined in section 9-5-402 of
this article.
1. Exception: Alternatively, the structure may be retrofitted per appendix A4 of the California Existing Building Code, provided the entire story is
analyzed and/or strengthened in order to mitigate the weak and/or soft wall line deficiencies defined in section 13.28.030.
C. Limitations To Lateral Force Resisting System: Strengthening systems with concrete walls or masonry walls, or steel braced frames shall not be
permitted unless a full story analysis considering proper diaphragm stiffness and torsional behavior is performed.
D. Horizontal Structural Irregularities In Buildings With Three Or More Stories: Structures with three (3) or more stories having horizontal structural
irregularities of either type 2, 3, 4, or 5 listed in ASCE 7, "Horizontal Structural Irregularities" table, shall be altered to meet the additional requirements
of those sections referenced in the table for the weak or open wall lines being considered.
E. Alternate Analysis, Base Shear And Design Parameters: The building official may approve alternate analysis and/or design methodologies that meet the
same performance intent as those prescribed by this article and that achieve the objectives established by this article. Design criteria shall be
submitted to the City for review and approval prior to submission of plans.
F. Story Drift Limitations: The calculated story drift for each retrofitted wall line shall not exceed the allowable deformation compatible with all vertical loadresisting
elements and 0.025 times the story height. Drift calculations shall be in accordance with ASCE 7 requirements and design provisions as
approved by City building official.
G. Cantilever Column System: The effects of rotation and soil stiffness shall be included in the calculated story drift where lateral loads are resisted by
vertical elements where required depth of embedment is determined by pole formulas or as specified by an approved geotechnical investigation report.
H. Elements Not Part Of The Lateral Force Resisting System: The requirements of the Building Code shall apply, except as modified herein. All structural
framing elements along the retrofitted line and immediately adjacent to the retrofitted line and their connections not required by the design to be part of
the lateral force resisting system, shall be designed and detailed to be adequate to maintain support of design dead plus live loads when subject to the
expected deformations caused by seismic forces. The stress analysis of cantilever columns shall use an effective length factor of 2.1 for the direction
normal to the axis of the beam.
I. Ties, Continuity And Collectors: All parts of the structure included in the scope of analysis shall be interconnected and the connection shall be capable of
resisting the seismic force created by the parts being connected as required per the Building Code.
J. Anchorage Of Masonry/Concrete Structural Walls To Diaphragms: When using new masonry or concrete walls to meet the requirements of this article,
proper in-plane and out-of-plane anchorage of walls into the diaphragm shall be provided per the Building Code. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-410: INFORMATION REQUIRED ON PLANS:
A. General: For existing and new construction, the plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature, design methodology, and
extent of the proposed work and to show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this article and other applicable section of the Building Code.
B. Engineer's Or Architect's Statement: The responsible engineer or architect shall provide the following statements on the approved plans:
I am responsible for designing this building's seismic strengthening in compliance with the minimum standards of the Mandatory Earthquake Hazard
Reduction In Existing Wood-Frame Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open-Front Walls (Title 9, Chapter 5, Article 4).
C. Owner Or Owner's Representative Statement: Unless the entire building has been evaluated and retrofitted as needed to meet the full intent of the
current Building Code, the owner shall provide and sign the following statement on the cover of the drawings:
I understand the seismic evaluation and strengthening performed under this project complies with the Mandatory Earthquake Hazard Reduction in
Existing Wood-Frame Buildings with Soft, Weak or Open-Front Walls (Title 9, Chapter 5, Article 4) which is intended to improve the performance of the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 473/797
building during a seismic event. I understand the entire building has not been evaluated nor strengthened for other potential structural deficiencies that
may cause a life safety concern, injury, or property damage risk resulting from a seismic event.
D. Quality Control And Assurance Requirements: General notes shall show the requirements for material testing, special inspection, structural observation
and the proper installation of newly added materials. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-411: QUALITY ASSURANCE:
A. Structural Observation: All structures regulated by this article require structural observation during construction. The owner shall employ the engineer or
architect responsible for the structural design, or another engineer or architect designated by the engineer or qualified architect responsible for the
structural design, to perform structural observation as defined in the Building Code.
B. Special Inspection: Special inspections shall be provided as required by the Building Code. Additional inspections shall be noted on drawings as
required by building official. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
9-5-412: VIOLATION/PENALTY:
A. Violation: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for person or business entity receiving the order
described in section 9-5-406 of this article, to: 1) fail to comply with any of the time limits set forth in subsection 9-5-405B, table A of this article,
including bringing the affected structure into full compliance with the minimum seismic standards specified in this article; and/or 2) maintain, use or
occupy any such structure that has not been brought into full compliance within the time limits set forth in subsection 9-5-405B, table A of this article.
Any person who violates or causes or permits another person to violate this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to prosecution
and/or administrative enforcement under this Code. For purposes of this paragraph, "any person" includes an owner, lessor, sublessor, manager or
person in control of a building subject to this article. This term shall not include any person who is merely a tenant or other individual occupying any
dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit, guest room or suite in a building. The legal owner of a building is that person, firm, corporation, partnership or
other entity whose name or title appears on the record with the Office of the County Recorder, as well as all successors or assignees of these persons.
B. Exception: This section shall not apply to any building on which work is proceeding in compliance with the time limits set forth in this article, or in
compliance with any extensions of time granted by the building official; or any action, order or determination made by the building official in the
implementation of this article. (Ord. 18-O-2767, eff. 1-11-2019)
Chapter 6
POSTDISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION
Article 1. Postdisaster Safety Assessment Placards
9-6-101: INTENT:
This article establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any disaster. The article further
authorizes the building and safety department, as well as authorized representatives of the department, to post the appropriate placard at each entry point
of a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-102: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the city council, to all buildings and
structures of all occupancies regulated by the city. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-103: DEFINITIONS:
"Safety assessment" means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued occupancy
should be permitted following a disaster. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-104: PLACARDS:
A. The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate whether buildings or structures may be occupied after a
disaster. The format of the placards is provided in the "Post Disaster Safety Assessment Plan" published by the governor's office of emergency
services.
1. "INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted" is to be posted on any building or structure where no apparent structural hazard has been found. This
placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 474/797
2. "RESTRICTED USE" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged where the damage has resulted in some form of
restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard shall note in general terms the type of damage encountered and shall
clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.
3. "UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy" is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a
threat to life or safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by
the building and safety department. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used
or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard shall note in general terms the type of damage encountered.
B. This article number, the name of the department, its address and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.
C. Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard shall not be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of
the city of Beverly Hills building and safety department or upon written notification from the department. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
Article 2. Postdisaster Demolition
9-6-201: INTENT:
This article establishes demolition criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which alocal emergency has been declared
by the city council, to the degree where demolition is a viable alternative to repair. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-202: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this article are applicable to all buildings or structures regulated by the city following each disaster when a local emergency is declared
by the city council. The city council may extend the provisions as necessary. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-203: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply:
EVENT: Any occurrence, which results in the declaration of an emergency, and shall include, but not limited to, fires, wind storms, earthquakes, and floods.
HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure included on the national or state register of historic places, or which are qualifying
structures within a recognized historic district. Historic buildings and structures shall also include those buildings and structures within a recognized historic
district where the specific building has historic significance.
STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO): The individual appointed by the governor, pursuant to section 101(b)(1) of the national historic
preservation act of 1966, as amended, to administer the state historic preservation program. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-204: DEMOLITION CRITERIA:
A. If after the event, and during any state of emergency, the director of building and safety determines that any building or structure poses an imminent
threat to the public health and safety and that protection of the public health and safety requires immediate demolition of the building, or of a portion of
the building or structure, the director or his designee shall, without contacting the owner or providing a hearing to the property owner, order that building
or structure be demolished immediately. Upon the order of the director or designee, the city shall immediately demolish the building or structure. Such
demolition shall be performed in the interest of public health and safety without condemnation hearings otherwise required by this code.
B. If after the event, the director of building and safety determines that any building or structure represents a hazard, but not an immanent threat, to the
public health and safety, heor she, or his or her designee, shall notify the building owner of such determination, and the reasons therefor, by certified
mail return receipt deposited in the United States mail no later than five (5) days after the determination is made. The notice shall set forth the date,
time, and place of a hearing which the director or his or her designee shall conduct, and the notice must also state that during the hearing the building
owner may present any evidence to explain why the building or structure should not be condemned. The hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30)
days after the director or his or her designee determines that the building or structure represents a hazard to the public health and safety. The decision
of the director or his or her designee to condemn the building or structure until all required repairs are made shall be final. In making the final decision,
the director or his or her designee shall consider: 1) all evidence presented at the hearing by the owner or his or her representative; 2) the nature of the
hazard presented by the building or structure; and 3) the likelihood of personal injury or death occurring if the building or structure is not condemned.
The words "condemn" and "condemned" as used in this section mean that no person shall enter the building or structure for any reason without the
express written permission of the director or his or her designee.
C. Nothing in this section shall in any way affect the provisions of section 9-6-205 of this article regarding the demolition of historic buildings or structures.
D. For any building or structure which the owner has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or owner's representative, shall follow the
established procedures for securing a demolition permit. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-205: DEMOLITION CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 475/797
A. If after the event, and during any state of emergency, the director of building and safety determines that any historic building or structure poses an
imminent threat to the public health and safety, the director of building and safety shall take one of the following actions and shall immediately notify the
state historic preservation officer of that action:
1. Whenever possible, and within reasonable limits as determined by the director of building and safety, the building or structure shall be braced or
shored in such a manner as to mitigate the imminent threat to public health and safety.
2. Whenever bracing or shoring is determined to be insufficient to mitigate the imminent threat, the director of building and safety or his or her designee
shall, without contacting the property owner or providing a hearing to the property owner, order that the building or structure be demolished
immediately. The director or his or her designee shall document in writing his or her reasons for ordering demolition, and shallphotographically record
the entire building or structure. Upon the order of the director or his or her designee, the city shall immediately demolish the building or structure.
Such demolition shall be performed in the interest of public health and safety without condemnation hearings otherwise required by this code.
B. If after the event, the director of building and safety determines that any historic building or structure represents a hazard, but not an imminent threat, to
the public health and safety, he or she, or his or her designee, shall notify the building owner of such determination, and the reasons therefor, by
certified mail return receipt deposited in the United States mail no later than five (5) days after the determination is made. The notice shall set forth the
date, time, and place of a hearing which the director or his or her designee shall conduct, and the notice must also state that during the hearing the
building owner may present any evidence to explain why the building or structure should not be condemned. The director or his or her designee shall
also notify the federal emergency management agency, in accordance with the national historic preservation act of 1966, as amended, of the director's
intention to hold a hearing. The hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30) days after the director or his or her designee determines that the building
or structure represents a hazard to the public health and safety. The decision of the director or his or her designee to condemn the building until all
required repairs are made shall be final. In making the final decision, the director or his or her designee shall consider: 1) all evidence presented at the
hearing by the building owner or his or her representative; 2) the nature of the hazard presented by the building or structure; and 3) the likelihood of
personal injury or death occurring if the building or structure is not condemned. The words "condemn" and "condemned" as used in this subsection
mean that no person shall enter the building or structure for any reason without the express written permission of the director or his or her designee.
C. For any historic building or structure where the owner has decided to demolish the building or structure within thirty (30) days after the event, the
director shall submit to the federal emergency management agency, in accordance with the national historic preservation act of 1966, as amended, a
request to demolish. Said request shall include all substantiating data.
D. If after thirty (30) days from the event, the owner of a historic building or structure decides that the building or structure should be demolished, such
action will be subject to the review process established by the national historic preservation act of 1966, as amended.
E. For any building or structure which the owner has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or owner's representative, shall follow the
established procedures for securing a demolition permit. (Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
Article 3. Disaster Repair And Reconstruction
9-6-301: INTENT:
This article establishes standards and regulations for the expeditious repair and reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a
local emergency has been declared by the city council. This article does not amend or allow exemptions from the city's technical codes, including the city's
building, fire, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or other codes. This article does not amend or affect the requirements set forth in title 10 of this code
regarding compliance with zoning standards. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-302: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The provisions of this article are applicable following each disaster for which a local emergency has been declared by the city council. In such event, the
provisions of this article are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Beverly Hills.
B. If approved by the director of building and safety, the requirements of this article may be waived in favor of repair recommendations included in an
"engineering evaluation" as defined in section 9-6-303 of this article. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-303: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
ARCHITECT: An individual licensed by the state of California to practice architecture as defined in the California Business and Professions Code.
CIVIL ENGINEER: An individual registered by the state of California to practice civil engineering as defined in the California Business and Professions
Code.
CURRENT CODE: The city of Beverly Hills Building Code, as set forth in chapter 1, article 2 of this title, that is in effect at the time an application for a
building permit to repair damage caused by a disaster.
ENGINEERING EVALUATION: An evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the
direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer or architect retained by the owner of a building or structure. An engineering evaluation shall, at the
minimum, contain recommendations for repair with an appropriate opinion ofconstruction cost for repair.
REPLACEMENT VALUE: The cost, as determined by the director of building and safety, of replacing the damaged structure with a new structure of the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 476/797
same size, construction material and occupancy on the same site. Replacement value shall be calculated by using the city of Beverly Hills building and
safety department building valuation guide sheet.
STRUCTURAL ENGINEER: An individual registered by the state of California to practice civil engineering and to use the title "structural engineer" as
authorized in the California Business and Professions Code.
VALUE OF REPAIR: The cost, as determined by the director of building and safety, of making necessary repairs to a damaged structure. (Ord. 94-O-2196,
eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-304: REPAIR CRITERIA:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as a result of a disaster for
which a local emergency has been declared, shall be repaired in accordance with the following criteria:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, if the estimated value of repair is less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the
building or structure, then the damaged elements, as well as all critical ties, elements that support the damaged elements and elements that are
supported by the damaged elements, shall be repaired and/or brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current code.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the replacement
value of the building or structure, then the damaged elements may be repaired to their predisaster condition if the director of building and safety
determines, after review of an engineering evaluation, that repair to their predisaster condition will not create an unreasonable risk of injury to
occupants of the building or structure, adjacent properties, pedestrians or other members of the public.
However, when the damaged elements include suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling systems shall be repaired and all bracing required by the current
code shall be installed.
C. If the estimated value of repair equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building or structure, then the entire building or
structure shall be brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current code.
D. In group R, division 3 occupancies, as designated in the current code, the value of repair of damaged chimneys shall be excluded from the computation
of the value of repair for the purpose of determining percentage of replacement value. Damaged chimneys shall be repaired in accordance with section
9-6-305 of this article. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
9-6-305: REPAIR CRITERIA FOR CHIMNEYS:
A. All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to comply with the requirements of the current code. Damaged portions of chimneys shall be
removed in accordance with the following criteria:
1. If the damaged portion of the chimney is located between the roof line and the top of the chimney, then the damaged portion shall be removed to the
roof line provided that the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition. The reconstructed portion of the chimney shall be braced to the roof
structure.
2. For a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the chimney is below the roof line or the damaged portion extends from above the roof
line to below the roof line, the chimney shall be removed to the top of the fireplace.
3. For a multi-story structure, the damaged portion of the chimney shall be removed from the top to a floor line where sound anchorage is found.
4. In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire chimney and firebox shall be removed to the foundation. If the foundation of the
chimney is in sound condition and is property connected to the foundation of the building, the firebox and chimney may be reconstructed using the
existing foundation. If the foundation of the chimney has been damaged or found not to be properly connected to the foundation o the building, then
the foundation of the chimney shall be removed and replaced.
B. If existing conditions preclude the installation of all anchorage required by the current code, then alternate systems may be used in accordance with the
alternate methods and materials provisions of the current code. Such alternate systems shall be designed and detailed by a structural engineer, civil
engineer or architect.
C. That portion of any chimney that extends above the roof line shall be braced to the roof structure unless the director of building and safety determines
that such bracing will not substantially increase the stability of that portion of the chimney. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-
6-1999)
9-6-306: REPAIR CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
A. Buildings or structures which are included on a national or state register of historic places or which are qualifying structures within a recognized historic
district, and which have been damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared, shall have an engineering evaluation
performed.
B. Repair shall be made as provided in section 9-6-304 of this article. However, to the extent that a conflict exists between the standards contained herein
and the state of California Historic Building Code, the Historic Building Code shall govern. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-
6-1999)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 477/797
9-6-307: REPAIR CRITERIA FOR UNREINFORCED MASONRY STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS:
In addition to any other requirement set forth in this chapter, all damaged buildings or structures that are determined to be bearing wall buildings or
structures constructed of unreinforced masonry shall be repaired, strengthened, or rebuilt in accordance with the following criteria:
A. If the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent (10%) of the replacement value of the building or structure, then the damaged elements
may be repaired to their predisaster condition if the director of building and safety determines, after review of an engineering evaluation, that repair to
the predisaster condition does not create an unreasonable risk of injury to occupants of the building or structure, adjacent properties, pedestrians, or
other members of the public. However, nothing in this section or chapter shall supersede or waive the requirements set forth in chapter 5 of this title.
B. If the estimated value of repair equals or exceeds ten percent (10%), but does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building or
structure, then the entire building shall be repaired and strengthened to fully comply with the requirements of chapter 5 of this title.
C. If the estimated value of repair exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building or structure, then the entire building or structure
shall be brought into conformance with the structural requirements of chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff.
8-6-1999)
9-6-308: TIME LIMITS FOR DISASTER REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION:
All repair and reconstruction required by this article shall be completed within one year after the date of the disaster for which a local emergency was
declared by the city council. Provided however, that if the city prohibits occupancy of an entire building or structure following the disaster, then therepair or
reconstruction required by this article need not be completed until one year after the date that partial or full occupancy of the building is again permitted.
Nothing in this section or this chapter shall limit the authority of the director of building and safety to prohibit occupancy of a building or structure, abate a
nuisance, or require repair of a building or structure to be completed more quickly than provided in this section, if the director determines that: a) failure to
repair presents an immediate threat to the safety of occupants of the building or structure, adjacent property, or the public safety, or b) partial or temporary
repairs which do not fully comply with the provisions of this article inadequately protect the safety of the occupants of the building or structure, adjacent
properties, or the public health or safety. (Ord. 94-O-2196, eff. 4-1-1994; amd. Ord. 99-O-2330, eff. 8-6-1999)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
(Ord. 16-O-2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
Chapter 8
TROUSDALE ESTATES HEAVY TRUCK REGULATIONS
9-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate construction activities, including the regulation of heavy trucks accessing and parking at construction sites, within
the Trousdale Estates area. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
GROSS WEIGHT: The combined weight of any vehicle, its trailer, passengers, equipment, payload, and any other items associated with the vehicle.
TROUSDALE ESTATES AREA: All property within the city's boundaries located north of Doheny Road and east of Schuyler Road, except that land zoned
R-1.X, and that portion of lot A of the Doheny Ranch tract northwesterly of tract numbers 24485 and 24486, commonly referred to as the Greystone
Mansion property. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, and unless otherwise exempt under state law, all persons in receipt of a building permit issued by the
building official for a construction project located in the Trousdale Estates area are subject to this chapter. The requirements and restrictions of this section
shall be included as conditions of approval in any building permit issued for work within the Trousdale Estates area, and shall be in lieu of any other permit
required under title 8, chapter 2 of this code for hauling debris, materials, or equipment. The city council may establish by resolution a fee for the cost of
coordinating and monitoring compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-4: TROUSDALE CONSTRUCTION TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLAN:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 478/797
A construction traffic management plan documenting haul routes, delivery times, parking plans, contact persons, and demonstrating compliance with the
requirements and restrictions of this chapter, in a form approved by the building official, must be submitted to the building official or his or her designee
before a vehicle having a gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds with three (3) or more axles or a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of twenty
six thousand (26,000) pounds or more may access a construction site within the Trousdale Estates area. The construction traffic management plan
required by this chapter shall be consistent with any other traffic management plan for the construction project and shall be updated as necessary to
ensure consistency with other traffic management plans. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-5: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
No more than two (2) hauling or construction related vehicles associated with a single construction site may park on a public street, except as otherwise
permitted by the building official or transportation official or when parking at the Greystone Mansion property. Hauling or construction vehicles must park
immediately in front of the construction site and must display a parking permit issued by the building official at the time the initial building permit is issued
and which corresponds to the specific construction project. The city council may establish by resolution a fee for each parking permit. This section shall not
be construed to prohibit any vehicle from parking on private property. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-6: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO VEHICLES HAVING A GROSS WEIGHT OF TEN THOUSAND POUNDS OR MORE
WITH THREE OR MORE AXLES OR VEHICLES HAVING A GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT OF TWENTY SIX THOUSAND POUNDS
OR MORE:
Vehicles having a gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more with three (3) or more axles or vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of twenty
six thousand (26,000) pounds or more may only travel on streets within the Trousdale Estates area to access a construction site if the following conditions
are satisfied:
A. The vehicle may only travel on streets within the Trousdale Estates area to access a construction site between the hours of eight thirty o'clock (8:30)
A.M. and three fifteen o'clock (3:15) P.M.
B. The vehicle must be annually inspected and certified by the city's licensed safety inspector. The city council may set a fee by resolution for the cost of
the vehicle inspection and related administrative costs. The inspection required by this section is separate and distinct from all other truck inspection
requirements established under state law.
C. A record of the vehicle's certification must be on record with the city at all times the vehicle is operated within the Trousdale Estates area.
D. The vehicle shall prominently display a city issued decal indicating that the vehicle has been certified for operation within the Trousdale Estates area.
E. The vehicle must have a functioning secondary braking system.
F. The person in receipt of the building permit must provide the building official, or his or her designee, twenty four (24) hour advanced notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, prior to causing the vehicle to travel into or through the Trousdale Estates area. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-2015)
9-8-7: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO VEHICLES HAVING A GROSS WEIGHT OF FIFTY THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED
POUNDS OR MORE:
No vehicle having a gross weight of fifty thousand four hundred (50,400) pounds or more may travel on any street located within the Trousdale Estates
area to access a construction site unless the recipient of the building permit demonstrates to the satisfaction of the building official that a truck exceeding
fifty thousand four hundred (50,400) pounds in gross weight is necessary and no other feasible options exist to conduct the permitted construction activity.
If a truck exceeding fifty thousand four hundred (50,400) pounds is approved for use in the Trousdale Estates area, in addition to the conditions required
under section 9-8-6 of this chapter, the following conditions must be satisfied:
A. The person in receipt of the building permit must provide the building official, or his or her designee, seventy two (72) hour advanced notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, prior to traveling into or through the Trousdale Estates area.
B. The vehicle must be escorted by the police department to and from the truck's destination. The recipient of the building permit shall be responsible for
all costs related to the police escort, including, but not limited to, the cost of police officers, traffic control officers, and signage. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-
29-2015)
9-8-8: REMEDIES:
If the recipient of a building permit violates or causes a violation of this section, the building official may temporarily suspend work authorized by the
building permit, amend a project's construction traffic management plan, impose fees in connection with investigating alleged violations, or revoke the
building permit. Any vehicle violating a provision of this section shall be denied access to a construction site within the Trousdale Estates area or directed
to a commercial scale to demonstrate that the vehicle's gross weight otherwise conforms to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 15-O-2683, eff. 8-29-
2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 479/797
Title 10
PLANNING AND ZONING
Chapter 1
PLANNING COMMISSION
10-1-101: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a planning commission consisting of five (5) members. (Ord. 88-0-2037, eff. 9-8-1988)
10-1-102: JURISDICTION:
The planning commission shall perform the following functions:
A. Periodically review, and as necessary revise the general plan.
B. Implement the general plan through actions including, but not limited to, the administration of specific plans and zoning and subdivision ordinances.
C. Annually review the city's capital improvement program and the local public works projects of other local agencies for their consistency with the general
plan.
D. Consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and citizens
generally, concerning implementation of the general plan.
E. Promote the coordination of local plans and programs with the plans and programs of other public agencies.
F. Act as the advisor agency of the council in connection with the administration of the state map act.
G. Act as the board of zoning adjustments and perform the functions and duties imposed by this code.
H. Perform such other duties as may be imposed by law or directed by council. (Ord. 88-0-2037, eff. 9-8-1988)
10-1-103: ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT:
The planning division of the department of environmental services shall provide administrative support to the planning commission. (Ord. 88-0-2037, eff. 9-
8-1988)
Chapter 2
SUBDIVISIONS
Article 1. Definitions
10-2-101: WORDS DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning is intended.
ADVISORY AGENCY: The planning commission shall constitute the "advisory agency" for tentative maps and parcel maps and shall have the authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such maps pursuant to the provisions of the subdivision map act of the state and this chapter.
BUILDING LINE: A line between which line and the street line no building, structure, or improvement or a portion thereof, may be erected, constructed, or
established.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: A community apartment project, a condominium project, a planned development, and a stock cooperative as
defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code or its successor statute.
KEY LOT: The first lot to the rear of a corner lot, the front line of which is a continuation of the side line of the corner lot, and which key lot fronts on the
street which intersects the street upon which the corner lot fronts.
PRIMARY STREET: Any thoroughfare of an existing or intended one hundred foot (100') width between property lines, including therein the sidewalk, if
any, or any greater width or its equivalent width in traffic carrying capacity when shown as such thoroughfare on the official street plan of the city.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 480/797
SECONDARY STREET: Any thoroughfare which is not a "primary street", as defined in this section, but which exists or isintended for through traffic
carrying purposes and which is shown as such thoroughfare on an official plan of the city or on any proposed street plan of a proposed subdivision filed
with the city, but which is not less than sixty feet (60') in width between property lines.
STREET WIDTH: The distance between property lines.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any improved or unimproved land, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units,
for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads,
streets, utility easements, or railroad rights of way. "Subdivision" shall include any common interest development, as defined in section 1351 of the
California Civil Code or its successor statute. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility shall not be considered a
division of land for the purposes of computing the number of parcels.
All words and terms used in this chapter which are defined in the subdivision map act (chapter 2 of part 2 of division 4 of the Business and Professions
Code of the state), as amended, shall have the same meaning as therein defined, except as specifically defined in this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-901;
amd. Ord. 73-O-1465, eff. 4-5-1973; Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; Ord. 77-O-1670, eff. 12-1-1977; Ord. 05-O-2465, eff. 3-3-2005)
Article 2. Tentative Maps
10-2-201: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Any subdivider desiring to lay out for the purpose of sale or recordation any subdivision of land in the city shall file with the planning official not less than
twelve (12) copies of a tentative map of the proposed subdivision. Such tentative map shall have been prepared by a licensed surveyor or civil engineer
and shall contain the following data and information, except the soils report required by the provisions of subsection S of this section:
A. The tract number under which the subdivision map is to be recorded;
B. The date of survey, date of the map, and north point with the base of bearing;
C. A sufficient legal description of the land to define the boundaries of the proposed division of land;
D. A key map indicating the location of the proposed division of land in relation to the surrounding area;
E. The name and address of the record owner, the subdivider, and the civil engineer or licensed surveyor under whose direction the map was prepared,
including the registration number of the engineer or surveyor, and the name and address of the person to whom notices of the approval or disapproval
of the map and other notices are to be sent;
F. The scale of the map, which shall not exceed one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') on a sheet size not to exceed twenty four inches by thirty six
inches (24" x 36");
G. The approximate lot layout, the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site, and the number assigned to each lot;
H. The location and size of all existing utilities on or adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
I. The existing topography of the land proposed to be divided using contour intervals of not more than five feet (5'), and of not more than two feet (2')
where the grade of the land is less than five percent (5%). The contour lines shall refer to city datum furnished by the city engineer. The contours of
adjacent land shall also be shown whenever the surface features of such land affect the design and/or improvement of the proposed division;
J. The approximate location and outline to scale of each building or structure on the property proposed for division. Buildings or structures on adjacent
property shall also be shown if such buildings or structures affect the design of the proposed subdivision. Each building shown shall be identified by a
house number or other identifying feature, including a notation on each building or structure to be retained;
K. The approximate location of each area covered by trees, with a statement of the nature of the cover and the kind and approximate location of all trees
standing within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision and the adjacent public rights of way;
L. The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow, the location, width, and direction of flow of each watercourse, and
the method for handling all storm water;
M. Each street shown by its actual street name or by a temporary name or letter for the purposes of identification until the proper name of such street is
determined;
N. The location, width, approximate grade, and curb radii of all existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision;
O. The radius and beginning and ending of each curve, with customary curve data, and the degrees in each angle and the angle of intersecting streets or
highways if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees (4°);
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 481/797
P. The width, purpose, and approximate location of all existing and proposed easements or rights of way, whether public or private within and adjacent to
the proposed subdivision;
Q. The approximate finished grading of each lot, the elevation of proposed building pads, and the locations of the top and toe of cut and fill slopes;
R. The name of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map and the date of the soils
report;
S. A geologic soils report prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations, unless the building
and safety division shall determine that, due to the knowledge such division has as to the soil qualities of the soil of such subdivision or lot, no
preliminary analysis is necessary. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not
corrected, would lead to structural defects, the person filing the tentative map shall submit a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision, prepared
by a civil engineer who is registered in the state, which shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling
proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The building and safety division shall approve the soils investigation if such division determines that
the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed and shall require that the approved recommended
action be incorporated in the construction of each dwelling as a condition to the building permit. Appeals from such determinations shall be to the
planning commission.
If the building official finds that a written geological report is necessary to determine whether the property to be divided is subject to an existing or
potential geological hazard, the person filing the tentative map shall submit such a report to the planning division. The report shall be prepared by a
registered engineering geologist; and
T. At its option, the planning commission may require all proposed dedications or offers of dedication to be made by deed.
The planning official may waive any of the requirements of this section whenever he finds that the type of subdivision is such that compliance is
unnecessary or that other circumstances justify the waiver. The planning official may require such drawings, data, and other information as deemed
necessary. (1962 Code § 10-902; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-202: FILING TENTATIVE MAPS:
A. Tentative maps shall be filed with the planning official and shall be processed in accordance with the subdivision map act ofthe state and the provisions
of this chapter.
B. A tentative map shall not be accepted for filing by the planning official unless such map complies with all the requirements of section 10-2-201 of this
article.
C. A tentative map shall not be deemed to be filed until such time as all environmental review procedures are completed as required by the city's
environmental regulations for implementation of the California environmental quality act, including the conclusion of all appeals, nor shall a tentative
map be deemed to be filed until such time as it complies with all the zoning regulations of the city. (1962 Code § 10-902; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-
1975; Ord. 80-O-1769, eff. 9-4-1980)
10-2-203: FILING FEES:
At the time of filing the tentative map, the subdivider shall pay to the city clerk a filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The purpose of such fee shall
be to provide funds to cover the costs to the city of processing subdivision maps. No such fee shall be refunded.
At the time of filing the final declaration of restrictions, and not later than the time of filing the final map, the subdivider shall pay a sum estimated to be
sufficient to pay the cost of recording such restrictions, and the city clerk shall record them in the office of the county recorder as soon as the city is
advised that the original final subdivision map has been recorded in said office. All fees deposited by the subdivider shall go into the general fund of the
city, or such other fund as may be approved by the council, and the director of finance administration shall pay the cost of recording the declaration of
restrictions from the general fund. (1962 Code § 10-902; amd. Ord. 74-O-1513, eff. 4-11-1974)
10-2-204: APPROVAL:
A. The planning commission shall not take any action on any tentative map until a report has been filed with the planning commission by the planning
official, unless more than thirty (30) days have elapsed since the map was filed.
B. If a tentative map does not comply with all the requirements of this chapter, the planning commission may approve such map if, as a condition of
approval, the applicant is required to make such changes as are necessary for the map to comply with all the requirements of this chapter. (1962 Code
§ 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-205: APPEALS:
A. The subdivider may appeal from any action of the planning commission with respect to a tentative map to the council as provided by section 66452.5 of
the Government Code of the state. Such appeal and the hearing thereon shall be conducted in the manner provided by subsections (a) and (b) of
section 66452.5 of the Government Code of the state.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 482/797
B. Any interested person may appeal any decision of the planning commission relative to the provisions of sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6
of the Government Code of the state to the council. Such appeal and the hearing thereon shall be conducted in the manner provided by subsections (a)
and (b) of section 66452.5 of the Government Code of the state.
C. Appeals filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be filed with the city clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. Appeal forms shall be
complete when filed, and all the grounds of the appeal shall be set forth therein. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-206: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP APPROVAL:
A. Expiration: The approval or conditional approval of a tentative tract map shall expire twenty four (24) months after the date the map was approved or
conditionally approved or such other period as may be set by section 66452.6 of the Government Code of the state.
B. Extensions: The person filing the tentative map may request an extension of the tentative map approval or conditional approval by a written application
to the planning commission, such application to be filed at least thirty (30) days before the approval or conditional approval is due to expire. The
application shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. In granting an extension, new conditions may be imposed, and existing conditions may
be revised.
C. Time Limits On Extensions: Extensions of a tentative map approval or conditional approval shall not exceed an aggregate of six (6) years.
D. Effect Of Map Modifications On Extensions: The modification of a tentative map after approval or conditional approval shall not extend the time limits
imposed by this section.
E. Failure To File Final Maps: Failure to file the final map within the time periods set forth in this section shall automatically terminate and void the tentative
map. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 82-O-1846, eff. 4-15-1982; Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988; Ord. 11-O-2610, eff. 8-7-2011)
Article 3. Subdivision Improvements
10-2-301: STREETS:
A. The width and alignment of all primary and secondary streets shall conform to the width and alignment of those streets already existing in the city
adjacent to the subdivision, and to the requirements of the planning commission in conformity therewith or subsidiary thereto, and shall conform to any
proceeding affecting the subdivision which may have been initiated by the planning commission, or approved by the planning commission upon
initiation by other legally constituted bodies of the county or state, unless by action of the planning commission and such other bodies a different width
and alignment shall be approved.
B. All streets, as far as practicable, shall be required to be in alignment with existing adjacent streets or their proper projection and in general conformity
with the general street plan of the city; provided, however, in cases where the holdings are large enough, a modified curved street layout may be
required or permitted in the event such a layout will not interfere with the general street plan and that all boundary connections are made satisfactorily.
C. A minimum width of sixty feet (60') between property lines shall be maintained on all streets, unless it can be definitely shown that topography or local
conditions will not permit such a width or that a lesser width is more suitable.
D. The width of streets or roads on hillside or mountainous lands shall be determined by expected future traffic needs and topographical conditions, and
the decision of the planning commission thereon, after an investigation and hearing, shall be conclusive. All mountainous highways which form a part of
primary or secondary traffic routes shall have a minimum width of forty feet (40') between property lines but shall be made wider on curves where the
topography will permit. Other mountainous roads of more than local importance shall have a minimum width of thirty feet (30') between property lines.
Such widths shall be approved only when the planning commission, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, determines that the topography will not
permit a greater width.
E. The rate of grades of all streets shall be kept as low as possible, bearing in mind the advantageous development of the subdivision and surrounding
property. Streets of more than local importance shall not exceed a maximum grade of eight percent (8%), and no street shall be approved with a
maximum grade in excess of twelve percent (12%), unless by special permission of the planning commission.
F. A minimum center line radius of fifty feet (50') shall be maintained on all winding mountainous streets, and a minimum of three hundred feet (300') shall
be required on all through traffic streets. Existing streets of less than thirty feet (30') in width shall be widened to a thirty foot (30') width when the
centerline radius is the minimum or near the minimum. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and care shall be taken in
laying out intersections that adequate, but not excessive, areas are offered for dedication. Grades ofstreets leading into through streets from above
shall be reduced as much as practicable near the intersection.
G. At all block corners, rounding or cutting back at the property lines shall be required. The intersection corners on all primary and secondary streets shall
be rounded by a curve having a radius of curvature at least twenty feet (20') on the property line. All other corners shall be rounded by curves having a
radii of the curvature at least ten feet (10') on the property line. Where business development is anticipated, an optional method of a diagonal cutoff
substantially equivalent may be used instead of rounding in order to simplify building construction.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 483/797
H. Private streets, alleys, or ways shall not be approved, except when the planning commission, after an investigation and hearing, finds that public
dedication is impractical. All alleys and private streets shall be paved and approved the same as public alleys or streets.
I. All street improvements in any subdivision shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications for such improvements on file in the office of the
city engineer and in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer and planning commission. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff.
3-4-1975)
10-2-302: ALLEYS:
A. Alleys twenty feet (20') in width shall be required at the rear of lots fronting on primary or secondary streets and at the rear of all lots shown as business
property. Such alleys shall be laid out in a manner which will not cause greater interference with traffic on the principal streets adjacent to such blocks
than is necessary. All other alleys shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20') and shall be required at the rear of all lots, except where the
topography makes them impracticable. When two (2) alleys intersect, the intersecting corners shall be cut back or rounded, if practicable in a manner
satisfactory to the transportation/engineering official to facilitate the movement of trucks.
B. When alleys are not provided at the rear of lots, and it is or may become necessary to have easements to reach existing pipes, mains, and lines, or
proposed pipes, mains, and lines, such easements shall be dedicated and shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width. All rights of way and easements
shall avoid entering or crossing streets whenever possible. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-303: LOTS:
A. Zones: For the purposes of this chapter, the city shall be divided into three (3) zones as follows:
1. Northerly Zone: The northerly zone shall consist of allproperty lying between Sunset Boulevard and the northerly boundary of the city.
2. Southerly Zone: The southerly zone shall consist of all property lying southerly of the northerly lines of Santa Monica Boulevard and Wilshire
Boulevard, together with all lots fronting on Doheny Drive.
3. Central Zone: The central zone shall consist of all property in the city not included within the northerly and southerly zones.
B. Frontage: Where a lot adjoins a primary or secondary street, it shall front on such street; otherwise, a lot shall front upon the street which parallels the
long dimensions of the block. A key lot shall not be permitted unless it is established that it cannot be avoided. A double frontage lot shall not be
permitted, unless the planning commission, in the exercise of its discretion, approves the same after it has been established that a double frontage lot
cannot be avoided if the dimensions set forth in this section are to be secured for a majority of other lots in the same subdivision. The side lot lines of
each rectangular lot, and each other lot (so far as possible), shall be at approximate right angles to the street on which the lot fronts.
C. Large Lots: When parcels of land are subdivided into larger lots than building lots, such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening and
ultimate extension of adjacent local streets. When parcels are so divided, each lot indicated shall be of such size and shape as to permit any individual
owner to resubdivide, giving each lot legal size, shape, and access, independent of the adjoining owners.
D. Size And Shape: Each subdivided lot shall have a depth in its longest dimension of at least one hundred fifty feet (150'), shall conform as nearly as
practicable to other lots in the vicinity, and shall have its building site located, so far as possible, to prevent the rear portion of one lot from being
adjacent to the front portion of another lot. In addition:
1. In the southerly zone, each lot shall have at least fifty feet (50') of frontage on a public street and shall have an area of at least seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet;
2. In the central zone, each lot shall have at least ninety feet (90') of frontage on a public street and shall have an area of at least thirteen thousand
(13,000) square feet; and
3. In the northerly zone:
a. Each lot shall be compatible in shape and topography with other lots in the vicinity;
b. Each lot shall have at least one hundred feet (100') of frontage on a public street and shall have an area of at leastforty three thousand five
hundred sixty (43,560) square feet;
c. Each lot shall have a building site of at least four thousand (4,000) square feet, no part of which shall have a slope greater than one vertical in five
(5) horizontal feet, either existing or guaranteed to be constructed under the subdivider's surety bond.
E. Variances: Whenever the size of the parcel of land to be subdivided, its street and alley frontage, its contour, and its location with reference to
surrounding property, are such that the requirements of this section work undue and unusual hardship, and a different size and arrangement would not
result in undue detriment to surrounding property or the residents thereof, the planning commission may, in its discretion, approve a different size and
arrangement of the lots in the proposed subdivision. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 1161, eff. 11-2-1962; Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; Ord. 91-O-
2111, eff. 3-22-1991)
10-2-304: BLOCKS:
Blocks over six hundred sixty feet (660') are not desirable and shall not be approved except where the topography or other special conditions make it
imperative, in the reasonable judgment of the planning commission, to provide longer blocks. In every case where blocks of more than nine hundred feet
(900') are platted for residential development, they shall be broken near the center by a ten foot (10') walkway. No walkway shall be approved which has a
grade exceeding thirty percent (30%). (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 484/797
10-2-305: DRAINAGE:
In all subdivisions the layout of streets, alleys, lots, and easements shall be such as to provide for sanitary sewers and storm drainage in conformity with
good engineering practices in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. When construction is considered necessary to care for such drainage, such
construction shall be guaranteed by the subdivider filing security for the improvements as provided in this article. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-
1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-306: BUILDING LINES:
Front line setbacks shall be required whenever the planning commission, in the exercise of sound judgment, determines that the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare will be conserved or furthered by such requirements. They may also be required in lieu of street widenings. When
required, such building lines shall be indicated on the map at the distance from the street lines as specified. The requirement by the planning commission
of such setback lines shall be evidence that the planning commission has investigated and made a finding supporting such decision. (1962 Code § 10-903;
amd. Ord.75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-307: STREET NAMES:
Any street which is a prolongation or approximately a prolongation of an existing street shall be given the same name; otherwise no street shall be
designated by the same name as that borne by any other street in the city, irrespective of the use of any suffix, such as "street", "avenue", "boulevard",
"drive", "way", "place", "court", or other similar term. The planning official may recommend to the planning commission a change of the name of any street
shown on a subdivision map or to designate a name when no name is shown. If the planning commission approves such recommendation or makes a
different recommendation, any such recommendation shall be transmitted to the council for approval or disapproval. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-
O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-308: DEDICATIONS:
A. As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision
that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. In
addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility
easements, and other public easements.
B. Reserved strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or alley, or having the effect of restricting or
damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes, or which will not be taxable or assessable for special improvements, shall not be permitted in
any subdivision unless such reserved strips are conveyed to the city. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-309: PAVING:
All streets and alleys located in any subdivision of land or immediately adjacent thereto shall be paved. The width, thickness, and type of paving shall be
as required by the city engineer, having due regard to the location of the subdivision, the pavement of adjacent streets and alleys, and the anticipated use
or traffic thereon. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-310: UTILITIES:
A. The subdivider shall be required to install all utilities in keeping with the installations of utilities surrounding the subdivision according to good
engineering practices for eachutility and subject to the approval of the city engineer. The utilities, mains, lines, services, and appurtenances shall be
shown upon the tentative map or upon a special utility map, a copy of which, approved by the particular company or division involved, shall be filed with
the city engineer for review and approval prior to the approval of the final subdivision map by the council. The final subdivision map shall show the
location of all necessary easements located therein. The subdivider shall file with the city engineer security as required by the city engineer in
accordance with the provisions for improvement security set forth in this article, assuring the installation of all utilities within such time as the city
engineer may require and in any event within not to exceed one year after the date of the approval of the final map. The city engineer shall require that
the installation of all utilities shall begin within ninety (90) days after the approval of the final map and shall proceed diligently to completion. The
amount of time to be allowed shall be determined by the size and complexity of the subdivision and of the utility installations. No public utility facilities or
appurtenances shall be installed in any public street, alley, easement, or right of way without a permit from the city engineer. The city engineer shall be
given not less than two (2) days' written notice prior to the installation of any utility in a street, alley, or easement in order that inspections may be made.
B. Utility mains, lines, and services shall be brought to the curb line whenever their installation is in a public street and to the lot line of each lot whenever
their installation is in a public alley or in an easement. Individual service installations shall not be required to the curb line or lot line for gas installations
wherever such installations are not considered to be practical by the city engineer.
C. Inasmuch as all large tracts of land have been subdivided and most of the lots in the city are highly restricted and already improved, in all future
subdivisions all utilities shall be brought underground to the subdivision and to each lot therein by the subdivider, and all installations, including all
appurtenances, shall be entirely underground insofar as it is reasonable and practical to do so from the engineering standpoint, unless the city engineer
finds that because of unusual conditions and circumstances on the subdivider's property or immediately surrounding it, such an installation would work
an undue and unusual hardship or would he unnecessary and serve no useful purpose. Cost alone shall not be a decisive factor. (1962 Code § 10-903;
amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-311: EXCEPTIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 485/797
It is recognized that certain parcels of land exist of such size, subject to such title restrictions, so affected by topographical location, and devoted to such
usage, that it is practically impossible for the owner to conform to the rules and regulations of this article in every respect when subdividing. Exceptions
maybe granted in such cases only when the planning commission shall, in the exercise of sound, reasonable judgment, after an investigation and a
hearing with the subdivider, determine that conditions affecting the property in question warrant and require such exceptions; provided, however, no
exception may be made to any requirements imposed by laws of the state as they now exist or are hereafter amended. (1962 Code § 10-903; amd. Ord.
75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-312: IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND INSPECTION FEES:
The city engineer and the water manager and chief engineer shall estimate the cost of the checking of plans for required improvements and of all general
supervision and inspections required to ensure the proper installation and completion of all improvements in accordance with the city's general
requirements therefor. The subdivider shall thereupon post with the city a cash deposit, in the amount so estimated, and, upon the completion of all the
work, any amount not actually used shall be refunded to the subdivider or, if the fund is exhausted before the completion of all the improvements, the
subdivider shall forthwith pay to the city an amount estimated by the city engineer and the water manager and chief engineer to be sufficient to cover
completion; provided, however, if the subdivision is of such magnitude that the installation and completion of improvements will extend over a period in
excess of one year, the subdivider may deposit an amount estimated to be sufficient for the first year, and the city shall bill the subdivider monthly as the
work progresses, which amount shall be promptly paid by the subdivider until the city engineer and the water manager and chief engineer are satisfied that
the total amount paid to the city will be sufficient to cover the costs of all general supervision and inspections by the city. (1962 Code § 10-903: amd. Ord.
75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-313: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY; REQUIRED:
Any improvement agreement, contract, or act required or authorized by the subdivision map act of the state, for which security is required shall be secured
in the manner provided for in section 66499 of the Government Code of the state. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-314: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY; AMOUNT:
A. The improvement security shall be in the amount set forth or authorized in section 66499.3 of the Government Code of the state. If the improvement
security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the city
engineer as necessary to cover the costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney fees, which may be incurred by the city in
successfully enforcing the obligation secured.
B. The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or
alterations do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the original estimated cost of the improvements. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-315: IMPROVEMENT SECURITY; RELEASE:
Security given for the faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work by the
city engineer. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
Article 4. Final Maps
10-2-401: ACCEPTANCE FOR CHECKING:
No final map of a subdivision shall be accepted for checking by the city engineer until the planning commission action on the tentative map shall have
been received by him, and then only in the event the final map shall conform to the planning commission action thereon. (1962 Code § 10-905; amd. Ord.
75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-402: FILING:
A. The final map shall be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map as provided in section 10-2-206 of this chapter.
B. The final map shall be filed with the city engineer, one original on tracing cloths and three (3) prints of the final subdivision map. (1962 Code § 10-906;
amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-402.1: TRACT MAPS; CHECKING FEES:
Upon the submission of a tract map for checking, the subdivider shall pay a map checking fee to the county engineer in addition to all other fees and
charges required by law. Such fee shall be equal to the fee established by the county for checking tract maps. (Ord. 1187, eff. 10-14-1964; amd. Ord. 70-
O-1379, eff. 3-19-1970; Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; Ord. 78-O-1690, eff. 7-20-1978)
10-2-403: INFORMATION REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 486/797
The city engineer shall refuse to accept any final map which does not conform to all the provisions of the laws of the state, as they now exist or are
hereafter amended, and to the conditions of tentative approval by the planning commission, or which map isnot accompanied by the following:
A. A statement on the final map that all taxes payable on all property within the limits of the subdivision are paid in full, or a letter from the clerk of the
board of supervisors of the county stating that a satisfactory bond has been filed to secure such payment;
B. A statement on the final map dedicating all streets, alleys, public improvements, and utility and easement rights to the city;
C. Proof of the payment of all special assessments which may be paid in full and to which the subdivision is subject, or a letter from the clerk of the board
of supervisors of the county stating that, in lieu of such payment, the subdivider has filed with the board of supervisors of the county a satisfactory
surety bond ensuring the payment of all interest and principal payments for a period of five (5) years from the date of the bond, and furthermore
ensuring the payment of the outstanding principal in full within five (5) years after such date;
D. Sufficient security in the amounts required by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of article 3 of this chapter for all improvements;
E. Proof from the county engineer that such tract has been checked by his office and is ready for certification by the city engineer and the council;
F. A declaration of restrictions, duly signed by all owners of any interest in the subdivision who sign the final subdivision map, shall be acknowledged by
the signers before a notary public in a form required to enable it to be recorded in the office of the county recorder and shall be filed with the final map;
G. Proof from the county engineer that, at the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor set sufficient durable monuments to
conform with the standards described in section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code of the state so that another engineer or surveyor may
readily retrace the survey. In lieu of such proof, the subdivider may deposit cash with the city in an amount specified by the city engineer to cover the
cost of the proper placement of the monuments. Expenditures or reimbursements of the deposit will be in accordance with the provisions of section
66497 of the Government Code of the state; and
H. A statement on the final map that the park and recreation facilities construction taxes set forth in title 3, chapter 1, article 7 of this code may be required
to be paid upon the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any building or structure, or any addition thereto, on any property or in any
building located in the subdivision. (1962 Code § 10-907; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; Ord. 78-O-1693, eff. 6-30-1978)
10-2-404: ACTION OF CITY ENGINEER AND COUNCIL:
A. The city engineer shall check the final map upon receipt, and, when satisfied that all the conditions of tentative approval imposed by the planning
commission have been satisfactorily met, that all the provisions of laws of the state as they now exist or are hereafter amended have been complied
with, and that all centerline data, monuments, survey data, mathematical data, and computations are correctly and satisfactorily indicated on the map
and on the ground, shall, within twenty (20) days after the filing by the subdivider of the final map with other required information and data, certify to its
correctness thereon and transmit it, together with such other information and recommendations as deemed necessary, to the council, or shall return the
map to the subdivider, together with a statement setting forth the grounds for its disapproval and the necessary steps to make it acceptable.
B. If the council approves the final map, it shall return the map to the clerk of the board of supervisors of the county for recordation. If the map is
disapproved by the council, it shall be returned with the reasons for such disapproval to the city engineer, who shall return the same to the subdivider,
together with a statement in detail of the reasons for its return. The subdivider shall thereafter, at his own option, make such additions or corrections
and take such other action as necessary to overcome the objections of the council, as set forth in the statement of the city engineer, and resubmit it to
the city engineer for rechecking and resubmission to the council in the same manner as in the first instance. The map shall thereafter be acted upon as
set forth in section 10-2-403 of this article. Nothing contained in this section or in section 10-2-403 of this article shall be construed as prohibiting any
subdivider from filing the surety bond as required by the provisions of subsection 10-2-403C of this article. (1962 Code § 10-908; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561,
eff. 3-4-1975)
Article 5. Parcel Maps
10-2-501: REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING:
A. A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the subdivision map act of the state,
except for subdivisions created by short term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days' notice in writing) of a portion of an operating
right of way of a railroad corporation defined as such by section 230 of the Public Utilities Code of the state; provided, however, upon a showing made
to the planning commission, based upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply.
B. Such maps shall meet all the requirements of the subdivision map act of the state and of this chapter and shall show alldedications or offers of
dedication thereon. The planning commission may require that such dedications or offers of dedication be made by deed in lieu of, or in addition to,
appearing on the map. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-502: TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS:
When a parcel map is required by the provisions of this article, a tentative parcel map shall first be filed with the planning official. Such map shall meet all
the requirements for tentative maps provided be the subdivision map act of the state and this chapter. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 487/797
10-2-503: PROCESSING OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS:
Tentative parcel maps shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in article 2 of this chapter. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-504: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
All lots proposed to be created pursuant to the provisions of this article shall conform to the minimum requirements for new subdivisions set forth in article
3 of this chapter and shall all have frontage on a public street. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-504.1: PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES CONSTRUCTION TAXES:
Each final parcel map shall include a statement that the park and recreation facilities construction taxes set forth in title 3, chapter 1, article 7 of this code
may be required to be paid upon the issuance of any building permit for the construction of any building or structure or any addition thereto, on any
property or in any building located in the subdivision. (Ord. 78-O-1693, eff. 6-30-1978)
10-2-505: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND EXTENSIONS:
The expiration of tentative parcel maps, and the extensions of such expiration times, shall be governed by the provisions of section 10-2-206 of this
chapter. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-506: TITLE REPORTS:
The tentative map required by this article shall be accompanied by a current preliminary title report showing title to the property proposed to be divided to
be vested in the applicant. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-507: FILING FEES:
Tentative maps filed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to cover the costs of filing,
processing, and investigations. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-508: APPROVAL OF PARCEL MAPS:
A. On receipt of the parcel map, the city engineer shall examine the map to determine if it complies with all the requirements of this article and the
approved tentative parcel map. If the parcel map so complies, the city engineer shall accept the parcel map for filing and transmit the parcel map, with
his report thereon, to the council for action.
B. The council shall approve the parcel map, unless the council finds that the parcel map is not in substantial compliance with the tentative parcel map.
(Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-509: REJECTION OF TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS:
If the tentative parcel map is rejected either by the planning commission, or by the council on appeal by the applicant, the applicant and his successors
and assigns shall be barred from filing a new application with reference to such lot or parcel, or any part thereof, for a period of one year after the date of
such rejection, except upon the grounds of new evidence or changed conditions. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-510: FILING OF PARCEL MAPS AFTER COUNCIL APPROVAL:
On approval of the parcel map by the council, the city clerk shall notify the applicant by mail and shall transmit the original parcel map to the clerk of the
board of supervisors of the county and one copy of such map to each of the following: the city engineer, the building official, and the county assessor. (Ord.
75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-511: PARCEL MAPS; CHECKING FEES:
Upon the submission of a parcel map for checking, the subdivider shall pay a map checking fee to the county engineer in addition to all other fees and
charges required by law. Such fee shall be equal to the fee established by the county for checking parcel maps. (Ord. 78-O-1690, eff. 7-20-1978)
Article 6. Soil Reports
10-2-601: PURPOSE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 488/797
The council declares that this article is enacted pursuant to the requirements of the subdivision map act (division 2, title 7, of the Government Code of the
state). (Ord. 1229, eff. 2-17-1966; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-602: PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORTS:
Prior to the submission of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall file with the building and safety division a preliminary soil report, prepared by a
civil engineer who is registered by the state, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision, as defined in sections 66490 and
66491 of the Government Code of the state. The preliminary soil report may be waived if the building official shall determine that, due to the knowledge of
such division as to the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. (Ord. 1229, eff. 2-17-1966; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-
1975)
10-2-603: SOIL INVESTIGATIONS:
If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural
defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil investigation shall
recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The report
shall be filed with the building and safety division. (Ord. 1229, eff. 2-17-1966; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
10-2-604: APPROVAL OF SOIL INVESTIGATIONS:
The building division shall approve the soil investigation if it determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to
each structure to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. Appeals from such determinations shall be to the planning commission. The building permit
shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the approved recommended corrective action in the construction of each dwelling. (Ord. 1229, eff. 2-17-
1966; amd. Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
Article 7. Common Interest Development Projects
10-2-701: AUTHORITY:
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in sections 66421 and 66426 of the California Government Code. The provisions of this article
shall apply to subdivisions involving common interest development projects as set forth in thedefinition of "subdivision" in section 10-2-101 of this chapter.
(Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-702: PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose: Common interest development projects require special additional regulations because of special problems resulting from the divided
ownership of individual units, and the purpose of this article is to provide reasonable standards for the location, design, and development of common
interest development projects and the information to be contained in the precise plan of development which shall be filed with the tentative map.
B. Application: Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall apply to both residential and nonresidential common interest
development projects. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-703: PRECISE PLANS REQUIRED:
A precise plan of design shall be required for the use or development of any lot or parcel of real property for a common interest development project,
irrespective of the area or size of such lot or parcel. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-704: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Each application for the approval of a precise plan of design for a common interest development project shall include the following information and
documents:
A. A site plan with at least the following details shown to scale:
1. The location, height, gross floor area, and proposed uses of each existing structure to remain and for each proposed structure;
2. The location, use, and type of surfacing for all open storage areas;
3. The location and type of surfacing for all driveways, pedestrianways, vehicle parking areas, and curb cuts;
4. The location, height, and type of materials for walls or fences;
5. The location of all landscaped areas, the type of landscaping, and a statement specifying the method by which the landscaping areas shall be
maintained;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 489/797
6. The location of all recreational and open space facilities and a statement specifying the method of the maintenance thereof; and
7. The location of the parking facilities to be used in conjunction with each unit in the common interest development;
B. Three (3) copies of the plans and elevations of all structures, showing the architectural features and the types and materials of construction; and
C. Three (3) copies of the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or, if there are no covenants, conditions, or restrictions, any other agreements between
any persons who have an ownership interest in the project and who have the right to reside in such project which will apply to the common interest
development project, which covenants, conditions, and restrictions or agreements shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions:
1. Provisions satisfactory to the city for the maintenance of the common areas of any such project by the city in the event of default in the maintenance
of such common areas by individual owners of the units and for reimbursement to the city for any costs incurred thereby;
2. In nonresidential common interest development projects, the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or other agreement(s) shall include:
a. Provisions satisfactory to the city for parking, access and utility covenants in order to: 1) satisfy parking and access requirements imposed by this
code, 2) assure the continuing availability of parking within the building at fair market value for the benefit of each parcel owner and their
respective permittees, 3) assure continuous access, subject to reasonable rules and regulations imposed by the owners pursuant to any future
covenants, to and through each parcel created by the subdivision as required to access any other parcel and 4) provide the owner of each parcel
with structural support and the right to use existing common utility systems and equipment servicing the building.
b. A provision that any provision required to be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or agreements by this section or by the
conditions of approval imposed on the project shall not be deleted or amended without the written consent of the planning commission.
3. In residential common interest development projects the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or agreements shall include:
a. Provisions restricting the use of each residential unit to use as a single-family residence except as provided in chapter 3, article 43 of this title; and
b. Provisions establishing each individual unit owner's exclusive right to the use of specifically designated covered parking spaces sufficient to satisfy
the code required parking for eachunit or, if a reduction in the required parking for a conversion is granted pursuant to this article, provisions
establishing each individual unit owner's exclusive right to the use of not less than one specifically designated covered parking space for each unit;
and
4. A provision that any provision required to be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions or agreements by this section or by the conditions
of approval imposed on the project shall not be deleted or amended without the written consent of the planning commission. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-
6-2006)
10-2-704.1: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR CONVERSIONS:
In addition to the general application requirements set forth in section 10-2-201 of this article, applications for a tentative map to convert an existing
apartment building to a common interest development or to convert a common interest development created prior to January 1, 2006, to another form of
common interest development pursuant to sections 10-2-707 through 10-2-711 of this article, shall include a report on the physical elements of each
structure and facility within the subdivision that includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. A report prepared by a licensed architect detailing the condition of each element of the property including:
1. Foundations;
2. Roofs;
3. Electrical;
4. Plumbing;
5. Utilities;
6. Walls;
7. Ceilings;
8. Heat insulation factors;
9. Windows;
10. Recreational and open space facilities;
11. Sound transmission characteristics between units;
12. Mechanical equipment;
13. Fire protection equipment;
14. Parking facilities; and
15. Appliances.
For each element listed above, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, the following: a) the date the building permit
was originally issued for each element (or the date the permit was issued for the most recent replacement of the original element); b) the
replacement cost of the element at the time the report is prepared; and c) the current condition of each element. If applicable, the report shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 490/797
describe why the physical condition of each element does not comply with current zoning, housing or building code and shall identify how each
defective or unsafe element will be repaired.
B. A report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator describing the general condition of the entire project. In addition, prior to the approval of
the final map, the applicant shall also cause to be prepared by a licensed pest control operator a pest infestation and dry rot report for each individual
unit in the project;
C. A structural engineer's evaluation of the integrity of the foundations. If a soils report was not done at the time of original construction, or if there has
been soil movement since construction, the application for conversion shall also include a report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding
soil deposits, rock formations, faults, ground water and landslides in the vicinity of the project, and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils
problems relating to the structures on the project site. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy of said prior reports
shall be submitted with the soils report required by this section.
D. A statement of the repairs and improvements the subdivider proposes to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and
safety.
E. An affidavit attesting to compliance with the noticing requirements prescribed by section 10-2-710 of this article. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-705: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL:
Applications for the approval of precise plans of design for common interest development projects shall be made in such form as the director of community
development shall prescribe, and all applications for the approval of precise plans of design shall be considered by the planning commission, irrespective
of the area of the lot or parcel involved in any such project. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-706: CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL:
A tentative map of a common interest development project may beapproved subject to the imposition of reasonable conditions relating to the design and
improvement of the subdivision. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-707: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE PROVISIONS:
A. Code Compliance Required: Except as otherwise provided by this article, neither a tentative map nor a precise plan of design for a new common
interest development project or for the conversion of an existing building to a common interest development or the conversion of an existing common
interest development created prior to January 1, 2006, to another form of common interest development shall be approved unless the project will
comply with the building codes and zoning regulations and all the other requirements of this code in effect at the time of application.
B. Exception For Conversion Of Character Contributing Buildings: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, it is recognized that
certain multi-family residential buildings that cannot feasibly comply with current building codes and zoning regulations may be of continued value if
otherwise allowed to be converted to common interest developments, and upgraded and rehabilitated to generally conform to the provisions of this
article and other code requirements.
For the purposes of this article, and all related sections of this code, a character contributing building shall mean any multi-family residential building
that the planning commission determines, due to its proportions and scale, design elements, and relationship to the surrounding development, is of
continued value and contributes to defining the character of the community as a whole. In making this determination, the planning commission shall
make the following findings:
1. The building to be converted is not substantially greater in massing and scale than the surrounding streetscape. In making this determination, the
planning commission may compare the relative lot coverage, height and setbacks of the building being converted to the lot coverage, height and
setbacks of developments on parcels in the same block.
2. And either:
a. The building to be converted and/or the project site design contribute(s) to community character through the use of: 1) architecturally pure styles
that foster congruous designs and details that are similar or complementary in scale and mass to other nearby structures; 2) features visible from
the public street, including, but not limited to, courtyards, balconies, open space, building modulation, or any other similar characteristics that, as a
result of the conversion, would be maintained, restored or refined in a manner consistent with the general criteria of architectural review set forth in
section 10-3-3010 of this title; or
b. The interior spaces of the building to be converted contribute to community character through the use of architectural features and high quality
construction finishes and features such as crown molding, hardwood floors, fireplaces, stairways, and built in cabinets in individual units; private
courtyards, balconies, and/or interior open spaces; interior fountains; or any other similar characteristics or features that, as a result of the
conversion, would be maintained, restored or refined in a manner consistent with the general criteria of architectural review set forth in section 10-
3-3010 of this title.
C. Architectural Review Required: Nothing in this article shall relieve a project to convert an existing building to a common interest development from the
architectural review requirements of chapter 3, article 30 of this title. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-708: REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 491/797
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the conversion of an existing multi-family residential apartment to any form of common interest development or
the conversion of a common interest development created before January 1, 2006, to any other form of common interest development shall comply with all
of the provisions set forth in this section and section 10-2-709 of this article. The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the
provisions of articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this chapter.
A. Inspections:
1. Distribution Of Reports: Upon receipt of the application for subdivision for the purpose of conversion of an existing multi-family residential building
from apartments to common interest ownership, the director of community development or his/her designee shall submit copies of the applicable
reports or documents required by section 10-2-704.1 of this article, to the fire department, community development department - building and safety
division, and other departments as appropriate.
2. Building Inspection: The building official or his/her designee shall inspect each proposed conversion project and shall prepare a written report (the
"building inspection report") detailing the repairs and/or upgrades necessary for the project to meet the standards of the current building and housing
codes. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider.
3. Fire Inspection: The fire marshal shall inspect or cause an inspection to be made of each proposed conversion project to determine the sufficiency of
fire protection systems serving that project and shall prepare a written report (the "fire inspection report") detailing the repairs and/or upgrades
necessary for the project to meet the standards of the current fire code. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider.
4. Zoning Compliance Inspection: The city planner or his/her designee shall cause an inspection to be made of each proposed conversion project to
ascertain whether the project was constructed in compliance with applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the project
was constructed. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-709: PHYSICAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS:
Except as expressly provided in this article, no application to convert an existing multi-family residential apartment building to any form of common interest
development or to convert an existing common interest development created prior to January 1, 2006, to any other form of common interest development
shall be approved unless the proposed conversion will conform to each and every standard set forth in this section. These standards are in addition to the
findings required for any concurrent application for a development plan review pursuant to chapter 3, article 31 of this title.
A. Mandatory Minimum Standards: The proposed conversion shall conform to all of the following minimum standards:
1. Life Safety Requirements:
a. Smoke detectors shall be provided in sleeping rooms, in hallways leading to sleeping rooms, at the top of stairs, and in all public corridors. Smoke
detectors shall be hardwired with battery backup in accordance with the provisions of section 9-1-202 of this code and section 310.9.1 of the
California Building Code or any successor statute or regulation.
b. Buildings that contain 1) three (3) or more stories or 2) sixteen (16) or more dwelling units shall be provided with both a manual and an automatic
fire alarm system in public areas in accordance with the requirements set forth in California Building Code section 310.10 or any successor statute
or regulation.
c. Doors opening into public corridors shall be a minimum one and three-eighths inch (13/8") thick solid wood core or twenty (20) minute fire rated
and shall be self-closing and latching in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 402.4 uniform code for building conservation or any
successor statute or regulation.
d. Interior doors opening into enclosed stairways shall be fire rated and self-closing and latching as required by California Building Code section
1005.3.3.5 or any successor statute or regulation.
e. All public corridors shall have illuminated exit signs indicating the path of travel along the exit system and emergency backup power shall be
provided for the exit signs in accordance with the provisions of California Building Code 1003.2.8 or any successor statute or regulation.
f. Emergency backup power shall be provided for egress lighting in all public areas, including corridors, stairways, lobbies, attached parking garages
and elevator cabs and shall provide a minimum illumination of one foot-candle at the floor level as required by section 9-1-302 of this code and
California Building Code section 1003.2.9.1 or any successor statute or regulation.
g. A means of two-way communication shall be provided between all elevator cabs and the outside of the elevator in accordance with the provisions
of California Building Code section 3003.4.10 or any successor statute or regulation.
h. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided in accordance with section 1002 of the California Fire Code or any successor statute or regulation.
i. The building address number shall be conspicuously displayed at the front entry and the number and street name shall be displayed at the rear
alley in accordance with the provisions of section 9-1-202 of this code.
j. Buildings with six (6) or more dwelling units shall display a descriptive diagram at the front entry of the building indicating the location of each
dwelling unit within the building in accordance with the provisions of section 9-1-202 of this code.
k. All fire protection systems installed in multi-residential occupancies shall be inspected, serviced and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of title 19 of the California Code of Regulations or any successor statute or regulation.
l. All fire alarm systems shall be inspected, serviced and maintained annually by an appropriately licensed contractor in accordance with the
requirements of regulation 72 of the National Fire Protection Association.
2. Electrical Requirements:
a. Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) protection shall be provided for all electrical receptacles in bathrooms, serving kitchen counters, in garages
or outdoors in accordance with the provisions of uniform code for building conservation - 4 guideline 3.1 and California Electrical Code section
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 492/797
210.8 or any successor statutes or regulations.
b. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum sixty (60) amp electrical panel and feeder in accordance with the provisions of uniform code
for building conservation - 4 guideline 3.1 and California Electrical Code section 230.79 or any successor statutes or regulations.
c. A separate electrical meter shall be provided for each dwelling unit and the common public area.
d. Electrical systems over fifty (50) volts shall be grounded in accordance with the provisions of uniform code for building conservation - 4 guideline
3.1 and California Electrical Code section 250.20 or any successor statutes or regulations.
e. Weatherproof covers shall be provided for all exterior receptacles in accordance with the provisions of California Electrical Code section 406.8(B)
or any successor statute or regulation.
3. Plumbing Requirements:
a. A temperature and pressure relief valve shall be provided for all water heaters in accordance with the provisions of California Plumbing Code
section 505.3 or any successor statute or regulation.
b. Water heaters shall be seismically braced with a minimum of two (2) straps in accordance with the provisions of California Plumbing Code section
510.5.1 or any successor statute or regulation.
c. Water heaters shall be properly vented to the outside in accordance with the requirements of California Plumbing Code section 512 or any
successor statute or regulation.
d. Water heaters shall be provided with sufficient combustion air in accordance with the requirements of California Plumbing Code section 507.0 or
any successor statute or regulation.
e. Potable water shall have backflow protection where necessary to prevent potential cross connection (contaminating potable water with nonpotable
water or other pollutants) in accordance with the requirements of California Plumbing Code sections 602 and 603 or any successor statutes or
regulations.
f. Dishwashers shall be connected to the drainage system through an approved air gap fitting in accordance with the requirements of California
Plumbing Code section 807.4 or any successor statute or regulation.
4. Mechanical Requirements:
a. Habitable areas shall be provided with permanent heating facilities capable of maintaining a temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) at
a height of three feet (3') above the floor in accordance with the requirements of uniform code for building conservation section 701.4 and
California Building Code section 310.11 or any successor statutes or regulations.
b. Gas heating equipment shall be properly vented to the outside in accordance with California Mechanical Code section 801 or any successor
statute or regulation.
c. Gas heating equipment shall be provided with sufficient combustion air in accordance with the requirements of California Mechanical Code section
701 or any successor statute or regulation.
d. Permanently installed HVAC equipment shall be fastened in place to resist seismic loads in accordance with the requirements of California
Mechanical Code section 304.4 or any successor statute or regulation.
5. Structural Requirements:
a. The owner of or applicant for the proposed conversion shall provide a structural analysis report for seismic resistance prepared by a California
state licensed engineer or California state licensed architect. Said report shall include, but not be limited to, the following topics:
(1) Cripple wall/anchor bolt (uniform code for building conservation chapter 3)
(2) Soft story (uniform code for building conservation chapter 4)
(3) Nonductile building (uniform code for building conservation chapter 5)
The report shall establish compliance with the structural requirements set forth in the above chapters of the uniform code for building
conservation by clearly demonstrating to the satisfaction of the building official that no structural deficiencies exist and no mitigation is required.
Alternatively, the owner or the applicant shall submit plans for structural alterations necessary to comply with the structural requirements set
forth in those chapters. Said plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements in the most recent "Guidelines For Seismic Retrofit Of
Existing Buildings" published by the International Conference of Building Officials and shall be submitted to the building official for review and
approval.
6. Pest Control Requirements:
a. A licensed exterminator, or equivalent, shall certify that all structures in the building or buildings to be converted is/are free from insect or rodent
infestation.
7. Handrail, Guardrail, Stairs, Pool Barriers:
a. At least one handrail shall be provided on all stairs with four (4) or more risers in accordance with the requirements of uniform code for building
conservation section 405.1 and California building code section 1003.3.3.6 or any successor statutes or regulations.
b. The vertical rise and horizontal run of a stair shall not vary by more than three-eighths inch (3/8") over a flight of stairs in accordance with the
requirements of uniform code for building conservation section 405.1.1 and California building code section 1003.3.3.3 or any successor statutes
or regulations.
c. Guardrails shall be provided at any areas adjacent to an opening with a thirty inch (30") drop off or more. The guardrail shall be at least thirty six
inches (36") high and shall have openings which do not allow the passage of a four inch (4") diameter sphere in accordance with the requirements
of uniform code for building conservation section 405.2 and California building code section 509 or any successor statutes or regulations.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 493/797
d. Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a barrier in accordance with the provisions of California building code section 3118B or any successor
statute or regulation and section 9-1-602 of this code. The barrier shall be at least five feet (5') high, shall have openings that do not allow the
passage of a four inch (4") diameter sphere, and shall not be climbable by small children. Gates through the barrier shall be self-closing and
latching and must open outward away from the pool. All gate latches shall be located at a height of at least four and one-half feet (41/2').
8. Security Requirements:
a. Openings into individual dwelling units shall comply with the security provisions of the uniform building security code or any successor statutes or
regulations.
b. Doors with a deadlock that requires a key to open from the inside shall be replaced with an approved lock in accordance with the requirements of
California building code section 1003.3.1.8 or any successor statute or regulation.
c. Required egress windows in sleeping rooms shall not be blocked by a security grill or grate that does not have an approved release device in
accordance with the requirements of California building code section 310.4 or any successor statute or regulation.
9. Miscellaneous Requirements:
a. Any construction work requiring a permit that was done without the appropriate permit shall be properly permitted and inspected in accordance
with the requirements of the Beverly Hills administrative code set forth in title 9, chapter 1, article 1 of this code.
b. The property shall be maintained in accordance with sections 5-7-3, 5-7-4 and 5-7-5 of this code.
c. The roof of any structure on the property shall be covered to a class A fire retardant roof no later than July 1, 2013, in accordance with the
provisions of section 9-1-202 of this code.
d. No certificate of completion for the building being converted shall be issued until the building official has inspected and verified that the building
complies with each and every building standard set forth in this subsection A and has assigned addresses for the individual units within the
building.
No application to convert an existing multi-family residential apartment building to any form of common interest development or to convert an
existing common interest development created prior to January 1, 2006, to any other form of common interest development may be granted a
waiver from compliance with any standard required by this subsection A.
B. Building And Zoning Regulations: In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, the proposed conversion shall conform to the
applicable standards of the city's building code, the city's housing code, the city's fire code and the city's zoning code in effect on the date the city
determines the application for conversion is complete. Notwithstanding the foregoing, and subject to the provisions of subsection H of this section, the
planning commission may modify or waive one or more of the requirements of this subsection and subsection 10-2-707A of this chapter, for an
application to convert a character contributing building to a common interest development, provided, based on a written report from the building official,
the planning commission determines that, due to the existing physical limitations of said character contributing building, strict application of the
provisions of this subsection would require physical alterations to the structure that would irreparably damage or remove the character defining features
of the building, and provided further that the requested waiver does not seek waiver of any mandatory minimum standard required by subsection A of
this section.
C. Pest Control: The subdivider shall repair or replace any damaged or infested areas in need of repair or replacement as shown in the structural pest
control report required by section 10-2-704.1 of this article to the satisfaction of the city building official.
D. Laundry Facilities: If the proposed conversion will not provide a common laundry area, a laundry area shall be provided in each individual unit. If
common laundry areas are provided to serve the entire project, each project shall provide, at a minimum, a laundry area(s) with not less than one
automatic washer and dryer for each five (5) units, or fraction thereof, in the project. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission may
modify the requirements of this section for an application to convert a character contributing building to a common interest development, provided the
planning commission finds that, due to the existing physical limitations of said character contributing building, strict application of the provisions of this
section would require physical alterations to the structure that would irreparably damage or remove the character defining features of the building.
E. Landscape And Open Space Requirements; Installation And Maintenance:
1. Prior to the issuance of the final map for any proposed conversion, the subdivider shall install new landscaping or shall restore existing landscaping,
as appropriate, subject to review and approval by the architectural commission in accordance with the approved comprehensive plan for the
rehabilitation of the exterior elements of the property as required by subsection G of this section. In addition, all landscaping installed or restored on
the project site as part of the comprehensive plan for rehabilitation shall be maintained in perpetuity to achieve a high degree of appearance and
quality.
2. The proposed conversion shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 3, article 28 of this title with respect to landscaped setbacks, usable
open space and/or facade modulation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for an application to convert a character contributing building to a common
interest development, if the subject building has been determined to be a character contributing building in part due to notable semipublic site
features, including, but not limited to, courtyards, balconies, open space, building modulation or any other similar characteristics, the planning
commission may waive compliance with any of the standards imposed by this subsection, provided the planning commission finds that, due to the
existing physical limitations of said character contributing building, strict application of the provisions of this section would require physical alterations
to the structure that would irreparably damage or remove the character defining features of the building. Such a waiver shall not exempt the
subdivider from architectural review as otherwise required by this code.
F. Condition Of Equipment And Appliances: The developer shall provide a one year warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow on any
dishwasher, garbage disposal, stove, refrigerator, hot water tank, and air conditioner that is provided as a condition of sale or occupancy. At such time
as the homeowners' association takes over management of the development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that
any improvements, such as pools and pool equipment (filters, pumps, and chlorinators), spas, saunas and other appliances and mechanical equipment
to be owned in common by the association, are in operable working condition.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 494/797
G. Refurbishing And Restoration: In connection with an application for a tentative map to convert an existing multi-family residential apartment building or a
common interest development previously created prior to January 1, 2006, to any form of common interest development, the subdivider shall submit a
comprehensive plan for the rehabilitation of the exterior elements of the property. Said comprehensive plan shall provide for the rehabilitation and
restoration of each building, structure, fence, patio enclosure, carport, accessory building, sidewalk, driveway, paved area, landscaped area, and
additional exterior element of the site, as necessary, to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety, subject to review and approval by the
architectural commission. Prior to consideration of the final map, the architectural commission shall review the comprehensive plan and, through its
review, shall expressly identify those elements, if any, which the planning commission found contributed to the determination of the project as a
"character contributing building" in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this chapter and incorporate measures to ensure that the refurbishment and
restoration of those elements preserves said character defining features.
H. Parking:
1. Spaces Required: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of chapter 3 of this title. No open space may be
eliminated to expand on site parking. As a condition of approval of the tentative subdivision map, the planning commission may require the
subdivider to replace or expand an existing freestanding parking structure pursuant to exceptions as noted in section 10-3-2808 of this title for the
replacement or expansion of a nonconforming garage or carport in the rear setback. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in connection with an application
to convert a character contributing building to a common interest development, the planning commission may permit the modification of the required
number of on site parking spaces and the minimum standards with regard to stall and aisle dimensions for required parking spaces provided the
commission finds that, due to the existing physical limitations of said character contributing building, strict application of the provisions of this
subsection would require physical alterations to the structure that would irreparably damage or remove the character defining features of the building.
Under no circumstances, however, may the planning commission approve an application to convert an existing multi-family residential apartment
building or a common interest development previously created prior to January 1, 2006, to a common interest development that provides less than
one covered parking space per unit.
2. Assignment And Use Of Required Off Street Parking Spaces: Either the covenants, conditions and restrictions, or similar ownership agreements of
the common interest development shall incorporate the following parking requirements:
a. Required off street parking spaces shall be permanently and irrevocably specifically assigned to particular units within the project on the basis of
the parking spaces required per unit. For projects where the planning commission has approved less than code required parking, each unit shall
be assigned the exclusive right to the use of not less than one specifically designated covered parking space.
b. To the maximum practical extent, the spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous.
c. All parking spaces shall be for the use of unit owners.
d. All studio and one bedroom units shall be assigned one parking space and may rent additional spaces from the association as available.
e. The space(s) assigned to a particular unit may not be tandem with the spaces assigned for any other unit.
f. All parking spaces, except those specifically designated for the storage of recreational vehicles, shall be used solely for the purpose of parking
motor vehicles as defined by the Vehicle Code of the state of California and shall not be used for trailers, unmounted campers, boats, or other
recreational vehicles.
I. Acceptance Of Reports: The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the director of community
development or his/her designee. The reports required by this article, in their accepted form, shall remain on file with the department of community
development for review by any interested person and shall be transmitted to the planning commission as part of the application packet submitted for
their review.
J. Copy To Buyers: The subdivider shall provide each purchaser of a residential unit with a copy of each report (in its final, accepted form).
K. Long Term Reserves: Prior to approval of the final map, the developer shall prepare and submit a reserve study as required by California Civil Code
section 1365 to the director of community development and shall provide purchasers with a disclosure, in the form prescribed by California Civil Code
section 1365.2.5 or any successor statute.
L. Submittal Of Budget: Prior to approval of the final map, the subdivider shall submit to the director of community development or his or her designee a
copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities submitted to the California department of real estate, including
needed reserves, along with any changes in the budget required by the department of real estate. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006; amd. Ord. 16-O-
2719, eff. 1-20-2017)
10-2-710: TENANT NOTIFICATION:
With regard to all forms of common interest development conversions, the property owner shall be responsible to give each tenant and each prospective
tenant all applicable notices as required by this code in accordance with chapter 3, article 2.5 of this title and state law. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-2-711: TENANT PROVISIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS:
The tenant protections set forth in this section shall apply to the conversion of existing multi-family residential apartment buildings or common interest
developments created prior to January 1, 2006, to any form of common interest development.
A. Tenant's Right To Purchase: In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code section 66427.1(d) or any successor statute, any tenant
shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will
be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the
date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 495/797
receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed
satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.
B. Temporary Relocation Of Tenants During Construction: If temporary relocation of any tenant is necessary for renovation or rehabilitation of a unit
between the date of submission of the tentative map application and the date established for permanent relocation of the tenant, the subdivider shall
provide equivalent substitute housing for that tenant and his or her household, at no additional cost to the tenant, during the period that tenant's unit is
being renovated or rehabilitated. Such substitute housing shall be within the city limits unless a different agreement is made between the subdivider
and the tenant by mutual consent. Any tenant temporarily relocated shall have the right to return to his or her former unit until the expiration of all rights
granted to such tenant under this code and applicable provisions of state law. The obligation to relocate the tenant to alternate housing imposed on the
subdivider by this section shall only apply if the unit being renovated or rehabilitated is not habitable during such construction. The final determination
of habitability and suitability shall be made by the city's building official or his or her designee. The subdivider shall avoid the economic displacement of
nonpurchasing tenants in accordance with California Government Code section 66427.5 or any successor statute.
C. Lease Period For Senior Tenants: In accordance with Government Code section 7060.4, any tenant who is sixty two (62) years of age or older or is
disabled and has lived in an apartment for at least one year prior to the date that the landlord delivers notice to the city pursuant to subsection 4-5-
511B2 of this code or equivalent notice of an intent to withdraw a unit from the rental market, shall have his or her tenancy extended to one year after
the date of delivery of that notice to the city, provided that the tenant gives written notice of his or her entitlement to an extension to the landlord within
sixty (60) days after the date of delivery to the city of the notice. In that situation, the following provisions shall apply: 1) the tenancy shall be continued
on the same terms and conditions as existed on the date of delivery of the notice, 2) no party shall be relieved of the duty to perform any obligation
under the lease or rental agreement.
D. Relocation Benefits:
1. Relocation Fee Required: Any subdivider who serves a notice of intent to convert on tenants pursuant to section 10-2-710 of this chapter shall pay a
relocation fee to each tenant in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such relocation fee shall be due and payable to each tenant who is
not in default under his or her tenancy and does not exercise his or her right to purchase his or her unit unless the subdivider notifies each tenant in
writing of the withdrawal of the notice of intent to convert prior to such time as the tenant has: a) given the subdivider notice of his or her last date of
occupancy, or b) vacated his or her unit if such notice of the last date of occupancy is not given by the tenant. The subdivider must file a copy of such
withdrawal notice with the director of community development within one week after serving such notice on the tenant.
2. Amount Of Fee: The relocation fee due each tenant shall be calculated as follows:
a. Tenants Who Vacate Without Extending Tenancy: For any tenant who vacates his or her unit without electing to extend his or her tenancy pursuant
to subsection C of this section, the relocation fee shall be calculated as provided in section 4-5-605 of this code for rent stabilization units.
b. Tenants Who Extend Tenancy: For any tenant who elects to extend his or her tenancy under subsection C of this section, the relocation fee shall
be limited to the actual cost of moving not to exceed a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per tenant household.
c. Annual Adjustments: The amount of relocation assistance established by this section shall be increased annually by an amount equal to the
annual increase in the "Consumer Price Index For All Urban Consumers For The Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Areas" (the "CPI"),
including all items as published by the U.S. bureau of labor statistics as of March 1 of each year. For the purposes of this article, the CPI change
will be measured from January 1 to January 1.
3. Time Of Payment: The relocation fee or pro rata share thereof shall be paid to any tenant who vacates the apartment unit at the time he or she
vacates said unit.
4. Applicability: Those parties who lease a unit in a building being converted to a common interest development subsequent to the date the application
for conversion is determined by the city to be complete shall not be eligible to receive relocation benefits in accordance with this subsection D;
provided the subdivider gave such parties written notice of the pending application for conversion at the time such parties entered their respective
leases. Such notice shall comply with the requirements of California Government Code section 66452.8(b) or any successor statute. If the subdivider
fails to give notice pursuant to this section, the subdivider shall pay to each such party who becomes a tenant, and who was entitled to such notice,
and who does not purchase his or her unit pursuant to subsection A of this section, an amount equal to two (2) times the monthly rent for moving
expenses.
E. Limitations On Evictions: No tenant shall be evicted as the result of the conversion of an existing apartment building to a common interest development
pursuant to this article for at least one hundred eighty (180) days from approval of the final map for the project and the expiration of the ninety (90) day
period of the exclusive option to purchase the unit described in subsection A of this section as provided by California Government Code section
66427.1 or any successor statute. The protections afforded tenants by this subsection shall only extend to tenants who are not in default under their
rental agreement.
F. Grounds For Denial: If the planning commission makes any of the following determinations, that determination may serve as prima facie evidence that
the proposed tentative map is not consistent with the city's general plan.
1. The planning commission determines that during the one hundred eighty (180) days prior to filing a notice of intent to convert pursuant to section 10-
2-710 of this article vacancies in the project have been unlawfully increased, or elderly or permanently disabled tenants unlawfully displaced or
discriminated against in leasing units, or unlawful evictions have occurred for the purpose of preparing the building for conversion.
2. The planning commission determines that during the one hundred eighty (180) days prior to filing a notice of intent to convert pursuant to section 10-
2-710 of this article, rents in the project have been increased in excess of the increases permitted by chapter 5 or chapter 6 of title 4 of this code, as
applicable.
3. The planning commission determines that the subdivider has knowingly submitted incorrect information (to mislead or misdirect efforts by agencies
of the city in the administration of this code).
4. The planning commission determines, based on a report from the building official, that the residential rental units in the project have not been
maintained to the standard of habitability prescribed by section 1941 of the California Civil Code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 496/797
If the tentative map is disapproved on any of the grounds set forth in this section, the subdivider may not reapply for eighteen (18) months from the date of
denial. In evaluating the determination under subsections F1 and F2 of this section, the increase in rental rates for each unit over the preceding five (5)
years and the average monthly vacancy rate for the project over the preceding three (3) years shall be considered. In the evaluating displacement of
elderly tenants, any such displacements over the preceding three (3) years, and the reasons therefor, shall be considered. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-712: ANNUAL LIMITATION ON RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS:
A. Annual Limitation: An annual limitation is hereby imposed on the conversion of existing residential rental units to common interest developments. Said
limitation shall be as follows:
1. Character Contributing Buildings: For buildings designated as character contributing buildings in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this article,
applications for conversion up to an aggregate maximum of one and one-half percent (1.5%) of the existing multi-family residential rental stock as of
January 1 of each calendar year may be approved by the planning commission in any calendar year.
2. All Other Multi-Family Residential Buildings: For all multi-family residential buildings other than character contributing buildings, applications for
conversion up to an aggregate maximum of one-half percent (0.5%) of the existing multi-family residential rental stock as of January 1 of each
calendar year may be approved by the planning commission in any calendar year.
The actual physical number limit for each category of conversion shall be determined annually by the director of community development or his or
her designee and shall be made available in the department of community development. The planning commission may consider a request to
exceed the foregoing annual limitations on conversions in conjunction with an application for a density bonus permit pursuant to article 15.2 of
chapter 3 of this title.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in applying the annual limitations established by this section, an application to convert existing residential rental units
to common interest developments may be approved for a specific project even if such conversion would exceed the applicable limitation for that
category of conversions for the current calendar year, provided that at least fifty percent (50%) of the residential rental units in the project to be
converted can be accommodated under the remaining annual limitation for said category for that calendar year, and further providedthat granting the
approval to allow the conversion of the residential rental units in the project will not cause the annual limitation established by this section to be
exceeded by more than fifty (50) units for said category of conversions for the calendar year.
B. Waiting List: If an applicant for a tentative map to convert an existing residential rental unit to a common interest development is denied such permit or
entitlement because of the provisions of this section, the applicant shall be placed on a waiting list. Applicants on the waiting list shall have priority over
all other applicants for available permits or entitlements, with order of priority determined by the date the city determines that the original application is
complete. An applicant on the waiting list shall be notified by the director of community development or his/her designee of the first available time which
such permit or entitlement could be issued. Such applicant shall have two (2) weeks from the date of such notice to notify the director of community
development or his/her designee of the applicant's intent to accept such permit or entitlement. Failure to respond to the notice of the director of
community development or his/her designee within such time shall be deemed to be notice of intent of such applicant not to accept such permit or
entitlement, and such applicant's name shall be removed from the waiting list. Upon receipt of notice of intent not to accept such permit or entitlement,
or if two (2) weeks have passed from the date of the notice of availability without a response from such applicant, the director of community
development or his/her designee shall notify the next applicant on the waiting list to whom such permit or entitlement could be issued.
C. Exemption: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the demolition of the existing residential rental units where such demolition is necessary in
order to accommodate the construction of new residential rental housing units. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-713: VOLUNTARY DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
If requested in writing by either the applicant for a proposed conversion or by an existing tenant in the building being converted (collectively, the "parties"),
city staff shall assist the parties in setting up a voluntary conflict resolution process acceptable to both parties to resolve any landlord/tenant issues that
arise during the conversion process. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-2-714: EXEMPTION FOR COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS CREATED PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2006:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a common interest development created prior to January 1, 2006, satisfies each of the mandatory
minimum standards required by subsection 10-2-709A of this article, said common interest development maybe converted to another form of common
interest development without otherwise complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 06-O-2499, eff. 4-6-2006)
Article 8. Lot Line Adjustments
10-2-801: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT DEFINED:
For the purposes of this article, "lot line adjustment" shall mean any adjustment between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels where the land taken
from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff.
3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-802: NO PARCEL MAP OR TRACT MAP NECESSARY:
Any person who desires to adjust a lot line as defined in section 10-2-801 of this article and does not wish to record a map pursuant to the provisions of
articles 1 through 5 of this chapter or of the subdivision map act (sections 66410 through 66499 of the Government Code of the state) shall comply with
the provisions of this article. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 497/797
10-2-803: FILING MAPS FOR LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
The applicant for a lot line adjustment shall file with the planning director an original and four (4) signed, legible prints of the following map prepared by a
licensed surveyor or registered civil engineer on sheets of tracing cloth or polyester base film eighteen inches (18") wide by twenty six inches (26") long:
A. A map drawn to scale showing each affected parcel containing the exact dimensions and bearings of each existing line, plus the area of each lot; the
proposed new lot lines shown in dashed lines, plus the new dimensions and areas of each lot; dimensions and areas shall be clearly labeled "existing"
and "proposed";
B. The map shall also show the existing improvements on each lot and the existing and proposed setback dimensions;
C. The map shall also show all easements and public rights of way over the affected parcels;
D. The map shall include the legal description of each parcel, the signatures of all owners of each affected parcel, the name and address of the person
making the application, and the name and address of the engineer or surveyor who drew the map.
No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by section 8762 of the Business And Professions Code. (Ord. 75-O-
1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-804: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided in section 10-2-805 of this chapter regarding nonconforming lots, all lots proposed to be altered pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall conform to the minimum requirements for subdivisions set forth in article 3 of this chapter and to the minimum requirements set forth in the
city's zoning provisions. (Ord. 13-O-2648, eff. 11-3-2013)
10-2-805: APPROVAL OF LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
Upon receipt of the map, the planning director shall examine it to see whether it complies with all the requirements of this article and whether:
A. The proposed lot line adjustments will not deny access to any parcel;
B. The proposed lot line adjustment will not result in a conflict with any public or private easement; and
C. The proposed lot configurations meet all standards of the zoning, subdivision, and building ordinance provisions, except that existing, legally
nonconforming lots need not meet all standards of the zoning, subdivision, and building ordinance provisions, provided that the proposed lot line
adjustment will result in either a decrease or no change in the degree of any existing nonconformity, and will not create a new nonconformity.
If the planning director makes these findings, the planning director shall approve the adjustment. The planning director may forward the application to
the planning commission for its review. (Ord. 13-O-2648, eff. 11-3-2013)
10-2-806: APPEALS:
If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the planning director, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be in
writing and shall be received by the planning department within fifteen (15) days after the date of the planning director's action. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-
1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-807: DECISION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The planning commission may reject, uphold, or modify the decision of the planning director. The decision of the commission shall be final. (Ord. 75-O-
1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-808: FILING MAPS WITH COUNTY RECORDER:
Upon approval, appropriate documentation consistent with the provisions of sections 8760 through 8772 of the Business And Professions Code of the
state shall be filed in the office of the county recorder by the applicant at the applicant's expense. No building permit to construct any improvements upon
the lots indicated on such map shall be issued until the applicant has submitted proof of such filing to the building director. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975;
amd. Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-809: SALES PROHIBITED:
No person shall offer to sell, contract to sell, or sell any parcel which has had any lot line readjusted until the lots affected by such readjustment are in full
compliance with the provisions of this article. No permit of any kind shall be issued to any applicant to be used in connection with or pertaining to any
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 498/797
premises in a residential zone which has had a lot line adjusted in violation of the provisions of this article. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 90-O-
2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
Article 8A. Lot Mergers
10-2-810: LOT MERGERS; GENERAL:
Pursuant to section 66499.20 3/4 of the subdivision map act, the merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership may be merged without reverting
to acreage upon application by the owner of record. An appropriate instrument approved by the city shall be recorded evidencing the merger. (Ord. 90-O-
2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-811: FILING MAPS FOR LOT MERGERS:
The applicant for a merger shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 10-2-803 of this chapter relating to lot line adjustments except that a
record of survey may be required by the planning director. (Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-812: COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The lot to be created by the merger shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in article 3 of this chapter and to the minimum requirements set
forth in the city's zoning provisions. (Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-813: APPROVAL OF LOT MERGERS:
Upon receipt of the map, the planning director shall examine it to see whether it complies with the requirements of this article. If the map complies, the
planning director shall approve the lot merger. (Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-814: APPEALS:
If an applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the planning director, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be in
writing and shall be received by the planning department within fifteen (15) days after the date of the planning director's action. (Ord. 90-O-2102, eff. 10-4-
1990)
10-2-815: DECISION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
The planning commission may reject, uphold, or modify the decision of the planning director. The decision of the commission shall be final. (Ord. 90-O-
2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
10-2-816: FILING MAPS WITH COUNTY RECORDER:
Upon approval, the map shall be filed in the office of the county recorder by the applicant at the applicant's expense. No building permit to construct any
improvements upon the lot indicated on such map shall be issued until the applicant has submitted proof of such filing to the building director. (Ord. 90-O-
2102, eff. 10-4-1990)
Article 9. Environmental Impact; Grading And Erosion Control
10-2-901: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT:
No parcel or tentative map filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be approved until an environmental impact analysis is prepared, processed,
and considered in accordance with the city's local guidelines for implementation of the California environmental quality act. The subdivider shall provide
such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review
documents. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975; amd. Ord. 92-O-2148, eff. 9-11-1992)
10-2-902: GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL:
Every map approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and erosion control,
including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off site property, set forth in title 9, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 75-O-1561, eff. 3-4-1975)
Article 10. Vesting Tentative Maps
10-2-1001: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 499/797
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the implementation of chapter 4.5 (commencing with section 66498.1) of division 2 of title 7 of the
Government Code of the state of California which provides for the filing of vesting tentative maps. Except as otherwise specifically provided by this article,
the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the filing, processing and review of vesting tentative maps as said term is defined by section 66424.5 of the
Government Code and section 10-2-1003 of this article. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1002: CONSISTENCY REQUIREMENT:
The approval of a vesting tentative map shall be consistent with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, the zoning ordinance, and any other
applicable provision of this code in effect at the time provided by subsection 10-2-1009A of this article. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1003: DEFINITION OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
The "vesting tentative map" shall mean a tentative map for a "subdivision", as defined in this chapter, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the
words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with section 10-2-1004 of this article, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the subdivision map act. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1004: APPLICATION:
A. Whenever a provision of the subdivision map act or this chapter requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, a vesting
tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions herein.
B. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by chapter 4.5 of division 2 of title 7 of the Government Code and this article, the filing of a vesting
tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.
(Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1005: FILING AND PROCESSING:
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents, and provide the same information and shall be processed in the same
manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided:
A. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall haveprinted conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map".
B. The application for a vesting tentative map shall describe the manner in which the subdivision is proposed to be developed, including, but not limited to,
the height, size and location of all buildings and other improvements.
C. A vesting tentative map shall not be accepted for filing unless all other discretionary land use approvals required for the proposed development have
been obtained or applications therefor are filed concurrently with such map.
D. Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in
existence at the time of filing, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1006: FEES:
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required for the filing and processing of vesting tentative maps set by the city council.
(Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1007: CONDITION PRECEDENT TO APPROVAL:
A vesting tentative map shall not be approved unless all other discretionary land use approvals required for the proposed development, other than
architectural review, have been obtained. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988; amd. Ord. 00-O-2366, eff. 3-8-2001)
10-2-1008: EXPIRATION:
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1009: VESTED RIGHTS CREATED BY APPROVAL OF VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
A. Subject to the time limits established by subsection C of this section, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a
vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code
section 66474.2. If section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, however, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 500/797
confer a vested right to proceed withdevelopment in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting
tentative map is approved or conditionally approved subject to the time limits established by subsection C of this section.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied even though such action
may be contrary to the ordinances, policies, and standards described in subsection A of this section if any of the following are determined:
1. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety,
or both.
2. The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.
C. The rights referred to in subsection A of this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as
provided in section 10-2-1008 of this article. If the final map is timely approved, such rights shall exist for the following periods of time:
1. An initial time period of one year after the recording of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered
by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
2. The initial time period set forth in subsection C1 of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete
application for a grading permit or for architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed.
3. The subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one year extension at any time before the expiration of the initial time period set forth in
subsection C1 of this section. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days thereafter.
4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections C1 through C3 of this
section, the rights referred to herein shall continue to exist until the expiration of such permit, or any extension thereof. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-
1988)
10-2-1010: AMENDMENT TO VESTING TENTATIVE MAP:
Any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider, or his or her assignee, may apply for an amendment to such map. A public
hearing shall be held by the planning commission or any amendment involving a substantial modification to the subject subdivision or development related
thereto. Theplanning commission may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the proposed amendment. The decision by the planning commission
on the requested amendment shall be appealable to the city council in the manner provided by section 10-2-205 of this chapter. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-
1988)
10-2-1011: APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH ESTABLISHED POLICIES:
Notwithstanding any provision herein, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the
ordinances, policies, and standards described in subsection 10-2-1009A of this article, and the city may grant such approvals or issue such permits to the
extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
10-2-1012: SUBSEQUENT PERMITS, LICENSES, AND OTHER ENTITLEMENTS FOR USE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the city from conditionally approving or denying any permit, license, or other entitlement for
use which is applied for by the subdivider after the approval of a vesting tentative map provided such conditional approval or denial is made in accordance
with the ordinances, policies and standards described in subsection 10-2-1009A of this article. (Ord. 88-O-2034, eff. 8-4-1988)
Chapter 3
ZONING
Article 1. Definitions
10-3-100: WORDS DEFINED:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this article shall govern the construction of this chapter.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT: An attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, and is located on the same site area as the primary dwelling.
An accessory dwelling unit shall not include an accessory structure lawfully constructed prior to September 26, 2003, which provides independent living
facilities, provided the use of the accessory structure is restricted by a covenant as described in section 10-3-403 of this chapter or was otherwise lawfully
constructed in conformance with the applicable codes in effect at the time of construction.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE AREA: That portion of a site area included within a front yard, side yard, street side yard or rear yard.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate structure or building, including a private garage, a private stable, a pool house,
or a detached guest suite, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, and which is located on the same site area. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, accessory structure or accessory building shall not include kitchen facilities.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 501/797
ALLEY: A public way intersecting a block or portion of a block and designated on the master plan of streets.
ALTERNATIVE PARKING FACILITY: An off street parking facility in which vehicular storage is accomplished with mechanical parking lifts and/or
automobile elevators that are operated by a valet or other driver. An alternative parking facility shall not be a fully automated parking facility that uses
mechanical systems to hoist individual vehicles from receiving areas to separate automobile storage areas without a driver.
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS: Architectural features which extend beyond a setback line and do not contribute to the floor area of a residential
building. Architectural projections include, but are not limited to, balconies, bay windows that do not add to the floor area of a building, columns, and
beams. Architectural projections do not include stair shafts, elevator shafts, chimneys, space used for parking, or space used for housing equipment or
machinery.
AUTOMOBILE ELEVATOR: An elevator used to move vehicles vertically into and between levels of a parking garage in lieu of the use of ramps.
AVERAGE ROOF HEIGHT: The average height of each noncontiguous segment of a roof.
AVERAGE SLOPE: The average slope of the site as calculated using the following formula:
I x L
S =
[Total square footage of site]
For the purposes of this formula:
S shall mean the average slope of the site;
I shall mean the contour interval in feet as shown on a contour map of the site;
L shall mean the combined length of contour lines in scale feet on the contour map being used to calculate the contour interval.
BEDROOM: Any room, including a den or similar room, capable of being used as sleeping quarters in a customary manner.
BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and its own termination.
BLOCK FACE: One side of a street between two (2) consecutive intersections.
BONA FIDE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: See definition of single housekeeping unit.
BUILDING: A structure for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
BUSINESS OR COMMERCE: A purchase, sale, or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance, service, or commodity
for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices, recreations, or amusement enterprises.
CABARET: Any establishment that permits live dancing by performers at any time of day. The term "cabaret" shall not include a restaurant that limits
dancing by performers to a single dance floor that is contiguous to the dining or bar area and that does not exceed one hundred seventy five (175) square
feet or ten percent (10%) of the restaurant's total dining and bar area, whichever is less. Furthermore, in order to maintain this exemption the restaurant
must also limit performers and musicians, including those musicians who accompany dancing, to the dance floor.
CENTRAL AREA OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS: That area of the City of Beverly Hills other than the Hillside Area and Trousdale Estates.
COMMON PROPERTY LINE: Any lot line that separates two (2) parcels of private property.
COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY, LARGE: Any State licensed facility, place, or structure that is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential
care, day treatment, adult daycare, or foster agency services for seven (7) or more adults, children, or adults and children, as defined in California Health
and Safety Code section 1502.
COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY, SMALL: Any State licensed facility, place, or structure that is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential
care, day treatment, adult daycare, or foster agency services for six (6) or fewer adults, children, or adults and children, as defined in California Health and
Safety Code section 1502.
CONVENIENCE STORE: Any retail business selling general food and drink products not intended for home preparation and consumption with more than
half the square footage of the retail sales floor area dedicated to the sale of such foods and drinks, tobacco, magazines, toiletries, or any combination
thereof. "Convenience store" does not include a retail business occupying a tenant space whose primary entrance opens into the interior of a commercial
building. "Convenience store" does not include newsstands, tobacconists, specialty food stores, or retail stores containing a licensed pharmacy.
CORNER LOT: A site area located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that intersect at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty five degrees
(135°).
COSMETIC SPA: A use that is permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.2 of this chapter and that carries on as its principal business the service of
providing exclusively on an outpatient basis, elective, cosmetic services, including beauty consultations, cosmetic and vitamin injectables, laser
treatments, micro-needling, oxygen treatments, make-up applications, retail sales of skin care and cosmetic products, and similar services, that are
minimally invasive, non-surgical, and non-therapeutic in nature.
Cosmetic spas shall not include beauty shops, nail salons, or spas.
DISABLED; DISABLED PERSON: A person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities,
anyone who is regarded as having such impairment, or anyone who has a record of such impairment, as those terms are defined in the fair housing laws.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 502/797
DISTRICT: An entire City block, any part thereof, or two (2) or more contiguous blocks.
DRIPLINE: The area located directly under the circumference of a tree's canopy.
DRIVE-UP, DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES: Any commercial facilities in which a service is provided, or goods, food or beverages are sold,
to an operator or passengers of a vehicle without the necessity of the operator or passengers disembarking from the vehicle.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as living quarters for one bona fide housekeeping unit.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit with zero bedrooms.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: A facility that provides immediate and short term housing with minimal support services for homeless persons or families on a
first come, first served basis, and that is limited to occupancy of no more than six (6) months.
EXERCISE CLUB: A membership facility, or other facility for which usage fees are charged, that includes any one of the following, alone or in combination:
a) an exercise, aerobic, gymnasium, martial arts, and/or dance studio area, including, but not limited to, an exercise area designed for young children; b)
weight training equipment; or c) game courts. Exercise club does not include private training centers, or any facility that is accessory to a public
educational institution or accessory to a private educational institution that is included on the list of private schools prepared pursuant to California
Education Code section 33190.
FAIR HOUSING LAWS: The "fair housing act" (42 USC § 3601 et seq.), the "Americans with disabilities act" (42 USC § 12101 et seq.), and the "California
fair employment and housing act"1, as these statutes now exist or may be amended from time to time, and the implementing regulations for each of these
statutes.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit. Family also means the persons living together in a
licensed residential facility, as that term is defined in California Health And Safety Code section 1502(a)(1) serving six (6) or fewer persons, excluding the
licensee, the members of the licensee's family, and persons employed as facility staff who reside at the facility.
FENCE: A structure with length measured horizontally in excess of twenty four inches (24") and with height and thickness designed or constructed of
nongrowing materials in such a manner as to enclose property or to inhibit passage through or to obscure view.
FILL: Earth material placed by artificial means over natural grade.
FLAG LOT: A site area that is characterized by a strip of land, less than thirty six feet (36') in width, which provides access to the main portion of the site
area from a street. Such strip of land shall be referred to as the "pole" of the flag lot.
FLOOR AREA: A. Nonresidential and multi-family residential zones: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all floors or levels included within the surrounding
walls of a building or structure. Space devoted only to the following shall not be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure:
1. Stair shafts;
2. Elevator and escalator shafts and elevator lobbies located in parking areas or on rooftops. The area of each elevator lobby at each floor shall not
exceed one hundred (100) square feet per elevator cab; provided, however, that any elevator lobby area in excess of one hundred (100) square
feet per elevator cab shall be considered in determining the total floor area within a building or structure;
3. Courts;
4. Parking spaces below the first floor and access thereto, including void spaces in parking areas below the first floor used exclusively for storage
related to operation of the building. Such void spaces may be enclosed and shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet on each parking
floor or five percent (5%) of the floor area of the entire building, whichever is less;
5. Rooms exclusively housing building operating equipment or machinery;
6. Parking spaces at or above the first story and access thereto provided that in commercial zones:
a. Not less than the front forty feet (40') of the ground floor shall be devoted to retail sales, offices, or financial uses; notwithstanding such
restriction, the Director of Planning and Community Development may reduce the amount of floor area required under this provision by up to ten
percent (10%) pursuant to the provisions of article 36 of this chapter regarding minor accommodations if the Director finds that the dimensions of
the site do not provide adequate space for internal circulation for parking and such accommodation would not substantially compromise
pedestrian activity in the area; and
b. At least one full level of parking below grade is provided;
7. Mall areas; and
8. Space used or provided within a building or structure for publicly owned off street parking facilities.
B. Single-family residential zone: "Floor area" shall mean the area of all portions of floors and levels which have a roof or floor level above and are
enclosed by exterior walls by more than fifty percent (50%). Further, "floor area" shall include the area of that portion of an upper level not separated
from a lower level by a floor/ceiling assembly, but shall not include basements, crawl spaces, up to four hundred (400) square feet of garage area,
and the space created below a deck located at the finished first floor level of a residence that extends over a driveway that leads to subterranean
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 503/797
parking.
For the purposes of determining floor area in a single-family residential zone, "basement" shall mean any floor level directly below a story or portion
thereof, which has a finished floor level that is a maximum of three feet (3') above finished grade at any cross-section cut through the building.
Furthermore, a level shall be either entirely basement or entirely floor area, and partial basements shall not be permitted.
Exceptions:
1. Driveways: If a driveway not exceeding sixteen feet (16') in width is located within five feet (5') of a perimeter wall of a building, and the driveway
leads to a subterranean garage, then the finished grade, for that portion of the building located adjacent to the driveway, shall be assumed to be at
an elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such driveway.
2. Light Court: For light courts not exceeding a dimension of fifteen feet (15') measured perpendicular to the adjacent perimeter wall of a building,
the finished grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located within five feet (5') of the light court, shall be assumed to be at an
elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such light court. The fifteen feet (15')
dimensional limitation shall not apply to portions of light courts that are surrounded by three (3) or more structural walls, as long as the total area of
the light court does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the ground floor of the building.
3. Lightwell: For lightwells not exceeding a dimension of four feet (4') as measured perpendicular from the perimeter wall of a building, the finished
grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located within five feet (5') of the lightwell, shall be assumed to be at an elevation that is
equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such lightwell.
4. Pools And Water Features: If an in-ground pool or other in-ground water feature is located adjacent to a perimeter wall of a building, then the
finished grade, for that portion of the building located adjacent to the in-ground pool or in-ground water feature, shall be assumed to be at an
elevation that is equal to the waterline of such in-ground pool or in-ground water feature.
5. Stairs Or Access Ways: If stairs or access ways not exceeding four feet (4') in width are located adjacent to a perimeter wall of a building, and
the stairs or access ways lead to a basement, the finished grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located adjacent to the stairs
or access ways, shall be assumed to be at an elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct
such stairs or access ways. Furthermore, stairs or access ways that lead to a basement shall be deemed to be basement even if the stairs or
access ways are greater than three feet (3') above finished grade, and shall not preclude the rest of the floor level from qualifying as a basement.
A basement may extend beyond the perimeter of the building provided that such portion of the basement is below the natural or finished grade,
whichever is lower. A basement shall be considered to have extended beyond the perimeter of the building when the area, including any structure
or story, above the basement no longer qualifies as "floor area" as defined herein.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio of floor area to site area.
GAME COURT: A structure having a playing surface, paved or unpaved, with or without enclosing fences, designed to be used for playing or practicing
tennis, badminton, volleyball, paddle tennis, handball, racquetball, squash, basketball, or similar games.
GARAGE: A building or portion of a building designed or used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles.
GRADE: For the purpose of measuring the height of walls and fences, the elevation of the natural or finished surface of the ground, whichever is lower.
GRADE, FINISHED: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building and the
property line or, when the property line is more than five feet (5') from the building, between the building and a line five feet (5') from the building.
GRADE, NATURAL: Grade as it existed five (5) years prior to the date on which an application is submitted to the City for redevelopment or grading
activities on a given site.
HEDGE: A growth of vegetation, cultivated in such a manner as to produce a barrier to inhibit passage or to obscure view, which is more than twelve
inches (12") in height. Where there are interruptions of growth by vertical space having a horizontal distance of more than twenty four inches (24") in every
four feet (4'), such growth shall not be considered a hedge. This definition is not intended to include individual shrubs, plants, or trees.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: A. Nonresidential Zones: Except as otherwise provided for walls and fences, in nonresidential zones, "height" shall mean the
distance from the highest point of the natural ground level at the perimeter of a building or structure or from the highest point of the public sidewalk
adjoining the lot or parcel upon which the building or structure is to be erected, whichever is higher, to the highest element of the building or structure. The
following elements of a building or structure shall not be considered when determining its height pursuant to this subsection A:
1. Vent pipes that are not higher than required by law.
2. Chimneys that are not higher than required by law.
3. Structures enclosing elevator equipment and/or elevator lobbies if such structures are not higher than fifteen feet (15') above the adjacent roof
deck and are not larger than the shaft of the elevator or elevators and their respective lobby areas, provided such lobby areas comply with the
provisions of subsection A2 of the definition of Floor Area, and if such structure is used for no purpose other than providing the minimum space
required for the elevators and their equipment and such lobby areas.
4. Structures enclosing stairs required by law to be carried to the roof if such enclosing structure is used for no other purpose than enclosing the
stairs and is no larger than the stair shaft below and if such enclosure is not more than fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the adjacent
roof deck.
5. Penthouse structures used exclusively for mechanical equipment for the building or structure if such penthouse structure is not more than fifteen
feet (15') in height as measured from the adjacent roof deck.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 504/797
6. Parapets or handrails not more than forty five inches (45") in height as measured from the roof or floor which they surround.
7. Unoccupied architectural features, such as skylights and clerestories, not more than fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the adjacent roof
deck if such features do not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located, and no such feature exceeds or
intersects a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
8. Antennas, other than satellite dish antennas, that do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the surface on which the antennas
are mounted and do not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the applicable zoning height limit unless a minor accommodation permit and a building
permit are obtained in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-4506 of this chapter. If an antenna is mounted on a legally nonconforming
structure that exceeds the applicable zoning height limit, then the antenna may also exceed the applicable zoning height limit, to a maximum of
fifteen feet (15') above the height of that nonconforming structure.
9. Satellite dish antennas that do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the surface on which the antennas are mounted and do not
exceed fifteen feet (15') above the applicable zoning height limit unless a minor accommodation permit and a building permit are obtained in
accordance with the provisions of sections 10-3-4506 and 10-3-4504, respectively, of this chapter. If an antenna is mounted on a legally
nonconforming structure that exceeds the applicable zoning height limit, then the antenna may also exceed the applicable zoning height limit, to a
maximum of fifteen feet (15') above the height of that nonconforming structure.
B. Multiple-Family Residential Zones: Except as otherwise provided for walls and fences, in multiple-family residential zones, "height" shall mean the
distance from the highest point of the natural ground level at the perimeter of a building or structure or from the highest point of the public sidewalk
adjoining the lot or parcel upon which the building or structure is to be erected, whichever is higher, to the highest element of the building or
structure. The following elements of a building or structure shall not be considered when determining its height pursuant to this subsection:
1. Vent pipes that are not higher than required by law.
2. Chimneys that are not higher than required by law.
3. Structures enclosing elevator equipment and/or elevator lobbies if such structures are not higher than fifteen feet (15') above the adjacent roof
deck and are not larger than the shaft of the elevator or elevators and their respective lobby areas, provided such lobby areas comply with the
provisions of subsection A2 of the definition of Floor Area, and if such structure is used for no purpose other than providing the minimum space
required for the elevators and their equipment and such lobby areas.
4. Structures enclosing stairs required by law to be carried to the roof if such enclosing structure is used for no other purpose than enclosing the
stairs and is no larger than the stair shaft below and if such enclosure is not more than twelve feet (12') in height as measured from the adjacent
roof deck.
5. Penthouse structures used exclusively for mechanical equipment for the building or structure if such penthouse structure is not more than ten feet
(10') in height as measured from the adjacent roof deck.
6. Parapets or handrails not more than forty five inches (45") in height as measured from the roof or floor which they surround.
7. Unoccupied architectural features, such as skylights and clerestories, not more than ten feet (10') in height as measured from the adjacent roof
deck if such features do not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located, and no such feature exceeds or
intersects a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
8. Antennas, other than satellite dish antennas, that do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the surface on which the antennas
are mounted and do not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the applicable zoning height limit unless a minor accommodation permit and a building
permit are obtained in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-4506 of this chapter. If an antenna is mounted on a legally nonconforming
structure that exceeds the applicable zoning height limit, then the antenna may also exceed the applicable zoning height limit, to a maximum of
fifteen feet (15') above the height of that nonconforming structure.
9. Satellite dish antennas that do not exceed twelve feet (12') in height as measured from the surface on which the antennas are mounted and do not
exceed twelve feet (12') above the applicable zoning height limit unless a minor accommodation permit and a building permit are obtained in
accordance with the provisions of sections 10-3-4506 and 10-3-4504, respectively, of this chapter. If an antenna is mounted on a legally
nonconforming structure that exceeds the applicable zoning height limit, then the antenna may also exceed the applicable zoning height limit, to a
maximum of twelve feet (12') above the height of that nonconforming structure.
C. Single-Family Residential Zones In The Central Area Of The City: Except as otherwise provided for walls and fences, in single-family residential
zones located in the Central Area of the city, "height" shall mean the distance between the highest element of a building or structure and the highest
point of ground level at the perimeter of the building or structure. Such ground level shall be established by survey or grading plan prior to any
demolition, grading, or other alteration of the lot or parcel to accommodate the building or structure to be erected. However, if more than fifty percent
(50%) of the perimeter of the building or structure is below the highest point of such ground level, then the height shall be measured from the
average of such ground level at the perimeter of the building or structure. The following structures shall not be subject to the height limits set forth in
this subsection:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 505/797
1. The extension of chimneys and vent pipes to the extent permitted by title 9 of this Code.
2. Antennas, other than satellite dish antennas, that do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the surface on which the antennas
are mounted and do not exceed fifteen feet (15') above the applicable zoning height limit unless a minor accommodation permit and a building
permit are obtained in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-4506 of this chapter. If an antenna is mounted on a legally nonconforming
structure that exceeds the applicable zoning height limit, then the antenna may also exceed the applicable zoning height limit, to a maximum of
fifteen feet (15') above the height of that nonconforming structure.
3. Satellite dish antennas that do not exceed twelve feet (12') in height as measured from the surface on which they are mounted unless a minor
accommodation permit and a building permit are obtained in accordance with the provisions of sections 10-3-4506 and 10-3-4504, respectively, of
this chapter.
D. Single-Family Residential Zones In The Hillside Area Of The City: Except as otherwise provided for walls and fences, in single-family residential
zones located in the Hillside Area of the City, "height" of a building or structure at any point shall mean the vertical distance between that point and
the point below it on a plane defined by the finished grade at all points along the building or structure perimeter.
However, the following exceptions to this definition shall apply:
1. Driveways: If a driveway not exceeding sixteen feet (16') in width is located within five feet (5') of a perimeter wall of a building, and the driveway
leads to a subterranean garage, then the finished grade, for that portion of the building located adjacent to the driveway, shall be assumed to be at
an elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such driveway.
2. Light Court: For light courts not exceeding a dimension of fifteen feet (15') measured perpendicular to the adjacent perimeter wall of a building, the
finished grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located within five feet (5') of the light court, shall be assumed to be at an
elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such light court. The fifteen foot (15')
dimensional limitation shall not apply to portions of light courts that are surrounded by three (3) or more structural walls, as long as the total area of
the light court does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the ground floor of the building.
3. Lightwell: For lightwells not exceeding a dimension of four feet (4') as measured perpendicular from the perimeter wall of a building, the finished
grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located within five feet (5') of the lightwell, shall be assumed to be at an elevation that is
equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such lightwell.
4. Pools And Water Features: If an in-ground pool or other in-ground water feature is located adjacent to a perimeter wall of a building, then the
finished grade, for that portion of the building located adjacent to the in-ground pool or in-ground water feature, shall be assumed to be at an
elevation that is equal to the waterline of such in-ground pool or in-ground water feature.
5. Stairs Or Access Ways: If stairs or access ways not exceeding four feet (4') in width are located adjacent to a perimeter wall of a building, and the
stairs or access ways lead to a basement, the finished grade, for that portion of the perimeter wall of the building located adjacent to the stairs or
access ways, shall be assumed to be at an elevation that is equal to the grade on the opposite side of the retaining wall required to construct such
stairs or access ways. Furthermore, stairs or access ways that lead to a basement shall be deemed to be basement even if the stairs or access
ways are greater than three feet (3') above finished grade, and shall not preclude the rest of the floor level from qualifying as a basement.
Those elements of a building excluded from the measurement of height as set forth in subsection C of this definition shall also be excluded from
the measurement of height as set forth in this subsection D.
E. Single-Family Residential Zones In The Trousdale Estates Area Of The City: Except as otherwise provided for walls and fences, in single-family
residential zones located in Trousdale Estates, "height" shall mean the distance between the highest point of grade at the perimeter of a building or
structure and the highest element of the building or structure. However, if more than fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter of the building or structure at
grade is below such highest grade point, then the height shall be measured from the average grade level at the perimeter of the building or structure.
The following structures shall not be subject to the height limits set forth in this subsection:
1. The extension of chimneys and vent pipes to the extent permitted by title 9 of this Code.
2. Antennas, other than satellite dish antennas, which do not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from the surface on which they are
mounted and which do not exceed the zoning height limit by more than fifteen feet (15'). If an antenna is mounted on a legally nonconforming
building that exceeds the applicable height limits set forth in this definition, then the antenna may exceed the height limits otherwise set forth in this
chapter to a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') above the height of the nonconforming building.
3. Satellite dish antennas that do not exceed twelve feet (12') in height as measured from the surface on which they are mounted.
HEIGHT OF WALL, FENCE OR HEDGE: The vertical distance above grade to the highest element of the wall, fence, or hedge, including, but not limited
to, columns, pillars, pilasters, and gates, measured on the side of the wall, fence, or hedge located closest to the property line. Grades shall not be
adjusted for the purpose of circumventing the maximum height allowances set forth in this chapter.
HIGHEST ELEMENT OF A BUILDING: The highest element of a building other than those elements excluded from the measurement of height as set forth
in this article.
HILLSIDE AREA: That area of the City of Beverly Hills generally located north of Sunset Boulevard other than Trousdale Estates. The boundaries of the
Hillside Area are the boundaries of the "Hillside District" as shown on diagram 13-1, adopted by the City Council, and on file in the Department of Building
and Safety, excluding those areas south of Sunset Boulevard and Trousdale Estates.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 506/797
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation, activity, enterprise, profession, trade, or undertaking of any nature conducted or engaged in, or ordinarily
conducted or engaged in, with the object of gain, benefit or advantage to any person or entity, whether direct or indirect, and which is conducted in a
residential zone in the City. The term shall include the operation of a subsidiary, independent entity or any other activity conducted for the benefit of others
and at no profit to those engaged in the operation or activity, including nonprofit businesses and trade associations. However, "home occupation" shall not
include the delivery of goods or services to a residential site by an entity or individual with a principal place of business outside of any residential zone in
the City and which conducts no administrative or processing function within a residential zone in the City, such as a plumber, gardener, or caterer based in
a nonresidential zone. A "home occupation" shall also not include the operation of a small family daycare home. A person shall not be deemed to be
engaged in a home occupation solely by reason of receipt of dividend or interest income from passive investments or solely by reason of receipt of
royalties or residuals for work that does not constitute a home occupation.
HOTEL: Any building, or portion thereof designed or used for lodging persons for a period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days. Hotels shall include,
without limitation, any establishment held out to the public as a hostel, inn, time share project, tourist court, or motel, but shall not include hospitals or
governmental buildings where persons are detained under legal restraint, such as jails or prisons.
INTERIOR SIDE LOT LINE: A side lot line that abuts another site area.
INTERIOR SIDE SETBACK: A side setback that is measured from an interior side lot line.
LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: As defined in the California Health and Safety Code.
LEVEL PAD: That portion of a site containing level finished grade. No portion of a site with a slope that is greater than five percent (5%) shall be
considered to be part of a level pad. Furthermore, for the purposes of calculating floor area ratio, no portion of a level finished surface which is the longest
pole of a flag lot shall be considered to be part of a level pad.
LIGHT COURT: An excavated area adjacent to a building that extends more than four feet (4') from the building perimeter, as measured perpendicular
from the building perimeter, that is enclosed on four (4) sides, that is open at the top, and that allows light into a below grade level of a building.
LIGHTWELL: An excavated area adjacent to a building that extends no more than four feet (4') from the building perimeter, as measured perpendicular
from the building perimeter, that is enclosed on four (4) sides, that is open at the top, and that allows light into a below grade level of a building.
LOT: A parcel of land abutting on at least one street or alley and refers to those subdivisions of lands designated as lots and numbered consecutively upon
the recorded subdivision maps of the City.
LOT DEPTH: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot line(s). However, for the
purposes of measuring the depth of a flag lot, the calculation shall not include the pole of the flag lot.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line that separates a site area from a street. Provided, however, that in the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the
shortest lot line which separates a site area from a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line which is most opposite from the front lot line as determined by the Director of Building and Safety. Provided, however:
A. If a site area has only one lot line that does not separate the site area from a street, then that one line shall be considered a "rear lot line".
B. If a site area is triangular or otherwise tapered, and is not within the scope of subsection A of this definition, then the rear lot line shall be a ten foot
(10') line located within the property that is approximately parallel to, and most distant from, the front lot line.
C. If a site area not within the scope of subsection A of this definition is triangular or otherwise tapered, and the front lot line is curved, then the rear lot
line shall be a ten foot (10') line within the property which is approximately parallel to, and most distant from, a ten foot (10') chord through the front
lot line which is most distant from the intersection of lot lines that are not front lot lines.
D. Through lots that do not fall within the scope of subsection A of this definition shall have no rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET SIDE: A side lot line of a corner lot that separates the corner lot from a street.
LOT WIDTH: The average horizontal distance between opposite side lot lines measured in the mean direction of the front lot line. Provided, however, that
for lots with only one side lot line, the lot width shall mean the average distance between the front lot line and the side lot line. Also, for the purposes of
measuring the width of a flag lot, the calculation shall not include the pole of the flag lot.
MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITY: Physical, mental, and social activities, such as the operation of major bodily functions, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking,
standing, sitting, reaching, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, interacting with others, and
working.
MALL AREA: The main pedestrian area having common access to a number of tenants and occupancies which are predominantly for retail stores,
drinking and dining establishments, and other similar uses of a retail and service nature within one site area. "Mall area" shall not be construed to include
or mean a secondary required means of exit for an occupancy, nor to include or mean a street, alley, or other publicly owned space.
MAXIMUM POTENTIAL FACADE: A plane located at the front setback line which is bounded by the maximum height allowed for a building at the front
setback line, and bounded by the side and/or rear setback lines intersecting the front setback line. For the purposes of calculating the maximum potential
facade, the setback lines established by the applicable provisions of this title shall be used. No reduction in any setback line, whether or not authorized by
any procedure set forth in this title, shall be considered in calculating the maximum potential facade, and the maximum potential facade shall not be
increased as the result of a reduction in the required side or rear setback lines.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 507/797
MAXIMUM POTENTIAL SIDE FACADE: A plane located at a side setback line which is bounded by the maximum height allowed for a building at that side
setback line, and bounded by the front, rear and/or side setback lines intersecting the side setback line at which the facade is located.
MECHANICAL PARKING LIFT: An elevating device that enables the positioning of a vehicle above or below another parking space in a stacked (vertical
tandem) fashion.
MEDICAL LABORATORY: Any facility providing medical or dental services for the purpose of diagnosing or treating medical or dental conditions that does
not receive patrons on site.
MEDICAL OFFICE: Any facility providing health service and/or medical, surgical, or dental care. "Medical office" shall include, but not be limited to, a
health center, health clinic, doctor's office, chiropractor's office, dentist's office, or any office offering therapeutic service or care. "Medical office" shall not
include a "medical laboratory" as defined in this section or a "cosmetic spa" permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.2 of this chapter and as defined in this
section.
MEDICAL USE(S): Uses including medical office, medical laboratory, or any combination thereof, or a "cosmetic spa" permitted pursuant to section 10-3-
1620.2 of this chapter and as defined in this section.
MINI-SHOPPING CENTER: Any development which is developed for multiple uses of retail, personal services, or restaurants, or a combination thereof,
with the structure or structures located in close proximity to the rear property line and/or a common property line and with surface parking situated between
the structure or structures and the street.
MIXED USE OR MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: The development of a site with two (2) or more different land uses, such as, but not limited to, a
combination of residential, office or retail uses in a single or physically integrated group of structures or the development of a combination of different land
use in a single zone.
MOTION PICTURE PLANT: A place where motion pictures are regularly made or where successions of photographs upon motion picture film are regularly
taken, whether or not such film is there developed, printed, or reproduced, or a place equipped for making or taking such motion pictures or photographs,
or which is equipped with the appliances and machinery necessary and proper for the developing and printing or manufacture of motion picture film.
MULTI-FAMILY TRANSIENT USE: Rental or lease of a multi-family dwelling unit for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building which contains more than one dwelling unit.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE: Any zone possessing any of the following zone designations: R-3, R-4, R-4X1, R-4X2, or R-4-P.
NEW CAR DEALER: Any business engaged principally in selling or dealing in new automobiles, which may include dealing in used automobiles only as an
incident to the new car business providing such used automobiles are restricted to those acquired as trade-ins on new or used cars as part payment on
new or used cars sold by such dealer at its place of business in the City.
NIGHTCLUB: Any establishment that permits dancing by patrons at any time of day. A nightclub may be restricted to members or may be open to the
public. The term "nightclub" shall not include the following:
A. A restaurant that limits dancing by patrons to a single dance floor that is contiguous to the dining or bar area and that does not exceed one hundred
seventy five (175) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the restaurant's total dining and bar area, whichever is less. Furthermore, in order to maintain
this exemption, the restaurant must also limit musicians and performers, including those musicians who accompany dancing, to the dance floor;
B. An establishment that is located in a hotel;
C. A fixed seat theater that does not permit food or drink consumption in the seating area and that has no tables in the seating area.
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS: A building that was lawfully constructed in compliance with the development standards of the City at the time of its
construction, however, due to the adoption or amendment of a Zoning Ordinance or other land development regulation, the building no longer complies
with the current requirements of this title.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of property that was permitted at the time that it was lawfully established, but is presently prohibited or presently requires
a conditional use permit, or other use permit, and no such permit has been issued for the use.
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE: Any zone which is not a Residential Zone, including, but not limited to, any of the following zone designations: C-3, C-3A, C-
3B, C-3T-1, C-3T-2, C-3T-3, C-5, C-R, C-R-PD, or T-1.
ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE OR DWELLING: "One-family residence or dwelling" shall mean a building, together with any accessory
buildings, which is designed or used by only one bona fide housekeeping unit. "Single-family residence or dwelling" shall have the same meaning as "onefamily
residence or dwelling".
OPEN AIR DINING: The serving and/or consumption of food and/or drink outside of a residential zone if: a) such consumption takes place in an area that
is not fully enclosed within a permanent building by walls and a roof, but is located immediately adjacent to a restaurant use that is so enclosed, or b) such
consumption takes place in an area fully enclosed within a permanent building, such building has windows that can be opened, and such windows are
located on a wall that is oriented, at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) or less, toward residentially zoned properties adjacent to the building or separated
from the building by a public right of way.
OPEN TO PUBLIC VIEW: For any ten foot (10') length of wall, fence, or hedge, the total area of all opaque materials used shall be a maximum of thirty
percent (30%) of the area of that ten foot (10') length of wall, fence, or hedge, and the width or position of each opaque element shall not block more than
fifty percent (50%) of the open view of the appropriate setback area when viewed perpendicularly to the front plane of the wall, fence, or hedge or through
a forty five degree (45°) sweep on any side of the perpendicular. Tree foliage which is located more than eight feet (8') above grade shall be considered
open to public view.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district which governs the same territory as an underlying zone, but provides alternative development standards for a specified
type of development or use.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 508/797
PARKING SPACE: An area that is designed and used for parking automobiles and meets the standards set forth in the city's "minimum parking standards"
on file in the department of building and safety.
PAVING: A ground covering of concrete, stone, brick, tile, or similar substance. Provided, however, that an area shall be not considered "paved" for the
purposes of this chapter unless one-third (1/3) or more of that area contains paving and the paving is reasonably distributed throughout that area.
PET BOARDING FACILITY: A commercial or nonprofit facility that is fully enclosed within a building and provides day and/or night boarding for four (4) or
more adult dogs, cats, or any combination thereof, for persons other than the occupant of the facility including the boarding or keeping of animals for the
purposes of training, grooming, boarding, or socializing, and is ancillary to a principally permitted retail business for pet related merchandise. This does not
include the keeping of animals for receiving or recovering from medical services.
PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT: Any physiological disorder or condition and any mental or psychological disorder, including, but not limited to,
orthopedic, visual, speech and hearing impairments, cosmetic disfigurement, anatomical loss, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple
sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, intellectual disabilities (formerly termed "mental retardation"), emotional or mental illness, learning disabilities,
HIV disease (whether symptomatic or asymptomatic), tuberculosis, and alcoholism and drug addiction (but not including current use of illegal drugs). A
temporary condition, such as a broken leg, pregnancy, use of crutches, etc., does not qualify as a physical or mental impairment.
PLATE HEIGHT: The height to the topmost element of the structural support of a building's roof framing members.
PORTE-COCHERE: A roofed structure covering a driveway which is located between the public street and at least one required parking space. A portecochere
shall be no more than twenty feet (20') in length, no more than fourteen feet (14') in height, shall be attached to a residence or dwelling, shall be
adjacent to an exterior building wall on one side, and shall be completely open on the remaining three (3) sides except for necessary structural column and
other permitted side yard fences and walls.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING AREA: That portion of a site area not included within a front yard, side yard, street side yard or rear yard.
PRIVATE TRAINING CENTER: A facility used for individual exercise or training activities, where, during exercise or physical training activities, there is an
on site ratio of students to instructor and/or trainer of no more than five to one (5:1) and no more than fifteen (15) people, including instructors and trainers,
engage in exercise or training activities at any one time. "Private training center" does not include any facility that is accessory to a public educational
institution or accessory to a private educational institution that is included on the list of private schools prepared pursuant to Education Code section
33190.
PUBLIC NOTICE GUIDELINES: Guidelines approved by the director of community development and on file in the department of community development
describing implementation of the requirements for public noticing of planning applications set forth in article 2.5 of this chapter.
PUBLIC STREET: The land dedicated or condemned for use as a public highway or established as such by the use for public purposes.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any private corporation or other person that owns, operates, controls, or manages a line, pipeline and appurtenances, plant,
technological network or system for the transportation of people or property, the transmission of telephone or telegraph messages, or the production,
generation, transmission, or furnishing of heat, light, natural gas, water, power, storage, or wharfage, directly or indirectly to or for the public, and common
carriers. Public utilities shall also mean any additional class of private corporations or other persons that are designated by the California state legislature
or the California Constitution as public utilities.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: Any deviation requested and/or granted from the city's zoning and land use laws, rules, regulations, policies,
procedures, practices, or any combination thereof, that may be reasonable and necessary for a disabled person to have an equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE: A single-family residential zone or multiple-family residential zone.
RETAIL BUSINESS: A business that carries on as its principal business the selling of tangible commodities, goods, merchandise or wares. Retail business
also includes beauty shops, nail salons, and spas. A retail business may include an optometrist use that is ancillary to the retail business. A retail business
may only include ancillary space for the purpose of consultation with an optometrist if that space does not exceed the lesser of five percent (5%) of the
total floor area of the business or two hundred (200) square feet and that space is located at least thirty feet (30') behind the storefront of the retail
business facing a street.
RETAINING WALL: A wall or terraced combination of walls used to retain more than eighteen inches (18") of material and not used to support, provide a
foundation for, or provide a wall for a building or structure.
ROOF, FLAT: A roof shall be considered to be a flat roof if it is neither a sloped roof nor a sloped roof with ridgeline as defined in this section.
ROOF, SLOPED: A roof shall be considered to be a sloped roof if ninety five percent (95%) or more of the roof has a slope of ten percent (10%) or more
and the roof is not a sloped roof with ridgeline as defined in this section.
ROOF, SLOPED WITH RIDGELINE: A roof shall be considered to be a sloped roof with ridgeline if ninety five percent (95%) or more of the roof has a
slope of fifteen percent (15%) or more and the roof has one or more linear horizontal ridgelines formed by the juncture of two (2) roof planes where both
planes extend upward from the exterior facade of a perimeter wall of the building to the horizontal ridgeline. The roof planes may be intersected by other
roof planes that meet this definition, as well as architectural features such as dormers and chimneys that are otherwise allowed pursuant to this chapter.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: Any device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn, cornucopia, or flat plate. Such device receives or transmits radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based
units. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited to, what is commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, satellite receivers, satellite disks,
direct broadcast systems (DBSs), television reception only systems (TVROs), and satellite microwave antennas.
SERVICED RESIDENCE: A multi-family transient use where each dwelling unit includes a full kitchen, laundry facilities and bathroom, no dwelling unit is
leased or occupied by any person for less than seven (7) consecutive days, all residents jointly occupy the dwelling unit under a single written lease, and
each dwelling unit is maintained and offered services at a luxury standard. By way of illustration, at the time of adoption hereof, a "luxury standard"
includes a twenty four (24) hour resident service team, high tech fitness center, full service business center with executive boardroom and complimentary
high speed internet access, a lounge, en suite dining, same day valet dry cleaning and laundry service, and full time, on site management and
maintenance. All dwelling units include fully accessorized kitchens, contemporary furnishings, well appointed bathrooms, premium cable television and Wi-
Fi access.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 509/797
SETBACK, FRONT: The required minimum distance measured between a front lot line and the closest element of a building or structure on that site area.
SETBACK LINE, FRONT: A line within a site area parallel to the front lot line and located at a distance from the front lot line equal to the front setback.
SETBACK LINE, REAR: A line within a site area parallel to the rear lot line and located at a distance from the rear lot line equal to the rear setback.
SETBACK LINE, SIDE: A line within a site area parallel to a side lot line and located at a distance from the side lot line equal to the side setback.
SETBACK LINE, STREET SIDE: A line within a site area parallel to a street side lot line and located at a distance from the street side lot line equal to the
street side setback.
SETBACK, REAR: The required minimum distance between a rear lot line and the closest element of a building or structure on that site area.
SETBACK, SIDE: The required minimum distance between a side lot line and the closest element of a building or structure on that site area.
SETBACK, STREET SIDE: The required minimum distance between a street side lot line and the closest element of a building or structure on that site
area.
SIDE STREET: That portion of a street abutting a side lot line of a corner lot.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: See definition of One-Family Or Single-Family Residence Or Dwelling.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE: Any zone possessing any of the following zone designations: R-1, R-1.X, R-1.5, R-1.5X, R-1.5X2, R-1.6X, R-1.7X,
or R-1.8X.
SINGLE-FAMILY TRANSIENT USE: Rental or lease of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a period of less than six (6) months.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are a nontransient interactive
group of one or more persons, where if consisting of more than one person, such persons jointly occupy a single dwelling unit, jointly use common areas,
share household activities and responsibilities (e.g., meals, chores, and expenses), and where, if the unit is rented or leased, all adult members jointly
agree to occupy and be responsible for the entire premises of the dwelling unit under a single written rental agreement or lease and the make up of the
household occupying the unit is determined by the residents of the unit rather than the landlord or property manager.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING (SRO): A residential facility where individual secure rooms are rented to a one or two (2) person household.
Rooms are generally one hundred fifty (150) to three hundred seventy five (375) square feet in size and include a sink, closet and toilet, with shower and
kitchen facilities typically shared. SRO units are rented on a weekly or monthly basis.
SITE OR SITE AREA: All of that area (whether 1 or more lots) legally assembled into one building site by means of covenant, subdivision, or otherwise.
When such area consists of more than one lot or parcel of ground, such lots or parcels of ground shall be contiguous or separated only by an alley.
SLOPE: That portion of the site other than the level pad.
SMALL FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: As defined in the California Health And Safety Code.
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE: Any retail business dedicated to the sale of specialized types or classes of food and drink products, including, but not limited
to, import food stores, bakeries, and chocolatiers.
STORY: A. Nonresidential zones: "Story" shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor
above it or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the purposes of this chapter, "story" shall include
mezzanines, excepting mezzanines that meet the requirements of subsection A5 of this definition, and penthouses, but shall not include:
1. Basements and cellars which are less than eight feet (8') above grade as defined in the building code;
2. Floors devoted exclusively to mechanical equipment for the building and for rooftop elevator lobbies. The area of each such elevator lobby shall
not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per elevator cab;
3. Floors devoted exclusively to parking and access thereto; provided, however, when any parking spaces are located more than two (2) floors above
grade, this exception shall not apply;
4. Floors devoted to a combination of uses described in subsections A2 and A3 of this definition.
5. Mezzanines in buildings, provided:
a. The floor area ratio (FAR) on the site area, inclusive of the mezzanine, does not exceed 2.0;
b. The height of the building in which the mezzanine is located does not exceed forty five feet (45') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter,
or three (3) stories, whichever is less; and
c. The mezzanine complies with the construction standards set forth in the building code that a mezzanine is required to meet in order not to be
counted as a story under the building code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 510/797
B. Residential zones: "Story" shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it or,
if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. For the purposes of this chapter, "story" shall include
mezzanines and penthouses, but shall not include penthouses that are used exclusively for mechanical equipment, rooftop bathrooms that meet the
requirements of subsection 10-3-2804B of this chapter, or a floor devoted exclusively to parking and/or mechanical equipment where the finished
floor level of the floor above it is no more than three feet (3') above the adjacent finished grade at any point.
STREET: As defined in title 1 of this code except that "street" shall not include alleys.
STREET LINE: The lot line between a street and abutting property.
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Permanent affordable housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population as identified in state law,
and that is linked to on site or off site services that assist the supportive housing residents in retaining the housing, improving their health status, and
maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, work in the community2.
SYNTHETIC TURF: Synthetic manmade material that simulates the appearance of live sod, grass or lawn. Synthetic turf shall not mean painted natural
grass or sod.
TARGET POPULATION: Persons with disabilities, homeless families, and homeless youth3.
THROUGH LOT: A site area having frontage on two (2) streets, but not located at the intersection of those streets.
TOBACCONIST: Any retail business with at least ninety percent (90%) of its retail floor area dedicated to the sale of tobacco products such as cigarettes,
tobacco, and pipes.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Temporary rental housing intended for occupancy by homeless individuals or families transitioning to permanent housing that
is operated under program requirements calling for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the dwelling unit to another eligible program recipient
at a predetermined future time, which shall be no less than six (6) months. Transitional housing often includes a supportive services component, such as
job skills training or rehabilitation counseling to allow individuals to gain the necessary life skills to support independent living.
TROUSDALE ESTATES: All property located north of Doheny Road and east of Schuyler Road, except that land zoned R-1.X, and that portion of lot A of
the Doheny Ranch tract northwesterly of tract numbers 24485 and 24486, commonly referred to as the Greystone Mansion property.
UNDERLYING ZONE: The primary zone designation which would govern development of a particular site if such development were not otherwise
governed by an overlay zone.
USE: The purpose for which a building is designed, arranged, or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
USED CAR DEALER: Any business engaged in buying, selling, and dealing in used automobiles other than a new car dealer.
VEHICLE SALES, SERVICE OR FUEL STATIONS: Any business which involves sales, including long term leasing; rental; maintenance; repair; refueling;
painting; servicing, including tire or alarm sales and installation; or emissions testing of automobiles or any other motorized vehicles. Vehicle sales, service
or fuel stations shall not include a business limited to the sale of vehicle accessories, if such accessories are not installed as part of that business and the
business does not otherwise qualify as a vehicle sales, service or fuel station.
WALL: A structure with length measured horizontally in excess of twenty four inches (24") and with height and thickness designed or constructed of
nongrowing materials in such a manner as to enclose property or to inhibit passage through or to obscure view.
YARD, FRONT: That portion of a site area located between the front setback line and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: That portion of a site area located between the rear setback line and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: That portion of a site area located between a side setback line and a side lot line.
YARD, STREET SIDE: That portion of a site area located between a street side setback line and a street side lot line. (1962 Code § 10-101; amd. Ord.
1179, eff. 1-2-1964; Ord. 1197, eff. 3-18-1965; Ord. 1248, eff. 8-18-1966; Ord. 1260, eff. 1-19-1967; Ord. 67-O-1274, eff. 6-15-1967; Ord. 68-O-1311, eff.
6-20-1968; Ord. 69-O-1349, eff. 7-1-1969; Ord. 69-O-1357, eff. 10-16-1969, retroactive to 10-1-1969; Ord. 70-O-1375, eff. 2-19-1970; Ord. 72-O-1435, eff.
3-16-1972; Ord. 73-O-1475, eff. 7-19-1973; Ord. 73-O-1491, eff. 10-18-1973; Ord. 77-O-1652, eff. 6-2-1977; Ord. 79-O-1734, eff. 5-31-1979; Ord. 80-O-
1771, eff. 10-16-1980; Ord. 82-O-1859, eff. 10-7-1982; Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; Ord. 87-O-2009, eff. 11-19-1987; Ord. 87-O-2013, eff. 1-14-1988;
Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; Ord. 89-O-2063, eff. 7-6-1989; Ord. 89-O-2072, eff. 10-19-1989; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 90-O-2090, eff. 3-8-
1990; Ord. 90-O-2107, eff. 12-21-1990; Ord. 90-O-2109, eff. 12-21-1990; Ord. 91-O-2114, eff. 4-19-1991; Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 92-O-
2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996; Ord.
96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996; Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997; Ord. 97-O-2285, eff. 12-5-1997; Ord. 98-O-2295, eff. 5-1-
1998; Ord. 99-O-2333, eff. 10-15-1999; Ord. 99-O-2335, eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 99-O-2338, eff. 12-17-1999; Ord. 00-O-2351, eff. 10-20-2000; Ord. 01-O-
2383, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord. 01-O-2389, eff. 1-10-2002; Ord. 02-O-2399, eff. 6-20-2002; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002; Ord. 02-O-2409, eff. 11-8-2002; Ord.
02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003; Ord. 02-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003; Ord. 03-O-2427, eff. 9-26-2003; Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005; Ord. 10-O-2585, eff. 7-22-2010;
Ord. 10-O-2586, eff. 8-31-2010; Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011; Ord. 11-O-2606, eff. 4-1-2011; Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012; Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-
2012; Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013; Ord. 14-O-2654, eff. 3-21-2014; Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014; Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014; Ord. 15-O-2691,
eff. 11-6-2015; Ord. 16-O-2712, eff. 12-22-2016; Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017; Ord. 16-O-2718, eff. 1-20-2017; Ord. 16-O-2720, eff. 1-20-2017; Ord. 17-
O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017; Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017; Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-2018; Ord. 19-O-2786, eff. 8-16-2019)
Article 2. Purpose, Conflicts, Compliance And Enforcement Of Provisions
10-3-201: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted in order to bring previous and existing ordinances on the same subject up to date and make the zoning conform to changed
conditions in certain instances. This chapter is largely a reenactment of ordinances on the same subject adopted in 1922, 1927 and 1932 which have been
revised to conform to present conditions. The Council, in enacting this chapter, has given reasonable consideration to the character of the various zones
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 511/797
established, the peculiar suitability of each for particular uses, the conservation of property values, and the direction of building development in accordance
with a well considered plan. The Council also has given reasonable consideration to the character of buildings erected in each zone and the present use
thereof, the value of the land, and the use to which it may be put to the end that the regulations herein imposed may promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement
between parties. (1962 Code §§ 10-104, 10-863)
10-3-202: CONFLICTS:
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are
imposed or required by other laws, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. (1962 Code
§ 10-863)
10-3-203: CONFORMANCE TO ZONE REGULATIONS:
A. Premises Or Building For Permitted Uses Only: No person shall use or occupy any premises or building, or any portion thereof, for any use other than is
permitted by this chapter in the zone in which such premises or building is located.
B. Building Alterations And Improvements: No person shall erect, construct, build, alter, or enlarge any building, structure, or improvement which is
designed, arranged, or intended to be used or occupied for any use other than is permitted by this chapter in the zone in which such building, structure,
or improvement is located.
C. Conformity With Property Development Standards: No person shall erect, construct, build, alter, or enlarge any building, structure, or improvement
except in conformity with all of the property development standards prescribed by this chapter for the zone in which such building, structure, or
improvement is located.
D. Setback Required: No building, structure, or improvement, except as permitted by this chapter, shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, or
enlarged within any setback required by this chapter.
E. Potential Safety Hazards: Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the director of building and safety may authorize construction or grading in
contravention of the provisions of this title if the director, after consultation with the director of planning and community development, determines that:
1) such construction is necessary to address an existing significant potential safety hazard to the occupants of the subject property or neighboring
properties, 2) such potential safety hazard has not been caused by unpermitted or otherwise illegal construction or grading, and 3) such potential safety
hazard cannot be adequately and feasibly mitigated by methods which conform to this title.
F. Disabled Access Or Emergency Equipment Upgrades: Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the director of community development may
modify the size, number and/or location of loading spaces and/or parking spaces required by this title in existing buildings in all commercial zones in
the city, if the director, after consultation with the building official, determines that: 1) such modification is necessary to provide disabled access or
emergency equipment upgrades required by the city building code or fire code, or state or federal requirements; and 2) such need for disabled access
and/or emergency equipment upgrades have not been caused by unpermitted or otherwise illegal construction; and 3) such need for disabled access
and/or emergency equipment upgrades cannot be adequately and feasibly met by methods which conform to this title. In approving any such
modification to the size, number and/or location of any loading spaces and/or parking spaces, the director shall have the discretion to require the
replacement of loading spaces and/or parking spaces which are removed. Replacement may be achieved through adjustment to location, dimensions,
area, number and/or type, including, without limitation, van loading spaces, single loading spaces, multiple truck loading spaces, compact parking
spaces, and/or tandem parking spaces. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no loading space shall be approved where the total square footage of the space
is any smaller than the total square footage as designated in minimum loading space standards in section 10-3-2740 of this chapter; provided that any
van loading space approved shall be of sufficient width to accommodate an entire van on site.
G. Substantial Compliance Determination: An applicant may seek a determination that a project substantially complies with the zoning code if, after a
development project has been approved, a building permit has been issued and the city has approved placement of the footing, it is discovered that the
project as constructed does not meet the requirements of the zoning code or conditions of approval. A substantial compliance determination may be
approved, with or without conditions, for the zoning code standards listed in the table included in this section if the reviewing authority makes all of the
following findings:
1. That requiring strict compliance with the zoning code would create substantial financial hardship for the applicant;
2. That the items that deviate from the code would not exceed the permissible deviations stated in the table included in this section;
3. That approval of a substantial compliance determination would not result in substantial, adverse impacts to neighboring properties;
4. That approval of a substantial compliance determination would not pose a threat to life or safety;
5. That the circumstances surrounding the request for a substantial compliance determination do not indicate that the applicant intended to deviate
from the zoning code standards.
Nothing in this section shall allow the amount of front yard paving, the floor area of a building, or the height of a building to exceed the limitations in
the zoning code.
The reviewing authority for a substantial compliance determination shall be the director of community development. If, in the opinion of the director
an application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such application to the planning commission and the planning
commission shall serve as the reviewing authority for such application and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested substantial
compliance determination.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 512/797
Notice of a public hearing, an intended decision and action shall be provided in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter.
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding a substantial compliance determination may appeal to the planning commission, if
the original decision was made by the director, or to the city council, if the original decision was made by the planning commission, as provided in title
1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
Zoning Standard
Permissible Deviation
Building
encroachments
into required
setback areas
Building walls, architectural projections, balconies, awnings, chimneys, and porches may encroach no more than 10 percent
into a required setback.
Fence and wall
location, length,
and height
In terms of location, height and length, fences and walls may be built no more than 10 percent beyond the applicable zoning
code standard or condition of approval unless approved by the planning, design review or architectural commission. In no
event shall the fence or wall block an automobile driver's field of vision when exiting a driveway.
Minimum drive
aisle width
The width of a drive aisle may be up to 10 percent narrower than the width specified by the city's minimum parking standards
or a condition of approval.
Minimum parking
stall dimension
The dimension of a parking stall may be up to 10 percent shorter in each direction than specified by the city's minimum parking
standards or a condition of approval. No more than 1 parking stall shall be eligible for this deviation. Parking spaces in singlefamily
zones are not eligible for this deviation.
(1962 Code §§ 10-201, 10-202, 10-203, 10-207, 10-208, 10-213, 10-214, 10-217, 10-218, 10-220, 10-222, 10-224, 10-301, 10-302, 10-306, 10-321, 10-
327, 10-401, 10-402, 10-411, 10-420, 10-512; amd. Ord. 80-O-1771, eff. 10-16-1980; Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; Ord. 95-O-2139, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord.
93-O-2187, eff. 1-14-1994; Ord. 01-O-2367, eff. 3-8-2001; Ord. 05-O-2488, eff. 12-8-2005; Ord. 13-O-2638, eff. 2-24-2013; Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-
2014)
10-3-204: COMPLIANCE:
All departments, officials, and public employees vested with the duty and authority to issue permits and licenses when required by law shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter. No license or permit for uses, buildings, or purposes, when the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall
be issued. Any license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void. (1962 Code § 10-864)
10-3-205: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
Any use, occupation, building, or structure maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. Any person violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted in a criminal misdemeanor action unless prosecuted in a civil
administrative action pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this code. (1962 Code §§ 10-108, 10-865; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 00-O-
2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
10-3-206: LIMITATION OF ACTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 88-O-2037, eff. 9-8-1988)
10-3-207: TIME OF EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
A. Time of exercise of rights for projects that consist solely of approvals granted pursuant to this chapter:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or a resolution, development agreement or other action granting any discretionary approval authorized by this
chapter, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced within three (3) years after the date of approval.
Unless otherwise provided in a resolution, development agreement or other action granting any discretionary approval authorized by this chapter, the
reviewing authority may grant up to two (2) one-year extensions of the time limit contained in this section if an application therefor is made at least thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of the time limit, or any extension thereof. Such extension may be granted after a duly noticed public hearing held
pursuant to the same procedures applicable to the approval of the original application as outlined in article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public
notice guidelines, if the reviewing authority determines that conditions and regulations affecting development in the city have not changed in a manner
that would warrant reconsideration of the findings and decision made at the time of original approval and the extension of the approval will not
unreasonably delay efforts to advance the objectives of the zone.
The reviewing authority may impose conditions on an extension to ensure that the extension will not be contrary to the findings made at the time of
original approval.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no time limit imposed pursuant to this subsection may be extended beyond five (5) years after the initial
action granting the original approval. Any decision regarding an extension pursuant to this subsection may be appealed in the same manner and to the
same appellate body as an appeal of the approval of the original application or, if no appeal procedures are specified, to the city council in the manner
provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
The failure to exercise any right granted by the original approval within the time limit provided, or any extension thereof, shall constitute an
abandonment of the original approval and all rights conveyed by the approval shall lapse and expire.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 513/797
The procurement of a building permit for or the commencement of any use authorized by a discretionary permit or approval shall constitute the exercise
of the rights granted by such approval. However, all rights conveyed by the approval shall lapse and expire upon expiration of such building permit
unless such building permit is extended pursuant to title 9 of this code.
B. Time of exercise of rights for projects that include a tentative subdivision map pursuant to chapter 2 of this title:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or a resolution, development agreement or other action granting any discretionary approval authorized by this
chapter, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced within two (2) years from the date of approval if the approval is granted in
conjunction with a tentative subdivision map approved pursuant to chapter 2 of this title.
The reviewing authority may grant extensions of the time limit contained in this subsection such that the time in which to exercise the discretionary
approval rights is the same as the time in which to exercise the rights of the tentative map approval. In addition to the granting of extensions pursuant
to the foregoing sentence, the reviewing authority may also grant an extension of the time limit in which to exercise the discretionary approval rights
granted pursuant to this chapter by one year from the date of final map approval.
Extensions of the time limit provided in this subsection may be granted if an application therefor is made at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
of the time limit, or any extension therefor. Such extension may be granted after a duly noticed public hearing held pursuant to the same procedures
applicable to the approval of the original application as outlined in article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines, if the reviewing
authority determines that conditions and regulations affecting development in the city have not changed in a manner that would warrant reconsideration
of the findings and decision made at the time of original approval and the extension of the approval will not unreasonably delay efforts to advance the
objectives of the zone.
The reviewing authority may impose conditions on an extension of the approvals granted pursuant to this chapter to ensure that the extension will not
be contrary to the findings made at the time of original approval.
Any decision regarding an extension pursuant to this section may be appealed in the same manner and to the same appellate body as an appeal of the
approval of the original application or, if no appeal procedures are specified, to the city council in the manner provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of
this code.
The failure to exercise any right granted by the original approval within the time limit provided, or any extension thereof, shall constitute an
abandonment of the original approval and all rights conveyed by the approval shall lapse and expire.
The procurement of a building permit for or the commencement of any use authorized by a discretionary permit or approval granted pursuant to this
chapter shall constitute the exercise of the rights granted by such approval. However, all rights conveyed by the approval shall lapse and expire upon
expiration of such building permit unless such building permit is extended pursuant to title 9 of this code.
C. Extension of time to exercise rights when a related tentative map is extended by state law:
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or a resolution, development agreement or other action granting any discretionary approval authorized by this
chapter, if the state adopts legislation automatically extending the term of any valid tentative tract map approval, the Director shall have the authority to
grant extensions of related valid city's approvals granted pursuant to this chapter for the same period of time as set forth in the state legislation. If
changes in city policies have occurred between the later of the date of project approval, or the most recent extension thereof, and the effective date of
the state legislation, and the related subdivision map is not a vesting map, the director shall have the authority to refer extension requests to the
reviewing authority. (Ord. 11-O-2610, eff. 8-7-2011; amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
Article 2.5. Public Notice Requirements
10-3-250: PURPOSE:
This article is intended to provide standards for notification of the public regarding pending actions pursuant to chapters 2, 3, 4, and 8 of this title on
planning applications, land use proposals, and legislative changes such as general plan amendments, specific plans and amendments thereto, zone text
amendments, and zoning map amendments, whether initiated by an applicant or the City. Public hearings shall be preceded by public notice in accordance
with this section and, if applicable, State law. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-251: TYPES OF NOTIFICATION:
The following types of notification may be required as specified in chapters 2, 3, 4, and 8 of this title:
A. Notice Of Application/Pending Action: Notice informing recipients that the Director of Community Development intends to take certain action on an
application in advance of a final action.
B. Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice informing recipients that a public hearing will be held before a decision making or reviewing authority.
C. Notice Of Action: Notice informing recipients that a decision making or reviewing authority has taken action on an application, which begins an
applicable appeal period. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-252: NOTIFICATION METHODS:
A. On Site Posted Notice: Any site area requiring a posted sign on site shall be posted pursuant to the public notice guidelines and the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 514/797
1. Postings Required:
a. Director Level Posted Notice: A notice of application/pending action shall be posted for all Director level applications that require a posted notice.
b. Commission Level Posted Notice: A notice of public hearing with the hearing date correctly stated shall be posted for all commission level
applications that require a posted notice.
2. Notification Period: On site posted notices shall be displayed at least twenty (20) days in advance of a decision or public hearing and remain through
the appeal period.
3. Posting Location: The sign shall be placed on the site in a location determined by the Director as specified in the public notice guidelines.
4. Affidavit And Proof Of Posting: The applicant shall submit an affidavit within five (5) days of posting the sign verifying that the sign is posted in
compliance with this section and the public notice guidelines. The applicant shall also submit photographs showing the posted sign to the Community
Development Department as outlined in the public notice guidelines.
B. Mailed Notice: The Director shall provide mailed notice as follows, subject to the public notice guidelines:
1. Mailed Notices Required:
a. Director Level Mailed Notices: Director level decisions require the following mailed notices:
(1) Notice Of Application/Pending Action: Mailed in accordance with the requirements in this section and the City's public notice guidelines.
(2) Notice Of Action: Mailed in accordance with the requirements in this section and the City's public notice guidelines.
b. Commission Level Mailed Notice: Commission level decisions require the following mailed notices:
(1) Notice Of Public Hearing: Mailed in accordance with the requirements in this section and the City's public notice guidelines. In addition, any
notice of City Council hearing shall be mailed in accordance with the requirements for commission mailing in this section and published in
accordance with the newspaper mailing guidelines of this chapter.
2. Notification Period:
a. Notices of application/pending action and notices of public hearing subject to this section shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to such
action or hearing by the reviewing authority.
b. Notices of action subject to this section shall be mailed within five (5) days after issuance of a decision by the reviewing authority. The mailing of a
notice of action denotes the beginning of the appeal period.
3. Notification Radius: Mailed notice shall be sent to properties in accordance with section 10-3-253 of this article. In the event that a portion of the
radius captures properties both in the Hillside or Trousdale Areas and the Central Area of the City, noticing of the block face shall not be required for
those properties located in the Hillside or Trousdale Areas.
4. Recipients: All mailed notices shall be delivered by United States mail, postage paid, to the following:
a. All property owners of record and residential occupants of property within the notification area given in subsection 10-3-253A of this article,
measured from the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the application.
b. Any person or group who has filed a written request for notice regarding the specific application.
c. If the project involves a subdivision map, mailed notice shall be given to any owner of mineral right pertaining to the subject real property who has
recorded a notice of intent to preserve the mineral right pursuant to section 883.230 of the Civil Code, as required by Government Code section
65091(a)(2).
d. If considering an adoption or amendment of policies that affect drive-through facilities, notice shall be given to the blind, aged, and disabled
communities as required by Government Code section 65090(d).
5. Notification List: The applicant shall provide a list of property owners and occupants within the notification area given in subsection 10-3-253A of this
article and shall sign an affidavit verifying that the list has been prepared in accordance with the procedures outlined in this section and the City's
public noticing guidelines. Applicants for subdivisions shall also provide a list of all owners of mineral rights who have recorded a notice of intent to
preserve the mineral right pursuant to section 883.230 of the Civil Code.
a. Property Owner Notice: The last known name and address of each property owner as contained in the records of the Los Angeles County
Assessor shall be used.
b. Occupant/Tenant Notice: The addresses of each residential occupants/tenants shall be used. The notice may be addressed to "occupant" or
"tenant".
C. Newspaper Notice: Where a newspaper notice is required by this section, before the date of a public hearing the Director shall cause to be published a
notice in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the City at least twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing.
D. Electronic Notice: Notice may also be provided by electronic means such as e-mailed notice, posted notice on the City's website, or other means
determined by the Director. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014; amd. Ord. 18-O-2752, eff. 5-11-2018)
10-3-253: NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following methods of notice are required for each planning application:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 515/797
A.Standard Requirements:
Architectural review:
Director: Director level projects can be processed administratively and include: minor
landscape approvals, some commercial signs, and minor exterior changes to multi-family
and commercial buildings (paint color changes, replacing like for like elements). These
permits are generally processed at the planning counter.
None None None
Commission: Commission level projects must be reviewed by the City's Architectural
Commission (AC) and include: sign accommodations, most commercial signs, facade
remodels for commercial and multifamily buildings, new construction of commercial and
multifamily buildings, and landscaping for commercial and multifamily projects.
Only
projects in
multifamily
residential
zones
None None
Cultural heritage:
Director: Director level projects can be processed administratively and include Certificate of
Review for District Non-Contributor and Director's determination of ineligibility.
Certificate of appropriateness for designated
landmarks and contributing properties: See
section 10-3-3219 of this chapter
Commission: Commission level applications include projects that are reviewed by the City's
Cultural Heritage Commission (CHC). The CHC recommends to the City Council on
landmark or historic district designation1 nominations and Mills Act contracts. The CHC acts
on Certificates of Appropriateness for Designated Landmarks and Contributing Properties,
certificates of ineligibility, and certificates of economic hardship.
Certificate of ineligibility: See section 10-3-3221
of this chapter
Landmark or historic district designation: See
section 10-3-3215 of this chapter
Certificate of economic hardship: See section 10-
3-3220 of this chapter
Design review:
Director: Director level projects can be processed administratively and include single family
home remodels and new homes in the Central Area of the City that are determined to be
"track 1".
None None Owner/applicant
Commission: Commission level applications include projects that are reviewed by the City's
Design Review Commission (DRC) including single family home facade remodels and new
homes in the Central Area of the City that are determined to be "track 2".
Yes None Central Area:
100 foot radius
+ block-face
Planning review:
Director Level: Director level includes applications that can be reviewed and approved by
staff.
Yes No Hillside and
Trousdale: 300
foot radius
Central Area:
100 foot radius
+ block-face
Accessory dwelling unit use permit
Development plan review
Game court fence
In-lieu parking
Large family daycare permit1
Lot line adjustment
Minor accommodation
Open air dining
Overnight stay permit
Planned development review
R-1: Hillside, Central and Trousdale
R-4 permit
Reasonable accommodation1
Resolution of public convenience and necessity1
Tree removal permit1
View restoration1
Public Notice Requirements
For Development Applications
On-Site
Posted
Notice
20-Day
Newspaper
Notice 20-Day
Mailed
Notice 20-Day
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 516/797
Commission/Council Level: Commission/Council, however many of the applications may be
referred to the Planning Commission level applications are reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission or City Council. Applications include:
Yes Amendments
(General Plan,
Streets Master
Plan, Specific
Plan, zone text,
Zoning Code)
Conditional use
permit
Maps (tentative,
and parcel)
Specific Plan
Variance
Hillside and
Trousdale:
1,000 foot
radius
Central Area:
1,000 foot
radius + blockface
Accessory dwelling unit use permit
Amendment (General Plan, Streets Master Plan, Specific Plan, zone text, Zoning Code)2
Common interest development1,2
Conditional use permit2
Density bonus permit2
Development plan review
Extended hours permit2
Game court fence
Game court location2
Historic incentive permit2
In-lieu parking
Large family daycare permit1
Lot line adjustment
Maps: tentative and parcel2
Minor accommodation
Open air dining
Overnight stay permit
Planned development review
R-1: Hillside, Central and Trousdale
R-4 permit
Reasonable accommodation1
Resolution of public convenience and necessity1
Specific Plan2
Tree removal permit1
Variance2
View restoration1
Notes:
1. Special noticing requirements apply, see subsection B of this section.
2. Applications reviewed at the Commission/Council level only.
B.Special Notice Requirements:
The following applications have unique noticing requirements:
Common
interest
development
With regard to all forms of common interest development conversions, the property owner shall be responsible to give each
tenant and each prospective tenant all applicable notices as required by this Code and State law.
Public Notice Requirements
For Development Applications
On-Site
Posted
Notice
20-Day
Newspaper
Notice 20-Day
Mailed
Notice 20-Day
Development
Application
Special Public Notice Requirements
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 517/797
1. Notice Of Intent: A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least 60 days prior to
submitting an application for the tentative map in accordance with California Government Code section 66427.1(a) or any
successor statute. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the
legal requirements for service by mail. For the purposes of this article, the "legal requirements for service by mail" shall mean the
requirements set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure sections 1012 and 1013a, or any successor statutes. The form of the
notice shall be in the form outlined in Government Code section 66452.9 and shall inform the tenants of all rights provided under
this Code and State law.
2. Notice Of Public Report: In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code section 66427.1(a) or any
successor statute, the subdivider shall provide each tenant 10 days' advance written notice that an application for a public report
will be or has been submitted to the State Department of Real Estate, and that said report will be available for review in the
Department of Community Development once the report is released by the Department of Real Estate. The written notices to
tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.
3. Notice Of Final Map Approval: In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code section 66427.1(b) or any
successor statute, the subdivider shall provide each tenant written notification within 10 days of approval of a final map for the
proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with
the legal requirements for service by mail.
4. Additional Notice To Terminate Tenancy: In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code section 66427.1(c)
or any successor statute, the subdivider shall provide to each tenant written notice of the intent to convert at least 180 days prior
to the termination of tenancy due to the proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be
deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.
5. Notice Of Public Hearing On Tentative Map: In addition to any other notice required by law, at least 20 days prior to the public
hearing before the Planning Commission on the tentative map, the subdivider shall provide each tenant written notice of the
public hearing. Said notice shall be in the form prescribed by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee and
shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:
a. An estimate as to the length of time before the conversion, if approved, would result in the tenant's eviction;
b. An explanation of the tenant's rights and benefits if the conversion is approved; and
c. The grounds upon which the Planning Commission can deny the request for conversion.
6. Affidavit Required: In connection with an application for a tentative map to convert an existing multi-family residential apartment
building or a common interest development previously created prior to January 1, 2006, to a common interest development, the
subdivider shall submit an affidavit in a form prescribed by the Director of Community Development attesting to compliance with
the noticing requirements prescribed by subsection A of this section. Said affidavit shall be signed by the subdivider under penalty
of perjury and shall include copies of the proof of service on each tenant in the building to be converted.
Large family
daycare permit
Not less than 20 days prior to the date on which the Director shall review the application, notice of the application shall be mailed,
by United States mail, postage prepaid, to all owners shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within
100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject site area.
Reasonable
accommodation
At least 20 calendar days before issuing a written determination on the application, the Director shall mail notice to the applicant
and adjacent property owners that the City will be considering the application, advising of the standards for issuing an
accommodation, and inviting written comments on the requested accommodation. Written notice of a hearing to consider the
application shall be mailed 20 calendar days prior to the meeting to the applicant and adjacent property owners.
Resolution of
public
convenience or
necessity
Notice of a public hearing shall be mailed to property owners and occupants within 300 feet of the premises for which a
determination is requested. At least 20 days prior to the public hearing a written notice shall be published in the newspaper.
Tree removal
permit
Notice of any hearing on such a permit before the Planning Commission shall be mailed to any adjacent property owners whose
property rights may be substantially affected by the approval of the requested permit.
View
restoration
1. Public Hearing Notice: Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be mailed at least 30 days prior to such hearing
by United States mail, postage paid, to the applicant and to all owners who are identified as foliage owners in the view restoration
permit application, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, as well as residential occupants of the foliage owners'
properties.
2. Notice Of Decision: Within 5 days after the issuance of a decision by the reviewing authority, the Director of Community
Development shall cause a copy of the decision to be mailed through the United States mail, postage prepaid, to each of the
following persons:
a. The view owner, using the mailing address set forth in the application;
b. Each foliage owner that is named on the application, as listed on a current Tax Assessor's roll and to the occupant of the
foliage owner's property if the foliage owner's address is different than the property on which the foliage is located.
The failure of the person addressed to receive a copy of the decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any decision.
(Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-254: NOTIFICATION REQUIRED BY STATE LAW:
Development
Application
Special Public Notice Requirements
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 518/797
In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, all planning applications must be noticed in accordance with State law. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-
2014)
10-3-255: CONTENTS OF NOTICES:
All required public notices, including posted signs and mailed notices, shall include the information specified in the public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-
2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-256: MULTIPLE APPLICATIONS:
When multiple applications are under review for the same site area or project, the City may issue a single notice for all related applications. Notification
requirements for multiple applications for the same site area or project shall be the notification requirements for the application with the greatest noticing
requirement. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-257: APPEALS:
Unless otherwise provided, public hearings for appeals shall be noticed using the same procedures applicable to the original application. (Ord. 14-O-2661,
eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-258: REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION OF PERMITS:
Public notice for hearings for the revocation or modification of permits shall be completed in accordance with the standards set forth in section 10-3-253 of
this chapter for the permit in question. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-259: EXTENSION OF TIME:
Public hearings held for extensions of the time limits for actions granting any discretionary approval authorized in chapters 2, 3, 4 and 8 of this title shall be
noticed using the same procedures applicable to the approval of the original application. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-260: FAILURE OF PERSON OR ENTITY TO RECEIVE NOTICE; SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE:
A. The failure of any person or entity to receive notice given pursuant to the City's noticing requirements shall not constitute grounds for any court to
invalidate the actions for which the notice was given.
B. The noticing provisions of this chapter shall not be construed in any manner that results in the invalidation of an action because of the alleged
inadequacy of the notice content if there has been substantial compliance with the notice content requirements. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
Article 3. Establishment Of Zones; Permitted And Conditionally Permitted Uses
10-3-301: ZONES:
The city is divided into zones as described in the following articles of this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-102; amd. Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976; Ord. 83-O-
1882, eff. 3-31-1983; Ord. 96-O-2264, eff. 8-16-1996)
10-3-302: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING
DISTRICT OVERLAYS:
The following charts establish permitted uses and conditionally permitted uses in all residential zoning districts and zoning district overlays:
A. Single-Family Residential Zones: Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in a single-family residential
zone shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except:
ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAYS
P = Permitted use UP = Use permit CUP = Conditional use permit
Accessory dwelling units (subject to section 10-3-409 of this chapter) P P P P P P P P
R-1
R-1.X
R-1.5
R-1.5X
R-1.5X2
R-1.6X
R-1.7X
R-1.8X
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 519/797
Single-family dwelling P P P P P P P P
Transitional and supportive housing1:
Single-family structure P P P P P P P P
Family daycare home:
Small P P P P P P P P
Large (subject to section 10-3-408 of this chapter) UP UP UP UP UP UP UP UP
Community care facility2 (state licensed):
Small (serving 6 or fewer) P P P P P P P P
Educational institutions CUP
CUP3
CUP CUP3
Museums CUP
CUP CUP
Public utility uses (except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this
chapter)
CUP
CUP CUP
Religious institutions CUP
CUP
Public libraries CUP
Publicly owned playgrounds CUP
Home occupations (subject to section 10-3-4303 of this chapter) P P P P P P P
Single-family transient use4 P4 P4 P4 P4 P4 P4 P4 P4
Notes:
1. Transitional or supportive housing is permitted in residential zones subject to the same standards as similar residential uses; therefore, if such
housing is configured as a single-family residence, it is regulated as such and is subject to all regulations applied to residences in the single-family
residential zone where it is located.
2. For the purposes of this section, residential care facilities for the elderly, as defined in state law, shall be treated the same as community care
facilities.
3. Public educational institutions only.
4. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or "accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a
single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence 2 times per calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a
single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited.
B. Multiple-Family Residential Zones: Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in a multiple-family
residential zone shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except:
ALLOWED USES AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONES AND ZONING DISTRICT OVERLAYS
P = Permitted use CUP = Conditional use permit
Single-family dwelling and an accessory dwelling unit (subject to section 10-3-
409 of this chapter)
P P P P P
Multiple-family dwellings P P P P P P
Transitional and supportive housing:
Single-family structure P1 P1 P1 P1
Multi-family structure P1 P1 P1 P1 P1
Emergency shelters (subject to section 10-3-1275 of this chapter) P
Single room occupancy housing (SRO) CUP
Community care facilities3 (state licensed):
R-1
R-1.X
R-1.5
R-1.5X
R-1.5X2
R-1.6X
R-1.7X
R-1.8X
R-4
RMCP
Special Needs
Housing Overlay
Zone4
R-
4X1
R-
4X2
R-3
R-4-
P
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 520/797
Small (6 or fewer) P P P P
Large (7 or more) CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
CUP
Public library P P P
Childcare uses licensed pursuant to state law CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Educational institutions CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Multiple-family congregate housing for the elderly or disabled pursuant to article
12.8 of this chapter
CUP
Multiple-family housing for the elderly or disabled pursuant to article 12.5 of this
chapter
CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Museums CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Public utility uses2 CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Religious institutions CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Restaurants located in nonconforming hotels (subject to section 10-3-1207 of
this chapter)
CUP
CUP CUP
CUP
Convenience retail uses (subject to section 10-3-1233 of this chapter) CUP
Public parking uses CUP
Ancillary retail uses5 P
Ancillary parking facilities5 P
Notes:
1. Transitional or supportive housing is permitted in residential zones subject to the same standards as similar residential uses; therefore, if such
housing is configured as a multiple-family residence, it is regulated as such and is subject to all regulations applied to residences in the multiplefamily
residential zone where it is located.
2. Except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
3. For the purposes of this section, residential care facilities for the elderly, as defined in state law, shall be treated the same as community care
facilities.
4. Uses allowed in the special needs housing overlay zone are in addition to any use allowed in the underlying zoning district.
5. If approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-303: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES FOR NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING
DISTRICT OVERLAYS:
Uses for all nonresidential zones and zoning district overlays are listed in the article addressing each specific zone or zoning district overlay. (Ord. 12-O-
2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-304: ZONING MAP:
The zones, and the district that each encompasses, are shown on the "official zoning map of the city of Beverly Hills, January, 1962", a copy of which is on
file in the office of the city clerk and is incorporated in this chapter by reference, and said map shall govern as to the outline of all zones shown thereon.
Said map may be amended by ordinance from time to time.
Said map is intended to incorporate changes which have been made and provisions will have been modified since the adoption of the official zoning map
dated August, 1954. Said map, as hereby adopted, is not intended to change any zone or change the zoning of any property but is intended to indicate the
boundaries of the various zones and their locations in the city as heretofore established or hereafter established by ordinance and, in conjunction with the
text of this chapter, to indicate the uses and regulations applicable to the various parcels of property in the city.
Zones designated with an "X" indicate that the zoning of the particular area so designated has been submitted to and confirmed by a vote of the electors of
the city. (1962 Code § 10-102; amd. Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-305: UNCERTAINTY OF ZONE BOUNDARIES:
R-4
RMCP
Special Needs
Housing Overlay
Zone4
R-
4X1
R-
4X2
R-3
R-4-
P
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 521/797
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the zones shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Streets, Alleys, Or Lot Lines As Boundaries: The zone boundaries are either streets, alleys, or lot lines of record, unless otherwise shown, and where
the zone is indicated by hatchings or other markings on the zoning map to be approximately bounded by street, alley, or lot lines, such street, alley, or
lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such zone.
B. Other Cases: Where the zone boundaries are not shown to be streets, alleys, or lot lines, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided
into blocks and lots, the zone boundaries shall be construed to be lot lines. Where the zone boundaries are indicated by hatchings or markings on the
zoning map to be approximately bounded by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the zone.
C. Unsubdivided Property: In unsubdivided property, the zone boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale contained on such map,
and where uncertainty exists, the zone boundary line shall be determined by the council upon written application, and record thereof shall be kept on
file in the office of the council. (1962 Code § 10-103; amd. Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-306: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a street or alley included on the official zoning map of the city, unless otherwise
expressly indicated, shall be included as a part of the zone of the adjoining property on either side thereof. Where the street or alley serves as a boundary
between two (2) or more different zones, the street or alley shall be considered included in the most restrictive zone so adjoining. Where a street or alley
adjoins a park or other publicly owned property, the park or other publicly owned property shall be considered a part of the street or alley for the purposes
of this section. (Ord. 1248, eff. 8-18-1966; amd. Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
Article 4. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1)
10-3-401: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged,
built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care facility, or
transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or "accessory dwelling
unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per calendar year for each
single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family transient use more than
twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-402: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Clubs.
Educational institutions.
Museums.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions. (1962 Code § 10-202; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997)
10-3-403: RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. No other buildings except the usual accessory buildings, including private garages, private stables, and detached guest suites or pool houses which are
appurtenant to and are, or are intended to be, used together with a public school, public library, public playground, or private one-family residence or
dwelling shall be placed upon, erected, constructed, built upon, enlarged, altered, used, or occupied on any lot or parcel of land in zone R-1 except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. Unenclosed accessory structures may contain kitchen facilities provided the structure does not also include
bathroom facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, "unenclosed accessory structure" shall mean any accessory structure that has at least one open
side (no more than 3 solid walls in a square or rectangular structure), and shall not include structures where the open wall is fitted with a sliding glass
partition capable of fully enclosing the structure. Fully enclosed accessory structures shall not contain kitchen facilities.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, an accessory building lawfully constructed prior to September 26, 2003, may provide
complete, independent living facilities (including kitchen facilities) without otherwise conforming to the accessory dwelling unit standards set forth in
section 10-3-409 of this chapter, provided the property owner has recorded a covenant in a form satisfactory to the city attorney restricting the use of
the site to one bona fide housekeeping unit or was otherwise lawfully constructed in conformance with the applicable codes in effect at the time of
construction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such accessory structure may be maintained indefinitely and may be altered or
expanded without otherwise complying with the regulations applicable to accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-404: MORE THAN ONE SEPARATE ONE-FAMILY DWELLING:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 522/797
(Rep. by Ord. 91-O-2111, eff. 3-22-1991)
10-3-405: USE OF CONTIGUOUS LOTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-O-2139, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-406: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1. All property and buildings in zone R-1 hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except as
otherwise provided in this article. (1962 Code § 10-207; amd. Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-407: EXCEPTIONS; SUNSET RESERVOIR:
A variance is hereby granted to provide an additional use for lots 6 and 7, block 84, tract Beverly Hills, which lots may be used for the construction and
maintenance of a water storage reservoir and park in connection with the water department of the city. (1962 Code § 10-226)
10-3-408: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Notwithstanding sections 10-3-401 and 10-3-402 of this chapter, a large family daycare home may be permitted in an R-1 zone pursuant to a use permit
issued under the authority of this section.
A. Standards: The director of planning and community development shall issue a use permit to a large family daycare home if the daycare home meets the
following standards and requirements as prescribed by state law:
1. There shall be a minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') between the site area on which the large family daycare home is located and the
nearest site area containing a licensed childcare facility. However, notwithstanding this distance requirement, if the large family daycare home fronts
on a different street than the licensed childcare facility, then the minimum distance between the two (2) site areas shall be reduced to one hundred
fifty feet (150'). The foregoing minimum distance requirements shall not apply to small family daycare homes.
2. In order to reduce noise impacts from the operation of the large family daycare home, all open space areas located behind the residence and all
other open space areas used for childcare purposes shall be enclosed with a solid masonry wall along that portion of the side and rear lot lines not
located within a front yard. The wall shall be seven feet (7') in height along the side lot lines and eight feet (8') in height along the rear lot line. The
wall along the rear lot line shall contain a rear exit gate. In addition, the operation of the large family daycare home shall comply with all applicable
noise regulations of this code, including those contained in title 5 of this code.
3. In addition to the parking otherwise required for a single-family home, one paved parking space shall be provided for each nonresident employee,
nonresident aide and any other nonresident person engaged in the operation of the daycare home. Unless such spaces are located in an existing
driveway, such spaces shall be located on the premises outside of the front yard and shall conform to the requirements of section 10-3-2733 of this
chapter.
4. The director of planning and community development determines that loading and unloading of children may be accomplished without significantly
restricting traffic flow.
B. Procedure: An application for a permit to operate a large family daycare home shall be filed with the director of planning and community development in
a form provided by the director. Such application shall be processed pursuant to the following procedures as required by state law.
1. Notice: Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines.
2. Hearing: No public hearing on the application shall be held unless a hearing is requested in writing by the applicant or by an interested party. The
hearing, if requested, shall be conducted by the director.
3. Appeal: The applicant or any interested party may appeal the decision of the director to the planning commission pursuant to the procedures for an
appeal to the city council set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
No provision of this section shall alter the parking requirements for a single-family residential property set forth in sections 10-3-2419, 10-3-2515 and
10-3-2615 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 96-O-2260, eff. 6-14-1996; Ord. 97-O-2287, eff. 12-19-1997; Ord. 14-O-2661,
eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-409: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
A. Standards: Notwithstanding sections 10-3-401 and 10-3-402 of this chapter, an accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted in an R-1 zone and in an R-4
zone on a property developed with an existing single-family dwelling unit provided the proposed accessory dwelling unit meets the following standards
and requirements:
1. Location: The lot or parcel on which the proposed accessory dwelling unit will be constructed contains not more than one single-family dwelling unit.
The accessory dwelling unit may be either: a) attached to the primary one-family residence and located within the living area of the residence, or b)
detached from the primary one-family residence and located on the same site area as the residence. If the accessory dwelling unit is detached, it
must be located to the rear of the primary dwelling unit on the site.
2. Site Area: The site area on which the accessory dwelling unit will be located is a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 523/797
3. Unit Size:
a. Attached Accessory Dwelling Units: An attached accessory dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum size for an efficiency unit, as defined
in section 17958.1 of the California Health And Safety Code or any successor statute and shall not exceed the lesser of fifty percent (50%) of the
existing floor area of the primary dwelling unit or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
b. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units: A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not be less than the minimum size for an efficiency unit, as defined
in section 17958.1 of the California Health And Safety Code or any successor statute and shall not exceed a maximum floor area of six hundred
fifty (650) square feet.
4. FAR Calculations: The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit shall be included for purposes of determining the floor area of buildings on the site
when calculating floor area for any purpose under this code, including the determination of floor area ratio.
5. Number Of Accessory Structures Permitted:
a. Sites Less Than Eight Thousand Five Hundred Square Feet: Where the site area is less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet, no
accessory structure shall be permitted on the site area except for one accessory dwelling unit and a garage.
b. Sites Equal To Or Greater Than Eight Thousand Five Hundred Square Feet And Less Than Twenty Four Thousand Square Feet: Where the site
area is equal to or in excess of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet and less than twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, no more
than one accessory structure in addition to one accessory dwelling unit and a garage shall be permitted on the site area.
c. Sites Of At Least Twenty Four Thousand Square Feet: There is no restriction on the number of accessory structures on estate lots of at least
twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, however only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted.
6. Height:
a. Detached Accessory Dwelling Units: A detached accessory dwelling unit shall be located on the ground floor and shall not exceed a maximum
height of fourteen feet (14'). Notwithstanding the foregoing, a detached accessory dwelling unit located on an estate lot of at least twenty four
thousand (24,000) square feet may be located on the second floor and shall comply with the maximum height limit applicable to the primary
dwelling structure on the site.
b. Attached Accessory Dwelling Units: An attached accessory dwelling unit may be located on either the ground floor or the second floor of the
primary dwelling unit and shall be subject to the same height limitations applicable to the primary structure.
c. Central R-1 Permits: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, for those lots located south of Olympic Boulevard and west of Roxbury
Drive, the planning commission may, through the issuance of a Central R-1 permit pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter, modify the height
limitations set forth in this subsection A6, to allow a detached accessory dwelling unit to be located above the ground floor, provided the rear lot
line of the subject lot abuts an alley and provided further that the elevation of the subject lot slopes downhill from the front (street) lot line of the
property to the rear (alley) lot line with a minimum difference in elevation of at least twenty feet (20') between the street and the alley. In addition to
the findings required by section 10-3-2453 of this chapter, the planning commission may issue a Central R-1 permit to allow an accessory dwelling
unit to exceed fourteen feet (14') in height if the planning commission finds that the proposed accessory dwelling unit will not have a substantial
adverse impact on adjacent properties or the public welfare. In making this determination, the planning commission may look at such factors as the
impact of the accessory dwelling unit on the scale and massing as viewed from adjacent properties, the impact of the accessory dwelling unit on
available light in neighboring yards, and the cumulative impact to adjacent properties from the proposed accessory dwelling unit in combination
with existing accessory structures and accessory dwelling units in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall the height of an accessory dwelling
unit structure be permitted to exceed the following:
(1) Twelve feet (12') as measured from the lowest finished elevation along the perimeter of the primary structure; and
(2) Twenty five feet (25') for structures with a flat roof and thirty feet (30') for structures with a sloped roof, with a maximum plate height of twenty
two feet (22') as measured from the lowest existing grade.
d. Setbacks For Accessory Dwelling Unit Above A Garage: If an accessory dwelling unit is constructed above a garage pursuant to subsection A6a
or A6c of this section, the required side and rear setbacks shall not exceed five feet (5'). However, nothing prohibits an applicant from proposing
greater rear and side setbacks.
7. Demolition Of Garages, Carports Or Covered Parking Structures: When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction
with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, the off street parking spaces lost as a result of the demolition shall be replaced on site. The
replacement parking spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as
covered spaces, uncovered spaces, tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts.
8. Rental And Transfer: The accessory dwelling unit may be rented, subject to the limitations on single-family transient use, but shall not be sold,
transferred or assigned separately from the primary single-family dwelling.
9. Parking: Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, parking for an accessory dwelling unit shall be provided at the following ratios and in
accordance with following standards:
a. One parking space in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with zero or one separate
bedrooms;
b. Two (2) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with two (2), three (3) or
four (4) separate bedrooms;
c. Three (3) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with five (5) bedrooms;
d. Four (4) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with six (6) or more
bedrooms.
All required parking spaces shall be provided behind the front setback line for the site area.
e. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, no parking shall be required for any accessory dwelling unit in any of the following circumstances:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 524/797
(1) The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half (1/2) mile of public transit.
(2) The accessory dwelling unit is located within a historic district.
(3) The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure.
(4) When on street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit.
(5) When there is a city approved and dedicated parking space for a car share vehicle located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit.
f. Standards: Any required parking for an accessory dwelling unit may be provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway, including driveway
areas within setback areas.
10. Architectural Compatibility: The accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the color, material, architectural style, and detailing of the primary structure
and shall meet all other applicable building code requirements and development standards of the zone for single-family residential structures and
accessory structures.
11. Side Setbacks: Except as provided below, the accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all side setback requirements applicable to the primary
dwelling unit on the site.
a. Garage conversions: No additional side setback beyond the existing garage setback shall be required, except as may be required by the local
building and fire codes.
12. Rear Setback:
a. Garage conversions: No additional rear setback beyond the existing garage setback shall be required, except as may be required by the local
building and fire codes.
b. A new accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the rear setback requirement applicable to the primary dwelling unit on the site. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, an accessory dwelling unit located on a site whose rear lot line abuts an alley or a commercially zoned parcel may be located within
the rear setback.
13. Entrances: A separate entrance shall be provided for attached accessory dwelling units, which entrance shall not be located on the front of the
primary residential structure or facing the street. On corner lots, a separate entrance shall be provided for attached accessory dwelling units, which
entrance shall not be located on the front of the primary residential structure or facing the street on which the primary residential structure fronts.
14. Required Features: The accessory dwelling unit must provide complete, independent living facilities for sleeping, sanitation, and cooking.
15. Covenant Required: The owner of record shall record a deed restriction in a form satisfactory to the city attorney within thirty (30) days following the
issuance of a building permit for the accessory dwelling unit. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of building permit for an accessory dwelling unit
pursuant to this article, the owner of record shall record a covenant, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, which shall place future buyers on
notice of the maximum size of the accessory dwelling unit is as set forth in this subsection A, the required amount of off street parking to be provided
for the accessory dwelling unit, that the accessory dwelling unit may not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary dwelling unit,
and that such restrictions shall run with the land and be binding upon all future owners. The covenant shall be recorded in the official records of the
county of Los Angeles, and a copy of the covenant shall be filed with the office of the city clerk.
16. Fire Sprinklers: An accessory dwelling unit shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence.
17. Fees And Charges For Utilities: Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered new residential uses for purposes of calculating local agency
connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service.
18. Utility Connections:
a. The applicant for any accessory dwelling unit approved pursuant to subsection A20 of this section, shall not be required to install a new or
separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge.
b. The applicant for any accessory dwelling unit that is not described in subsection A20 of this section, may be required to install a new or separate
utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit and the utility, and consistent with Government Code section 66013, the connection
may be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge that shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit upon the
water or sewer system, based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures.
19. Historic Resources: Any accessory dwelling unit that has the potential to adversely impact a historical resource listed on the national register,
California register of historic places, or the city of Beverly Hills register of historic properties, shall comply with and shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the "Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties With Guidelines For Preserving,
Rehabilitating, Restoring, And Reconstructing Historic Buildings" found at 36 CFR 68.3, as amended from time to time.
20. Conversion Of Existing Space Of A Residence Or Accessory Structure: Conversion of existing space within a single-family residence or within an
accessory structure to an accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted by right, provided that the proposed accessory dwelling unit has independent
exterior access from the existing residence, and the side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety.
B. Accessory Dwelling Unit Use Permits: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, accessory dwelling units north of Santa Monica Boulevard that
do not meet all of the standards set forth in subsection A of this section but comply with the standards set forth in this subsection may be permitted in
an R-1 zone pursuant to an accessory dwelling unit use permit issued under the authority set forth in this subsection.
1. Standards: Upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the director of planning and community development, the reviewing
authority may, subject to the findings provisions of this subsection B, issue an accessory dwelling unit use permit for the development of an
accessory dwelling unit in an R-1 zone if the proposed accessory dwelling unit meets the following standards and requirements:
a. Location: The lot or parcel on which the proposed accessory dwelling unit will be constructed contains not more than one additional single-family
dwelling unit. The accessory dwelling unit may be either: 1) attached to the primary one-family residence and located within the living area of the
residence, or 2) detached from the primary one-family residence and located on the same site area as the residence. If the accessory dwelling unit
is detached, is must be located to the rear of the primary dwelling unit on the site.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 525/797
b. Site Area: The site area on which the accessory dwelling unit will be located is a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
c. Unit Size: The square footage of the accessory dwelling unit, when combined with the floor area of the other structures on the site, shall not
exceed the maximum allowable FAR for the site, and may exceed six hundred fifty (650) square feet in size for a detached accessory dwelling unit
or one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in size for an attached accessory dwelling unit if approved through an accessory dwelling unit
use permit. No accessory dwelling unit shall be less than the minimum size for an efficiency unit, as defined in section 17958.1 of the California
Health And Safety Code or any successor statute.
d. FAR Calculations: The floor area of the accessory dwelling unit shall be included for purposes of determining the floor area of buildings on the site
when calculating floor area for any purpose under this code, including the determination of floor area ratio.
e. Number Of Accessory Structures Permitted:
(1) Sites Less Than Eight Thousand Five Hundred Square Feet: Where the site area is less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet,
no accessory structure shall be permitted on the site area except the accessory dwelling unit and a garage.
(2) Sites Equal Or Greater Than Eight Thousand Five Hundred Square Feet And Less Than Twenty Four Thousand Square Feet: Where the site
area is equal to or in excess of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet and less than twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, no
more than one accessory structure in addition to the accessory dwelling unit and a garage shall be permitted on the site area.
(3) Sites Of At Least Twenty Four Thousand Square Feet: The restrictions on the number of accessory structures on a site set forth in this
subsection shall not apply to estate lots of at least twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, however only one accessory dwelling unit shall be
permitted.
f. Height: The accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the same height limitations as other accessory structures on the site area. In addition to an
application for an accessory dwelling unit use permit, a separate application for an R-1 permit must be submitted to allow for an increase in the
applicable height limitations. Said R-1 permit shall be reviewed pursuant to the standards and procedures for accessory structures set forth in
article 24.5, 25.5 or 26.5 of this chapter, as appropriate.
g. Garage Conversion Prohibited: No garage may be demolished or converted in order to construct an accessory dwelling unit, unless a garage of at
least equal size is replaced concomitantly on the site area. Any garage that has been demolished or converted to any other accessory use within
the three (3) year period prior to the issuance of a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit must be replaced with a garage of at least equal
size as a condition to the issuance of the building permit for an accessory dwelling unit.
h. Rental And Transfer: The accessory dwelling unit may be rented but shall not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary singlefamily
dwelling.
i. Parking: Parking for an accessory dwelling unit shall be provided at the following ratios and in accordance with following standards:
(1) One parking space in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with zero or one separate
bedrooms;
(2) Two (2) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with two (2), three (3)
or four (4) separate bedrooms;
(3) Three (3) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with five (5)
bedrooms;
(4) Four (4) parking spaces in addition to the parking spaces required for the primary dwelling for an accessory dwelling unit with six (6) or more
bedrooms.
All required parking spaces shall be provided behind the front and street side setback line for the site area.
j. Architectural Compatibility: The accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the color, material, architectural style, and detailing of the primary structure
and shall meet all other applicable building code requirements and development standards of the zone for single-family residential structures and
accessory structures. A landscape plan which provides for adequate screening of the accessory dwelling unit from neighboring properties to the
satisfaction of the director of planning and community development is required as a condition to the issuance of an accessory dwelling unit use
permit.
k. Side Setbacks: The accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the same side setback limitations as other accessory structures on the site area.
In addition to an application for an accessory dwelling unit use permit, a separate application for an R-1 permit must be submitted to allow for a
reduction in the side setback limitations. Said R-1 permit shall be reviewed pursuant to the standards and procedures for accessory structures set
forth in article 24.5, 25.5 or 26.5 of this chapter, as appropriate.
l. Rear Setback: The accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to the same rear setback limitations as other accessory structures on the site area. In
addition to an application for an accessory dwelling unit use permit, a separate application for an R-1 permit must be submitted to allow for a
reduction in the rear setback limitations. Said R-1 permit shall be reviewed pursuant to the standards and procedures for accessory structures set
forth in article 24.5, 25.5 or 26.5 of this chapter, as appropriate.
m. Entrances: A separate entrance shall be provided for attached accessory dwelling units, which entrance shall not be located on the front of the
primary residential structure or facing the street. On corner lots, a separate entrance shall be provided for attached accessory dwelling units, which
entrance shall not be located on the front of the primary residential structure or facing the street on which the primary residential structure fronts.
n. Required Features: The accessory dwelling unit must provide complete, independent living facilities for sleeping, sanitation, and cooking.
o. Covenant Required: The owner of record shall record a deed restriction in a form satisfactory to the city attorney to this effect within thirty (30)
days following the issuance of a building permit for the accessory dwelling unit. Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of building permit for an
accessory dwelling unit pursuant to this article, the owner of record shall record a covenant, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, which shall
place future buyers on notice of the approved size of the accessory dwelling unit, the required number of off street parking spaces to be provided
for the accessory dwelling unit, that the accessory dwelling unit may not be sold, transferred or assigned separately from the primary dwelling unit,
and that such restrictions shall run with the land and be binding upon all future owners. The covenant shall be recorded in the official records of the
county of Los Angeles, and a copy of the covenant shall be filed with the city's planning department.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 526/797
p. Historic Resources: Any accessory dwelling unit that has the potential to adversely impact a historical resource listed on the national register,
California register of historic places, or the city of Beverly Hills register of historic properties, shall comply with and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the "Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties With Guidelines For
Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, And Reconstructing Historic Buildings" found at 36 CFR 68.3, as amended from time to time.
2. Reviewing Authority: Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for an accessory dwelling unit use permit shall be the director of planning
and community development. If, in the opinion of the director, an application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such
application to the planning commission, and the planning commission shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed public
hearing regarding the requested accessory dwelling unit use permit.
If the application for an accessory dwelling unit use permit accompanies an application for any other type of discretionary permit for the same site
area, the reviewing authority and the administrative review process applicable to that other type of discretionary permit shall apply to the accessory
dwelling unit use permit application. However, the standards for the granting or denial of the accessory dwelling unit use permit application shall
continue to be those set forth in this section or any of its successors.
3. Notice: Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines.
4. Required Findings: The reviewing authority shall not issue an accessory dwelling unit use permit unless the reviewing authority finds that the
proposed accessory dwelling unit will not have a substantial adverse impact on or be detrimental to:
a. The scale and massing of the streetscape;
b. The scale and massing of the neighborhood as viewed from neighboring properties;
c. Neighbors' access to light and air;
d. Neighbors' privacy;
e. The garden quality of the city; and
f. Adjacent properties or the public welfare.
5. Appeals From Decisions: The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding an accessory dwelling unit use permit by a reviewing
authority other than the city council may appeal to the city council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
C. Conversion Of Existing Accessory Structures: For any accessory structure constructed prior to September 26, 2003, that contains a kitchen, the
property owner may apply for a building permit pursuant to subsection A of this section or an accessory dwelling unit use permit pursuant to subsection
B of this section to convert the accessory structure to an accessory dwelling unit. All applications for conversion must comply with the standards and
regulations set forth in subsection A or B of this section, as appropriate. If the conversion is permitted, any covenant previously recorded by the
property owner, or his or her predecessor, restricting the use of the site to one bona fide housekeeping unit shall be released by the city. (Ord. 17-O-
2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
Article 5. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.X)
10-3-501: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.X shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-502: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1.X zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Museums.
Public educational institutions.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994)
10-3-503: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in zone R-1.X pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-503.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.X provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 527/797
10-3-504: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not repeal, supersede, or affect the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, including the other sections of
this chapter, except insofar as the provisions of such other ordinances or resolutions may tend to permit other than private single, one-family residences or
dwellings in zone R-1.X and the other property specifically described in this article, but as to the property in zone R-1.X and as to the specific properties
described, the provisions relating to zone R-1.X shall supersede any conflicting provision of any other ordinance or resolution. (1962 Code § 10-212; amd.
Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-505: EXCEPTIONS; CHURCHES:
Lots 4, 5, and 6, block 1, tract 6217, and lots 1, 2, and 3, block 51, tract Beverly Hills, shall be used for private one-family residences only unless used for
church purposes. (1962 Code § 10-209; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-506: EXCEPTIONS; BEVERLY HILLS HOTEL:
Lots 1 through 12, inclusive, and the southeasterly 72.88 feet of lot 13 measured from the northeasterly lot line of lot 13, and lot 21, block 75, tract Beverly
Hills, shall be used for private one-family residences or dwellings unless used for hotel purposes consistent with the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan and
article 15.5 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-210; amd. Ord. 84-O-1925, eff. 5-3-1984; Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 92-O-2151, eff. 10-9-1992)
10-3-507: EXCEPTIONS; BEVERLY HILLS WOMEN'S CLUB:
No building, structure, or improvement, other than a single one-family residence and appurtenant structures, shall be erected, constructed, established,
maintained, altered, or enlarged upon lots 18, 19, or 20, or any combination thereof, of tract 6980, being the site of the Beverly Hills Women's Clubhouse,
except a clubhouse used and occupied by and for the Beverly Hills Women's Club or a women's club of similar kind and type, and then only in accordance
with the following provisions, conditions, and restrictions:
A. Size And Location Of Structures: Any building, structure, or improvement on all, either, or any combination of said lots shall be of a size and type
conforming generally in style and appearance, size, and arrangement with single-family residence structures in the vicinity, shall not exceed two (2)
stories or twenty six feet (26') in overall height, whichever shall be the lesser, and shall be set back from Chevy Chase Drive and from the common
property line between lot 20 and lot 21 of tract 6980 in accordance with the respective setbacks established by the laws of the city. (The laws now in
effect provide for a front setback of 25 feet from Chevy Chase Drive and a setback of 10 feet from the common property line between lots 20 and 21.)
B. Parking: Provisions for the surface parking of automobiles may be made upon any portion of the premises unoccupied by the structure of the women's
club provided the regular setback from Chevy Chase Drive and from Benedict Canyon Drive is maintained in accordance with established setbacks and
controlling laws. Any parking space shall be paved, and the paved area shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') from Chevy Chase Drive but may
extend to the existing wall between lots 20 and 21. If the existing building is replaced or is substantially remodeled or enlarged, adequate automobile
parking space shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this code in effect at that time for places of public assembly. A wall six feet (6')
high shall separate the space for automobile parking and the front setback area, and all setback areas shall be properly planted and maintained similar
to residential setback areas in the vicinity.
C. Commercial Uses: The use of the premises or any portion thereof for commercial purposes, as that term is generally defined, shall be deemed to be a
use for other than club purposes and hereby is prohibited. The lease or rental of any building, structure, or improvement, or any part thereof, or of any
of the lots or combination thereof, to any person, or group of persons, or use by any, shall be deemed to be a use other than for club purposes unless
the activities engaged in by such lessee or user are ethical, social, educational, or cultural, and similar to and of the character of activities of the
women's club. If the rental charged is substantially greater than the cost to the women's club of janitor service, public utilities, normal wear and tear,
and the policing and supervising of such use, it shall be deemed to be an indication that the use is for financial profit and not solely for ethical, social,
educational, and cultural purposes similar in character to use by the Beverly Hills Women's Club by and for the members, and therefore commercial in
character.
D. Meetings: Not more than one evening meeting per week shall be held other than the meetings of the women's club or one of its various divisions, and
any such evening meeting, other than the meetings of the women's club or one of its various divisions, shall adjourn at nine forty five o'clock (9:45) P.M.
of the same day and shall disperse promptly thereafter; provided, however, that no such evening meeting shall be held during the months of July and
August. Any meeting of the women's club or any of its divisions shall adjourn not later than eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. of the same day and shall
disperse promptly thereafter.
All other meetings (other than the 1 meeting per week and other than the meetings of the women's club or 1 of its various divisions) shall adjourn not
later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. of the same day and disperse promptly thereafter.
E. Traffic Officer: A traffic officer shall be provided at the expense of the club during the period beginning one-half (1/2) hour before and until one-half (1/2)
hour after any meeting of more than one hundred fifty (150) persons during the day or evening. Any additional traffic control deemed necessary by the
chief of police shall be at the expense of the city.
F. Meals And Liquor: No restaurant, tearoom, or beauty parlor shall be conducted upon the premises or any part thereof, and no intoxicating liquor shall be
dispersed, served, kept, or permitted upon the premises or any part thereof.
G. Uses: Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of the club premises, building, structure, or improvements for ethical, social, educational,
cultural, and similar enterprises and purposes sponsored or approved by the women's club and subject to the provisions of this section. If the property
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 528/797
or any part thereof ceases to be used by and for a women's club, the premises shall be used and zoned in accordance with the zoning of all
immediately surrounding property: zone R-1, single-residential. (1962 Code § 10-206; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-508: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.X. All property and buildings in zone R-1.X hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except as
otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 6. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.5)
10-3-601: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.5 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-602: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1.5 zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Clubs.
Educational institutions.
Museums.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994)
10-3-603: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in zone R-1.5 pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-603.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.5 provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-604: RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A. No other buildings except the usual accessory buildings, including private garages, private stables, and detached guest suites or pool houses which are
appurtenant to and are, or are intended to be, used together with a public school, public library, public playground, or private one-family residence or
dwelling shall be placed upon, erected, constructed, built upon, enlarged, altered, used, or occupied on any lot or parcel of land in zone R-1.5 except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. Unenclosed accessory structures may contain kitchen facilities provided the structure does not also include
bathroom facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, "unenclosed accessory structure" shall mean any accessory structure that has at least one open
side (no more than 3 solid walls in a square or rectangular structure), and shall not include structures where the open wall is fitted with a sliding glass
partition capable of fully enclosing the structure. Fully enclosed accessory structures shall not contain kitchen facilities.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, an accessory building lawfully constructed prior to September 26, 2003, may provide
complete, independent living facilities (including kitchen facilities) without otherwise conforming to the accessory dwelling unit standards set forth in
section 10-3-409 of this chapter, provided the property owner has recorded a covenant in a form satisfactory to the city attorney restricting the use of
the site to one bona fide housekeeping unit or was otherwise lawfully constructed in conformance with the applicable codes in effect at the time of
construction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any such accessory structure may be maintained indefinitely and may be altered or
expanded without otherwise complying with the regulations applicable to accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-605: MORE THAN ONE SEPARATE ONE-FAMILY DWELLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 91-O-2111, eff. 3-22-1991)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 529/797
10-3-606: USE OF CONTINUOUS LOTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-O-2139, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-607: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.5. All property and buildings in zone R-1.5 hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except as
otherwise provided in this article. (1962 Code § 10-217; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 7. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.5X)
10-3-701: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.5X shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-702: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in the R-1.5X zone pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4 of
this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-702.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.5X provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-703: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not repeal, supersede, or affect the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, including the other sections of
this chapter, except insofar as the provisions of such other ordinances or resolutions may tend to permit other than private single, one-family residences or
dwellings in zone R-1.5X, but the provisions of this article shall supersede any conflicting provision of any other ordinance or resolution. (1962 Code § 10-
219; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-704: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.5X. All property and buildings in zone R-1.5X hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except
as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 8. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.5X2)
10-3-801: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.5X2 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-802: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1.5X2 zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of
this chapter:
Public educational institutions.
Public libraries.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 530/797
Publicly owned playgrounds. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-803: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in the R-1.5X2 zone pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4
of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-803.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.5X2 provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-804: REZONING AND VARIANCES:
There shall be no rezoning of all or any part of such portions of zone R-1.5, nor shall any variance be granted to permit the use of any property in such
portions of zone R-1.5 for purposes other than public schools, public libraries, public playgrounds, or private one-family residences or dwellings unless
such rezoning or variances are confirmed by a vote of the electors of the city. (1962 Code § 10-227; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-805: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.5X2. All property and buildings in zone R-1.5X2 hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except
as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord.01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 9. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.6X)
10-3-901: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.6X shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-902: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in zone R-1.6X pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-902.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.6X provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-903: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not repeal, supersede, or affect the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, including the other sections of
this chapter, except insofar as the provisions of such other ordinances or resolutions may tend to permit building construction or property or building uses
other than those permitted in this article, in which case the provisions of this article shall supersede any conflicting provisions of any other ordinance or
resolution. (1962 Code § 10-221; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-904: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.6X. All property and buildings in zone R-1.6X hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except
as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 10. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.7X)
10-3-1001: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 531/797
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.7X shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-1002: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in zone R-1.7X pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure set forth in article 4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1002.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.7X provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-1003: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not repeal, supersede, or affect the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, including the other sections of
this chapter, except insofar as the provisions of such other ordinances or resolutions may tend to permit building construction or property or building uses
other than those permitted in this article, in which case the provisions of this article shall supersede any conflicting provisions of any other ordinance or
resolution. (1962 Code § 10-223; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1004: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.7X. All property and buildings in zone R-1.7X hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except
as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 11. One-Family Residential Zone (R-1.8X)
10-3-1101: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-1.8X shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose except as a private one-family residence, small family daycare home, small community care
facility, or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence. A single-family transient use of a "single-family residence" or
"accessory dwelling unit", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, by a single housekeeping unit is permitted to commence two (2) times per
calendar year for each single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit. Use of a single-family residence or accessory dwelling unit for a single-family
transient use more than twice per calendar year is prohibited. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-1102: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
No more than five (5) automobiles shall be parked on any separately numbered lot in zone R-1.8X. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1102.5: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted in zone R-1.8X provided the criteria set forth in article 4 of this chapter are satisfied or an accessory dwelling
unit use permit is issued pursuant to the procedure provided in said article 4 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-1103: LARGE FAMILY DAYCARE HOMES:
Large family daycare homes shall be permitted in zone R-1.8X pursuant to the large family daycare home use permit procedure provided in article 4 of this
chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1104: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-1.8X. All property and buildings in zone R-1.8X hereby are limited to strictly private one-family residential uses except
as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 12. Multiple Residential Zone (R-4)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 532/797
10-3-1201: DEFINITIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996)
10-3-1202: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone R-4 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged,
built upon, used, or occupied for any purpose other than as a public library, a single- or multiple-family dwelling and the usual and customary accessory
and appurtenant uses thereto including one accessory dwelling unit on a lot developed only with a single-family dwelling subject to the criteria in section
10-3-409 of this chapter; a small community care facility; or transitional or supportive housing structured as a single-family residence or as a multiplefamily
dwelling. (Ord. 17-O-2724, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-1203: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted in the R-4 zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Childcare uses licensed pursuant to state law.
Educational institutions.
Large community care facilities.
Multiple-family housing for the elderly or disabled pursuant to article 12.5 of this chapter.
Museums.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions.
Restaurants located in nonconforming hotels, as provided in section 10-3-1207 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1204: AREA REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1997)
10-3-1205: RENTING OF ROOMS PERMITTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996)
10-3-1206: NONCONFORMING HOTELS:
A hotel is not a permitted use within an R-4 zone.
Within any nonconforming hotel in an R-4 zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, alter, enlarge, maintain, or use any
building, structure, or improvement which is used, designed, arranged, or intended to be used or occupied for retail sales rooms, stores, offices of a
business other than the hotel, and other service uses such as vehicle rentals. Additionally, it shall be unlawful to expand, enlarge or intensify a
nonconforming hotel use except as allowed by section 10-3-1207 of this article. (Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996)
10-3-1207: DINING IN NONCONFORMING HOTELS:
Subject to the following restrictions, restaurants or dining rooms may be operated within a nonconforming hotel located in an R-4 zone:
A. Private Dining Rooms: A private dining room may be operated within a nonconforming hotel in an R-4 zone provided that the dining room serves only
hotel occupants and their guests and has no door or entrance opening through an exterior wall except a service door into a garage or warehouse or an
emergency exit door.
B. Restaurants: A restaurant may be operated within a nonconforming hotel pursuant to a conditional use permit if the hotel and restaurant meet the
following criteria:
1. The hotel is located on a street identified as an "arterial" street or "collector" street in the city's general plan.
2. The total dining and bar floor area of all restaurants and private dining rooms in the hotel does not exceed the floor area of any dining and bar area
that existed on or before November 1, 1995.
3. No patrons of the restaurant are seated after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 533/797
4. No live entertainment is performed.
5. No banquets or similar private receptions or parties are held at the restaurant.
6. Parking is provided free of charge to employees to ensure that employees do not park in the public right of way.
C. Restaurant Conditional Use Permit: Prior to issuing a conditional use permit to allow a restaurant to be located in a nonconforming hotel, the
commission shall consider, as part of its determination pursuant to article 38 of this chapter, whether the restaurant will have a substantial adverse
impact on the use and enjoyment of surrounding residential properties due to:
1. The accumulation of garbage, trash, or other waste;
2. Noise created by the operation of the restaurant or by employees or visitors entering or exiting the restaurant;
3. Light and glare;
4. Odors or noxious fumes;
5. Parking demand created by the restaurant, including parking demand created by employees; or
6. Traffic.
D. Prohibition Against Expansion: Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming hotel use or
private dining room or restaurant within a nonconforming hotel except that a private dining room may be converted to a restaurant as allowed by
subsections B and C of this section. No hotel may include both a private dining room and a restaurant.
E. Signage: In addition to any other signage permitted for the hotel, a hotel restaurant or private dining room may be identified by a sign at the entrance to
the restaurant or private dining room. The size of the sign shall be approved by the planning commission but in no event shall the sign exceed twelve
(12) square feet. The sign shall not be illuminated except with back lighting.
F. Outdoor Dining: Outdoor dining may be approved by the planning commission as part of the issuance of a conditional use permit subject to the issuance
of a development plan review approval that must be renewed on an annual basis for the first three (3) years and every three (3) years thereafter unless
the director of planning and community development determines that more frequent review and renewal is required to ensure that no adverse impacts
occur. (Ord. 96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996; amd. Ord. 98-O-2318, eff. 1-1-1999)
10-3-1208: STREETCAR TRACKS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the laying, construction, repair, and/or removal of all necessary ties, tracks, rails, poles, trolleys, and
other necessary equipment for streetcars and railways in, under, or upon private property located in and along the center of any public street within zone
R-4. (1962 Code § 10-320)
10-3-1209: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-4, except the business of an apartment house. All property and buildings in zone R-4 hereby are limited to residential
uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. (1962 Code § 10-321; amd. Ord. 73-O-1491, eff. 10-18-1973; Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-1210: BUSINESS USES; EXCEPTIONS; BLOCK 17, TRACT BEVERLY:
(Rep. by Ord. 67-O-1269, eff. 6-1-1967)
10-3-1211: EXCEPTIONS; LOT 510, TRACT 4988:
Lot 510, tract 4988, is hereby placed in zone R-4. No building, structure, or improvement, except a fence, gate, wall, or hedge not exceeding three feet (3')
in height and not otherwise prohibited by deed or ordinance, shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, or enlarged on said lot within twelve and
one-half feet (121/2') of the property line along Tower Drive. (1962 Code § 10-328)
10-3-1212: EXCEPTIONS; CRESCENT DRIVE BETWEEN WILSHIRE BOULEVARD FRONTAGE AND BRIGHTON WAY:
(Rep. by Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980)
10-3-1212.5: EXCEPTIONS; LOTS 12 AND 13, TRACT 11875:
Lots 12 and 13, tract 11875 are hereby placed in zone R-4. Lot 12 shall be subject to the height limits of height district A and lot 13 shall be subject to the
height limits of height district B, as set forth in section 10-3-2804, or its successor section, of this code.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, lot 12 and 13 shall be subject to the following density limitations:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 534/797
A. Lot 12: One dwelling unit for each two thousand eight hundred (2,800) square feet of site area;
B. Lot 13: One dwelling unit for each two thousand three hundred (2,300) square feet of site area.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, in the event lots 12 and 13 are combined and developed as a single site, the following density
limitation shall apply: One dwelling unit for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of site area.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, lot 12 shall be subject to the following side setback limitations: The northerly side setback shall be at
least twelve feet (12') and the southerly side setback shall be at least eight feet (8'). In the event lots 12 and 13 are combined and developed as a
single site, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the following side setback limitations shall apply: The northerly side setback of lot 12 shall
be at least twelve feet (12') and the southerly side setback of lot 13 shall be at least eight feet (8'). (Ord. 98-O-2309, eff. 10-9-1998)
10-3-1213: SCHOOL PLAYGROUNDS:
School playgrounds where permitted by other sections of this chapter shall be:
A. Located not less than fifty feet (50') from the side common property line of adjacent residential property; and
B. Separated from all adjacent residential property by a solid masonry wall, or equivalent thereof, not less than ten feet (10') in height. (Ord. 70-O-1380,
eff. 4-2-1970)
Article 12.3. Multiple-Family Residential-Commercial Parking Zone (RMCP)
10-3-1230: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the multiple-family residential-commercial parking (RMCP) zone is to provide a transitional zone between a commercial zone and a
residential zone which will provide uses compatible to the adjacent zones. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980)
10-3-1231: USES PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED:
Subject to the provisions of this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the multiple-family residential-commercial parking (RMCP) zone shall
be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except for the following purposes:
A. Those uses permitted in the R-4 zone.
B. Those uses conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone if authorized by a conditional use permit pursuant to the procedures set forth in article 12 of this
chapter.
C. Convenience retail uses. For the purposes of this section, "convenience retail" shall mean the retail sale of food and beverages for off site consumption;
provided, further, that a bakery use may prepare and cook its food on site and may provide a limited seating area not to exceed eighteen percent (18%)
of the floor area for the on site consumption of such baked goods and beverages. Convenience retail shall also mean the retail sale of hardware;
pharmaceutical products; small personal convenience items, such as toiletries, tobacco, magazines, plants, and flowers; personal convenience
services, such as barber and beauty care, shoe repair, alterations, locksmiths, small appliance repair, laundry or dry cleaning facilities (excluding selfserve
laundromats) subject to the restrictions set forth in this article; or uses which are generally characterized as serving the convenience shopping
needs of those living in the area.
D. Public parking uses.
E. Housing for the elderly and handicapped.
F. The uses set forth in this section may be combined in a single building or structure by a conditional use permit. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd.
Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983; Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 05-O-2463, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-1232: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER PROVISIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any building or structure constructed, erected, or enlarged for any use permitted by the provisions of this
article shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980)
10-3-1233: CONVENIENCE RETAIL USES:
Convenience retail uses shall be permitted by conditional use permit only and shall be located only on the ground floor of a parking building or structure;
provided, however, the floor area utilized of a parking building or structure shall not occupy more than twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor area of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 535/797
the parking building or structure. Convenience retail uses, exclusive of the parking required for such uses, shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%)
of the ground floor of any parking building or structure. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd. Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1234: PUBLIC PARKING USES:
A. A building used exclusively for public parking shall not exceed forty feet (40') in height.
B. In any building or structure in which the top floor is used for public parking, a wall five feet (5') in height shall be maintained above the top floor around
all sides of the building or structure, except the alley side. The height of the wall shall not be used in determining the height of the building or structure
for the purposes of the maximum height permitted by this article.
C. Surface parking upon any lot upon which no parking structure is constructed or maintained shall be subject to the provisions of this code applicable to
automobile parking lots. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd. Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1235: RESIDENTIAL USES:
A. A building used exclusively for multi-family residential purposes, exclusive of housing for the elderly and handicapped persons, as set forth in article
12.5 of this chapter, shall not exceed twenty eight feet (28') in height.
B. A building used exclusively for housing for elderly and handicapped persons under said article 12.5 of this chapter shall not exceed the maximum height
of sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd. Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1236: COMBINED USES:
The planning commission may grant the combination of any uses permitted by this article in a building or structure by a conditional use permit subject to
the following requirements:
A. A minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the total floor area shall be used for public parking; provided, however, this requirement shall not be
applicable to any combination of uses where thirty three percent (33%) or more of the total floor area is used for housing elderly and handicapped
persons under article 12.5 of this chapter.
B. Height shall not exceed forty feet (40'); provided, however, where all stories above the ground floor are used for housing elderly and handicapped
persons under article 12.5 of this chapter, a maximum height of sixty feet (60') shall be permitted. (Ord. 80-O-1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd. Ord. 83-O-
1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1237: SETBACKS:
All setback areas shall be landscaped in accordance with specifications on file in the recreation and parks department. Setback distances for the portion of
any structure housing the uses specified in this section shall comply with the provisions of this chapter pertaining to such uses, except for the purposes of
this article, the following special setback requirements shall apply to such uses:
A. The portion of any building used for residential purposes shall maintain a minimum setback as follows:
1. A front lot line setback from Crescent Drive of not less than fifteen feet (15'); and
2. Where a residential use is combined with any other use, the residential portion of the building shall maintain a setback of not less than the setback
on any portion of the building below such residential use.
B. The portion of any building used for public parking purposes shall maintain a minimum setback as follows:
1. A front lot line setback from Crescent Drive of not less than fifteen feet (15');
2. A lot line setback from any other public street, excluding alleys, of not less than five feet (5'); and
3. A lot line setback from any site boundary other than a public street or alley of not less than five feet (5') for the first story or first twelve feet (12') in
height, whichever is less; plus an additional two foot (2') setback for each additional story, or twelve feet (12') in height, whichever is less.
C. Where any portion of any building is used for convenience-retail purposes, the following minimum setbacks for the entire building shall be maintained:
1. A front lot line setback from Crescent Drive of not less than five feet (5') for fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage and not less than fifteen feet
(15') for the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage; provided, further, if the building is also used for residential housing under article
12.5 of this chapter, the first story of such structure may be set back not less than five feet (5') for sixty percent (60%) of the building frontage and not
less than fifteen feet (15') for the remaining forty percent (40%) of the building frontage.
2. Except as provided in subsection C1 of this section, all other convenience-retail setbacks shall comply with the public parking setbacks set forth in
subsection B of this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 536/797
3. Except as provided in subsection C1 of this section, portions of buildings containing public parking uses shall comply with the public parking
provisions of this article, and portions of buildings containing residential uses shall comply with the residential use provisions of this article.
D. Any property used exclusively for surface parking shall maintain a minimum setback from any public street of not less than five feet (5'). (Ord. 80-O-
1759, eff. 4-17-1980; amd. Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1238: PERMISSIBLE SETBACK AND RIGHT OF WAY ENCROACHMENTS:
A. Multiple-Family Residential Uses Setback Encroachments: The following may encroach upon any required setback if, pursuant to article 28.5 of this
chapter, the reviewing authority issues an R-4 permit. Such permit shall only be issued upon a finding that the encroachment is compatible with the
building design, the nearby streetscape and the surrounding development.
1. Marquees, canopies and awnings not exceeding twenty five feet (25') in length along the direction of the street and which have been reviewed by the
architectural commission pursuant to this chapter; and
2. Trellises and other similar landscape features not exceeding forty feet (40') in length along the direction of the street per trellis, provided all such
structures are completely on private property.
B. Combined Uses Setback Encroachments: Where public parking, convenience retail, and housing for elderly and handicapped persons under article
12.5 of this chapter are authorized as combined uses under a conditional use permit, the article 12.5 housing portion of the building may encroach
upon any required setback as follows:
1. Bay windows, a maximum distance of three feet (3');
2. Balconies, including vertical and horizontal wing walls, a maximum distance of seven feet (7');
3. Pergolas, a maximum distance of fourteen feet (14') into any rear yard setback at the second story and above provided such pergolas do not extend
beyond the vertical wall of the story immediately below; and
4. Planters may encroach in any setback area which does not abut a street or alley provided such planters do not exceed a height of ten feet (10').
C. Multiple-Family Residential Uses Right Of Way Encroachments: The following may encroach upon the public right of way if, pursuant to article 28.5 of
this chapter, the reviewing authority issues an R-4 permit. Such permit shall only be issued upon a finding that the encroachment is compatible with the
building design, the nearby streetscape and the surrounding development.
1. Marquees, canopies and awnings not exceeding twenty five feet (25') in length along the direction of the street that do not project more than twothirds
(2/3) of the distance from the property line to the curb and that are not less than eight feet (8') above the ground or pavement below, provided
that the marquee, canopy or awning receives architectural commission review pursuant to this chapter.
D. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
AWNING: A shelter or roof like structure supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
CANOPY: An ornamental roof like structure constructed of canvas or similar material projecting over an entrance to a building.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof like structure constructed of metal or glass projecting over an entrance to a building or structure.
TRELLIS: An open framed, decorative landscape structure constructed of latticework. (Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983; amd. Ord. 04-O-2453, eff. 10-
10-2004)
10-3-1239: NONCONFORMING HOTELS:
A. Nonconforming Use: A hotel is not a permitted use within the RMCP zone.
B. Uses Restricted: Within any nonconforming hotel in the RMCP zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, alter, enlarge,
maintain, or use any building, structure, or improvement which is used, designed, arranged, or intended to be used or occupied for retail sales rooms
(other than convenience retail uses permitted pursuant to a conditional use permit), stores, offices of a business other than the hotel, and other service
uses such as vehicle rentals.
C. Expansion Restricted: A nonconforming hotel in the RMCP zone may be altered or enlarged for the purpose of renovating the hotel, provided that such
alteration or enlargement does not increase the total number of guestrooms in the nonconforming hotel. It shall otherwise be unlawful to expand,
enlarge or intensify a nonconforming hotel use except as allowed by section 10-3-1240 of this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 1-2-2001; amd. Ord. 02-O-
2408, eff. 10-18-2002)
10-3-1240: DINING IN NONCONFORMING HOTELS:
Subject to the following restrictions, restaurants or dining rooms may be operated within a nonconforming hotel located in the RMCP zone:
A. Private Dining Rooms: A private dining room may be operated within a nonconforming hotel in the RMCP zone provided that the dining room serves
only hotel occupants and their guests and has no door or entrance opening through an exterior wall except a service door into a garage or warehouse
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 537/797
or an emergency exit door.
B. Restaurants: A restaurant may be operated within a nonconforming hotel pursuant to a conditional use permit if the hotel and restaurant meet the
following criteria:
1. No patrons of the restaurant are seated after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
2. No live entertainment is performed.
3. No banquets or similar private receptions or parties are held at the restaurant.
4. Parking is provided free of charge to employees to ensure that employees do not park in the public right of way.
C. Restaurant Conditional Use Permit: Prior to issuing a conditional use permit to allow a restaurant to be located in a nonconforming hotel, the planning
commission shall consider, as part of its determination pursuant to article 38 of this chapter, whether the restaurant will have a substantial adverse
impact on the use and enjoyment of surrounding residential properties due to:
1. The accumulation of garbage, trash, or other waste;
2. Noise created by the operation of the restaurant or by employees or visitors entering or exiting the restaurant;
3. Light and glare;
4. Odors or noxious fumes;
5. Parking demand created by the restaurant, including parking demand created by employees; or
6. Traffic.
D. Signage: In addition to any other signage permitted for the hotel, a hotel restaurant or private dining room may be identified by a sign at the entrance to
the restaurant or private dining room. The size of the sign shall be approved by the planning commission but in no event shall the sign exceed twelve
(12) square feet. The sign shall not be illuminated except with back lighting.
E. Outdoor Dining: Outdoor dining may be approved by the planning commission as part of the issuance of a conditional use permit subject to the
issuance of a development plan review approval that must be renewed on an annual basis for the first three (3) years and every three (3) years
thereafter unless the director of planning and community development determines that more frequent review and renewal is required to ensure that no
adverse impacts occur. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001; amd. Ord. 02-O-2408, eff. 10-18-2002)
10-3-1241: DRY CLEANING PLANTS; RESTRICTIONS:
Dry cleaning plants and pressing plants of all kinds shall be permitted in the RMCP zone under the following conditions:
A. Noise And Odor: No noise, odor, or other evidence of dry cleaning or pressing shall be detectable by a person outside such building or outside the
portion of the building used for cleaning or pressing.
B. Cleaning Fluid And Capacity: No explosive or inflammable cleaning fluid shall be used in dry cleaning plants except when used in self-contained
cleaning machines or units and unless the same has a flash point of not less than 138.5 degrees Fahrenheit (138.5°F). Any such installation shall be in
conformity with the state fire marshal and the provisions of the Health And Safety Code of the state.
C. Perchloroethylene Prohibited: The use of perchloroethylene or "perc" shall be strictly prohibited.
D. One Dry Cleaning Unit Only: No more than one complete unit of dry cleaning equipment or machinery shall be installed in one premises.
E. Retail Dry Cleaning And Pressing Only: The business of dry cleaning, pressing, or ironing conducted in the RMCP zone shall be strictly retail, and no
wholesale dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing shall be permitted. Garments shall be cleaned only when brought to such place of business by the owner of
the garments or by the members of his family or his employees, or when collected by the proprietor of the dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing plant
directly from the residences of the owners of such garments. Under no circumstances shall work be done for independent operators engaged in the
business of pressing, ironing, spotting, or dry cleaning garments, or collecting garments for any of such purposes.
F. Location Of Equipment: Equipment for dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing shall not be installed in the front portion of the ground floor of any building along
or adjoining any public street, and any such equipment if adjacent to or visible from the public street or sidewalk, shall be shielded from pedestrians on
the public street or sidewalk by a masonry or similar substantial wall at least six feet (6') in height.
G. Use Of Front Portion Of Building: The front portion of the ground floor of any premises used for dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing of garments shall be
designed and used for the receiving from the customer and returning to the customer of the garments to be processed and shall not be used for any
portion of the work on the garments.
H. Approval Of The Chief Of The Fire Department: Before installing any cleaning, ironing, or pressing equipment in any premises in the RMCP zone, it
shall be necessary to obtain the approval of the chief of the fire department and the chief building inspector for such equipment and the use of such
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 538/797
equipment in such premises. In no case shall equipment or the use thereof be approved which is or may create a fire hazard or become a menace to
life or property, or become a nuisance. (Ord. 05-O-2463, eff. 3-18-2005)
Article 12.5. Incentives For Constructing Multiple-Family Housing For The Elderly Or
Disabled
10-3-1251: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to incentivize the construction of housing for elderly or disabled persons at costs lower than could be achieved under the
general provisions of this code by modifying the general development standards to meet the unique needs of elderly or disabled households. It is also the
intent to avoid the concentration of housing for elderly or disabled persons in any single area. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1252: ELDERLY OR DISABLED HOUSING DEFINED:
Housing is considered to be housing for the elderly or disabled if all the units are occupied by one of the following:
A. A household in which the head and/or his (her) spouse is sixty two (62) years or older; or
B. A household in which the head and/or his (her) spouse is sixty two (62) years or older with a disabled child; or
C. A household headed by a disabled person who has an impairment which is expected to be of a long, continued and indefinite duration and which:
1. Substantially impedes the person's ability to live independently; or
2. Is of such nature that the person's ability to live independently could be improved by a more suitable housing condition.
Notwithstanding the above, one unit may be occupied by a family who is neither elderly nor disabled but who occupies the unit for the specific
purpose of managing and/or operating the housing complex. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1253: PERMITTED AREAS:
A. Multiple-family housing for the elderly or disabled shall be a permitted use in any zone permitting multiple-family residential uses.
B. A conditional use permit shall be required for any multiple-family housing for the elderly or disabled that will be built using the alternative development
standards provided in this article. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1254: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
A. In addition to the standards for the issuance of conditional use permits set forth in this chapter, conditional use permits shall be issued for multiple-family
residences for elderly and handicapped persons only if it is determined that the proposed site for any such residence or residences shall have available
services to include shopping, medical, recreation, and transportation within a reasonable distance for elderly and handicapped persons and that the
residence or residences shall be located in an area which permits easy access and circulation which is not unreasonably subject to, or impacted by,
traffic, noise, and other adverse environmental impacts.
B. Conditional use permits shall be issued subject to the condition that the owner of the property files a covenant with the city building official for recording
with the county recorder, prior to the issuance of a building permit, such covenant to be approved by the city attorney, that the building or buildings shall
be used only for residences for elderly and handicapped persons in accordance with the provisions of this article and that if such building or buildings
are used for any other purpose, the owner shall cease the use of the building until such building or buildings are remodeled or rebuilt to comply with the
applicable provisions of this code for any use other than multiple-family residences for elderly and handicapped persons. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-
1979)
10-3-1255: SITE AREA:
No site area for housing for the elderly and the handicapped shall exceed seventy thousand (70,000) square feet. For projects in which the net density
exceeds one hundred (100) units per acre, the maximum site size shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1256: DENSITY:
The number of units of housing for the elderly and handicapped which may be constructed shall not exceed one hundred sixty five (165) units per acre;
provided, however, the maximum number of units which may be constructed on any one site shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) units. The number of
units which will be permitted on any one site shall be determined by the planning commission. In making such a determination, the planning commission
shall consider the number of units for the elderly and the handicapped located or proposed to be located in the vicinity of the site, the availability of
community services to serve the site, and its compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 539/797
10-3-1257: DWELLING UNIT REQUIREMENTS:
Each multiple-family dwelling unit for elderly and handicapped persons shall have a minimum floor area of not less than the maximum allowable by the
United States department of housing and urban development under section 202, funded housing, for efficiency, one-bedroom, and two-bedroom units.
A. An efficiency dwelling unit is defined as a unit which has a combined living, sleeping, and kitchen area and a separate bathroom.
B. No dwelling unit shall exceed two (2) bedrooms.
C. All units shall contain a separate bathroom equipped with a shower or tub, or both, toilet, and washbasin and kitchen facilities which shall include a
stove, oven, refrigerator, and sink. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979; amd. Ord. 83-O-1882, eff. 3-31-1983)
10-3-1258: NUMBER OF BEDROOMS LIMITED:
No more than five percent (5%) of the total number of units in any one development shall be two (2) bedroom units. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1259: PERMITTED HEIGHT:
The height of any building for elderly or handicapped persons constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be determined by the
planning commission so that the height of the building shall not be substantially at variance with the prevailing height of buildings surrounding said
building; provided, however, no such building shall exceed sixty feet (60') in height. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1260: PARKING:
At the time of the construction, alteration, or improvement of any building to be used for suitable family residences for elderly and handicapped persons,
there shall be one parking space provided for each dwelling unit; provided, however, the number of parking spaces required by this section may be
reduced by the planning commission to a number not less than four-tenths (4/10) of a parking space for each dwelling unit if the planning commission finds
that the parking required by this section is demonstrated to be in excess of the amount of parking which will be required to adequately serve the project.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any property which receives a reduction in the number of required parking spaces per dwelling unit
pursuant to this section, and all residents of the dwelling units located thereon, shall be ineligible to participate in a preferential parking zone established
pursuant to title 7, chapter 3, article 2 of this code. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979; amd. Ord. 03-O-2432, eff. 11-21-2003)
10-3-1261: RECREATION SPACE:
There shall be provided a minimum of seventy five (75) square feet of usable common indoor or outdoor recreation space for each unit for the use of the
occupants of any multiple-family residential building for elderly and handicapped persons, exclusive of the required front setbacks. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff.
12-6-1979)
10-3-1262: LAUNDRY FACILITIES:
Each multiple-family residential building for elderly and handicapped persons shall have laundry facilities in the building which shall include washing
machines and dryers. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1263: DINING FACILITIES:
A. Congregate dining facilities may be provided for each multiple-family residential building for elderly and handicapped persons.
B. Any congregate dining facilities provided in a multiple-family residential building shall be for the use of the residents of the building and their guests and
employees who work in the building only and shall not be open to the general public.
1. Entrances to the dining area shall not be from the exterior of the building.
2. A separate service entrance to the kitchen with an adequate loading area shall be provided. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1263.1: CONVENIENCE RETAIL USES:
Each multiple-family residential building for elderly and handicapped persons may have commercial uses provided all the following conditions are met:
A. That all such commercial uses are "convenience retail" uses as defined in subsection 10-3-1231C of this chapter;
B. That such uses shall be located only on the ground floor of such residential building; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 540/797
C. That the total amount of floor area occupied by such uses shall not exceed an amount which shall be determined by the planning commission to be
compatible with the purpose of this article and the neighborhood of the residential building. (Ord. 81-O-1807, eff. 9-17-1981)
10-3-1264: RENTAL RATES:
If at any time the rental rates for any such housing for elderly and handicapped persons constructed pursuant to this article are not subject to the control of
a federal, state, or other public agency, then the rental rates for any such housing shall be set by the planning commission as a condition of issuing a
conditional use permit in accordance with regulations adopted by the council by resolution. Such regulations shall provide for the setting of rental rates
which shall make such housing affordable at all times to elderly and handicapped persons whose incomes would otherwise restrict their opportunities to
find adequate rental housing in the city and that such rental rates shall not be increased except as provided by the city in accordance with said regulations.
The owner of the property subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in this article shall file a covenant with the director of building and safety, prior
to the issuance of a building permit, such covenant to be approved by the city attorney and to be recorded. Such covenant shall provide that rents for the
units in the building shall not exceed the rents set by the planning commission, except as otherwise approved by the city. (Ord. 79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
10-3-1265: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
Any building or structure constructed, erected, altered, or enlarged for multiple-family residential use for elderly and handicapped persons shall comply
with all the provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the zone in which such housing is located, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord.
79-O-1751, eff. 12-6-1979)
Article 12.7 Special Needs Housing Overlay Zone
10-3-1270: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to encourage the construction of housing for persons with special needs in compliance with state law. Such housing shall be
allowed in certain areas of the city to avoid the concentration of special needs housing in any single area and to locate such housing close to amenities
and services appropriate for the intended residents. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1271: PERMITTED AREAS:
The special needs housing overlay zone shall apply in the R-4 zone to those sites described in section 10-3-1282 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-
23-2012)
10-3-1272: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, development within the special needs housing overlay zone shall be subject to the development standards
provided in article 12.8 of this chapter. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1273: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the special needs housing overlay zone shall be erected,
constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used, or occupied except for the following purposes:
A. Uses permitted in the applicable underlying zone.
B. Emergency shelters subject to the standards provided in this article. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1274: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted in the special needs housing overlay zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of article 38 of this chapter:
Large community care facilities.
Multiple-family congregate housing for the elderly or disabled pursuant to article 12.8 of this chapter.
Single room occupancy housing (SRO) subject to the standards provided in this article. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1275: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR EMERGENCY SHELTERS:
Emergency shelters shall be allowed as a permitted use in the special needs housing overlay zone provided that the following development standards are
met:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 541/797
A. The minimum floor area per occupant shall not be less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and the maximum number of occupants to be served at
any given time shall not exceed fifty (50).
B. A minimum distance of three hundred feet (300') shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter.
C. The maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed ninety (90) days in a three hundred sixty five (365) day period.
D. On site client waiting and intake areas shall be located inside the building and shall be screened from public and private property where feasible. If not
feasible, an exterior waiting area shall be provided which contains a minimum of ten (10) square feet per bed provided at the facility; shall be in a
location not adjacent to the public right of way; and shall be visibly separated from public view by a minimum six foot (6') tall visual screening.
E. Hours of intake shall be between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. No release before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
F. A minimum of one employee per fifteen (15) beds, in addition to security personnel, shall be on duty and remain on site during operational hours
whenever clients are on the site.
G. Security personnel shall be provided during operational hours whenever clients are on the site and when people are waiting outside the facility.
H. Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor area of the site consistent with the provisions of section 5-6-1101 of this code and subsection
10-3-2730.2D of this chapter.
Exterior lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights of way, and be of an intensity compatible with the
neighborhood and the regulations in this code.
I. A minimum of one parking space for every ten (10) beds, plus one-half (1/2) parking space for each bedroom designated for families with children, plus
one parking space for each employee/volunteer on duty, shall be maintained. The number of parking spaces may be reduced by twenty five percent
(25%) if the shelter is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of a public transit stop. Bicycle rack parking shall also be provided at the facility.
J. The facility may provide the following services and facilities to clients in a designated area separate from the sleeping areas:
1. A recreation area either inside or outside the shelter. If located outside, the area shall be screened from public view.
2. A counseling center for job placement, educational, healthcare, legal, or mental health services.
3. Laundry facilities to serve the number of occupants at the shelter.
4. Kitchen for the preparation of meals.
5. Dining hall.
6. Client storage areas (i.e., for the overnight storage of bicycles and personal items).
7. Similar services supporting the needs of homeless occupants.
K. The operator of the facility shall provide, at the city's request, an annual report of the use of the facility and determination of compliance with the city's
development standards for the use.
L. A management plan shall be submitted to, reviewed, approved and enforced by the director of community development. The management plan shall be
approved before issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The management plan shall be comprehensive and shall address hours of operation,
admission hours and process, staff training, neighborhood outreach and privacy, security, resident counseling and treatment, maintenance plans,
residency and guest rules and procedures, and staffing needs, including job descriptions.
M. Operation of vehicles to transport residents shall not generate vehicular traffic substantially greater than normally generated by residential activities in
surrounding areas.
N. Arrangements for delivery of goods shall be made within hours that are compatible with existing codes and will not adversely affect livability of
surrounding properties.
O. The facility shall not generate noise or lighting at levels adversely affecting livability of surrounding properties. (Ord. 12-O-2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
10-3-1276: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING (SRO):
In addition to the requirements of article 38 of this chapter, single room occupancy housing shall be subject to the following standards:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 542/797
A. Unit Size And Occupancy: The minimum size of a unit shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet and the maximum size shall be three hundred
seventy five (375) square feet which may include bathroom and/or kitchen facilities.
B. Common Area: A minimum of ten (10) square feet for each unit shall be provided for a common area. All common areas shall be within the structure.
Dining rooms, meeting rooms, recreational rooms, or other similar areas approved by the city shall be considered common areas. Shared bathrooms
and kitchens shall not be considered as common areas.
C. Management: A single room occupancy management plan shall be submitted to, reviewed, approved, and enforced by the director of community
development. The management plan shall be approved before issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The management plan shall be comprehensive
and contain management policies and operations, rental procedures and rates, maintenance plans, residency and guest rules and procedures, security
procedures, and staffing needs, including job descriptions. A twenty four (24) hour resident manager shall be provided for any single room occupancy
use with twelve (12) or more units.
D. Parking: A minimum of 0.5 on site parking spaces shall be provided per unit, plus one guest space for every five (5) units.
E. Kitchen Facilities: Each unit shall be provided a kitchen sink with a garbage disposal, serviced with hot and cold water, and a countertop measuring a
minimum of eighteen inches (18") wide by twenty four inches (24") deep. If each individual unit is not provided with a minimum of a refrigerator and a
microwave oven, a complete kitchen facility available for residents shall be provided on each floor of the structure.
F. Bathroom Facilities: For each unit a private toilet in an enclosed compartment with a door shall be provided. This compartment shall be a minimum of
fifteen (15) square feet. If private bathing facilities are not provided for each unit, shared shower or bathtub facilities shall be provided at a ratio of one
for every seven (7) units or fraction thereof. The shared shower or bathtub facility shall be on the same floor as the units it is intended to serve and
shall be accessible from a common area or hallway. Each shared shower or bathtub facility shall be provided with an interior lockable door. (Ord. 12-O-
2633, eff. 11-23-2012)
Footnote 1: HSC § 50675.14.
Footnote 2: HSC § 50675.14(b)(3).
Article 12.8. Multiple-Family Congregate Housing For Elderly And Disabled Persons
10-3-1280: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide the opportunity for the construction of congregate rental housing for elderly and disabled citizens to meet the
unique requirements and demonstrated needs of elderly and disabled households and at costs lower than other market rate rental housing built under
existing standards for the general population. It is also the objective to locate this type of housing in or near areas which have the conveniences,
amenities, and services appropriate for elderly and disabled persons and to avoid the concentration of elderly and disabled housing in any single area.
(Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1281: MULTIPLE-FAMILY CONGREGATE HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABLED DEFINED:
"Multiple-family congregate housing for the elderly and disabled" is defined as a project which meets the following criteria:
A. All units are occupied by one or more of the following categories of occupants:
1. A household in which each member is sixty five (65) years or older; or
2. A household in which a spouse is sixty five (65) years or older; or
3. A household headed by a disabled person who has a physical impairment which:
a. Is expected to be of a long, continued, and indefinite duration; or
b. Substantially impedes the person's ability to live independently; or
c. Is of such nature that the person's ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing conditions; and
4. One unit may be occupied by a household which does not meet the requirements of subsections A1, A2, and A3 of this section, provided the unit is
occupied for the specific purpose of managing and/or operating the project; and
B. Provides the following services:
1. Three (3) nutritionally well balanced meals and snacks, including low salt or other modified diets prescribed by a physician as a medical necessity;
2. Self-operated laundry facilities, including washing machines and dryers, in each residential building;
3. Maid service for dwelling units;
4. Laundry service;
5. Convenient, regularly scheduled private transportation service;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 543/797
6. A planned and supervised activity program for the residents;
7. Areas set aside for activity programs and passive uses by the residents; and
8. An emergency in-house call system and a resident/management communication switchboard, staffed and located on the premises on a twenty four
(24) hour basis. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1282: PERMITTED AREAS:
Multiple-family congregate housing for elderly and disabled persons shall require a conditional use permit and may be permitted in the R-4 zone on sites
that satisfy all of the following criteria:
A. The project site is located in an area with four- or five-story height limits; and
B. The project site is located adjacent to commercially zoned areas; and
C. The project site is separated from adjacent commercial areas by an alley; and
D. The project site is located on a street greater than thirty feet (30') in width.
Multiple-family congregate housing for elderly and disabled persons may also be permitted in any other zone which specifically permits such use. (Ord.
87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1283: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
A. The planning commission may grant a conditional use permit pursuant to article 38 of this chapter, and without a mandatory environmental impact
report, for multiple-family congregate housing for elderly and disabled persons if the application meets the criteria for a conditional use permit, and the
planning commission makes the additional findings that:
1. The proposed site for such use has shopping, medical, recreation, transportation, and other essential services for elderly and disabled persons
within reasonable proximity to the site, and the site is located in an area which permits adequate access and circulation and is not unreasonably
subject to, or impacted by, traffic, noise, or other adverse environmental factors;
2. Vehicle traffic generated for the project does not significantly increase traffic congestion, circulation, or parking problems on neighboring residential
streets; and
3. The design of the project is compatible with the surrounding area.
B. Any conditional use permit granted pursuant to subsection A of this section shall include the following conditions:
1. Provisions for private transportation accommodations servicing the facility to further reduce parking and traffic impacts of the use;
2. Provisions for a supervised activity program to enhance the quality of life for inhabitants of the project;
3. The facility provides a plan for the specialized twenty four (24) hour supervised safety requirements of the residents, including a fire protection
system and an emergency contingency plan acceptable to the fire chief; and
4. Approval of the project will not result in an overconcentration of multiple-family congregate housing for elderly and disabled persons in the area
surrounding the project site in a manner that would result in an adverse impact to the surrounding neighborhood or the residents of the proposed
project. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1284: SITE AREA AND DENSITY:
A. The maximum site area for multiple-family congregate housing for the elderly and the disabled shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
B. The density shall not exceed one hundred sixty five (165) units per acre; provided, however, the maximum number of units which may be constructed
on any one site shall not exceed one hundred thirteen (113) units. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1285: DWELLING UNIT REQUIREMENTS:
Each dwelling unit in multiple-family congregate housing for the elderly and disabled shall contain a separate bathroom equipped with a shower or tub, or
both, and a toilet and wash basin; shall not include more than two (2) bedrooms; and shall have a minimum floor area of not less than the following:
A. Four hundred fifty (450) square feet for an efficiency unit. An "efficiency dwelling unit" is defined as a unit which has a combined living and sleeping
area and a separate bathroom;
B. Five hundred (500) square feet for a one-bedroom unit; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 544/797
C. Eight hundred (800) square feet for a two-bedroom unit. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1286: PARKING:
One parking space shall be provided for each efficiency or one-bedroom dwelling unit, and one and one-half (11/2) parking spaces shall be provided for
each two-bedroom unit; provided, however, the number of parking spaces required by this section may be reduced by the planning commission by fivetenths
(5/10) of a parking space for each dwelling unit if the planning commission finds that the parking required by this section is demonstrated to be in
excess of the amount of parking which will be required to adequately serve the project.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any property which receives a reduction in the number of required parking spaces per dwelling unit
pursuant to this section, and all residents of the dwelling units located thereon, shall be ineligible to participate in a preferential parking zone established
pursuant to title 7, chapter 3, article 2 of this code. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 03-O-2432, eff. 11-21-2003)
10-3-1287: RECREATION SPACE:
A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per unit of usable common indoor/outdoor recreation space shall be provided for the use of the
occupants of any multiple-family congregate housing project for elderly and disabled persons. Required front setbacks shall not be included in calculating
recreational space under this section. For the purposes of this section, "usable common recreation space" shall include resident activity areas for
socializing, entertainment, and other active or passive uses. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1288: DINING FACILITIES:
Dining facilities shall be provided for each multiple-family congregate housing project, and such facilities shall include kitchen facilities and complete meal
service.
A. Dining facilities shall be restricted to the residents of the building and their guests and employees who work in the facility.
B. The dining facility shall not be open to the general public and shall not have exterior signage.
C. The main entrance to the dining facility shall not have direct access to a public right of way.
D. A separate service entrance with an adequate loading area shall be provided for the dining facility kitchen. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987)
10-3-1289: CONVENIENCE RETAIL USES:
Multiple-family congregate housing sites for elderly and disabled persons may have commercial uses provided each of the following conditions is met:
A. Any commercial use is oriented toward convenience retail uses and services catering to the needs of the residents of the facility.
B. The total floor area occupied by such uses shall not exceed an amount, as determined by the planning commission, to be compatible with the purpose
of this article and deemed sufficient to meet the needs of the residents of the facility.
C. Such commercial uses shall be restricted to residents, guests, and employees of the facility, and shall not have direct access from the public right of
way, and shall not have exterior signage. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-1290: CONVERTIBILITY OF USES TO CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL UNITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 8-11-1998)
10-3-1291: RENTAL INCREASES:
Rental increases for a unit shall not exceed one per year, except that any time a voluntary vacancy occurs, the rent may be increased to the new
occupant. For the purposes of this section, "rent" shall include, but not be limited to, housing services, or other services, received by the occupant and
shall also include those congregate services described in section 10-3-1281 of this article and such conditions as may be imposed by the conditional use
permit. A minimum of sixty (60) days' prior written notice of any increase shall be provided to each occupant.
For the purposes of this section, "housing services" shall mean all services connected with the use or occupancy of an apartment unit, including, but not
limited to, repairs, replacement, maintenance, painting, light, heat, water, elevator service, laundry facilities and privileges, janitor service, refuse removal,
furnishings, telephone, off street parking, and any other benefits, privileges, or facilities. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987)
10-3-1292: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 545/797
Any building approved for multiple-family congregate housing for elderly and disabled persons shall comply with all the provisions and regulations of the
zone in which such housing is located, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 87-O-1995, eff. 8-6-1987; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
Article 13. Residential Income And Multiple Dwelling Zone (R-4X1)
10-3-1301: USES AND BUILDINGS PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building, or portion thereof in zone R-4X1 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered,
enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except for single- or multiple-family residential purposes. (1962 Code § 10-322; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-
1992)
10-3-1302: LOT 313, TRACT 7710; RETAIL BUSINESS PERMITTED:
Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, lot 313, tract 7710 may continue to be used for the present retail business use to the extent now so
used, but if such use is at any time discontinued, this exception shall no longer be of any force or effect. (1962 Code § 10-323)
10-3-1303: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not repeal, supersede, or affect the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, including the other sections of
this chapter, except insofar as the provisions of such other ordinances or resolutions may tend to permit building construction or property or building uses
other than those permitted in this article, in which case the provisions of this article shall supersede any conflicting provision of any other ordinance or
resolution. (1962 Code § 10-324)
10-3-1304: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-4X1 except for the business of an apartment house. All property and buildings in zone R-4X1 hereby are limited to
residential uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 14. Multiple Residential Zone (R-4X2)
10-3-1401: ZONE R-4X2; VARIANCES FOR PARKING:
The property designated as zone R-4X2 shall continue to be zoned, limited, and restricted as provided in article 12 of this chapter. No variances shall be
granted to permit the use of any property in zone R-4X2 for the parking of automobiles in connection with any property in any C-3 zone or in connection
with any retail or business use, nor shall any of such property ever be used for any retail business or commercial use without a vote of the electors of the
city if the P-zone ordinance is adopted. (1962 Code § 10-330)
Article 15. Multiple Residential Zone (R-3)
10-3-1501: ZONE R-3 CREATED:
There hereby is created a residential income or multiple dwelling zone designated zone R-3. (1962 Code § 10-326)
10-3-1502: USES PERMITTED:
A. Uses And Buildings Permitted And Conditionally Permitted: Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no lot premises, building or portion thereof
in zone R-3 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except for single- or multiple-family residential
purposes.
Those uses conditionally permitted in zone R-4 shall be conditionally permitted in zone R-3 pursuant to the procedures provided in article 12 of this
chapter.
B. Lot Area: The minimum lot area for any apartment house constructed in zone R-3 shall be not less than one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square
feet per dwelling unit.
C. Dwelling Unit Defined: "Dwelling unit", as used in this section, shall mean one or more rooms in a dwelling or apartment house designed for or occupied
by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having not more than one kitchen.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 546/797
D. Height Limit Of Buildings: No building or structure shall exceed twenty eight feet (28') in height.
E. Automobile Parking Requirements: Automobile parking space shall be provided in all buildings in accordance with the other provisions of this chapter
applicable to automobile parking space in buildings designed or intended to be used for human habitation.
F. Accessory Buildings: The usual accessory buildings appurtenant to the occupancy may be erected, created, constructed, and maintained on the same
lot or parcel of land, together with any of such buildings or occupancies or contiguous thereto on the same lot where the same is not in conflict with any
state law or other law of the city.
G. Other Provisions Applicable: Except as otherwise provided in this code referring specifically to zone R-3, the provisions applicable to zone R-1 shall
apply. (1962 Code § 10-327; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1503: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-3, except the business of an apartment house. All property and buildings in zone R-3 hereby are limited to residential
uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-3-2001)
Article 15.2. Residential Density Bonus
10-3-1520: PURPOSE:
This article specifies the method of providing developer incentives pursuant to California Government Code sections 65915 and 65915.5, or any successor
statutes thereto, and provides procedures for waiving or modifying development procedures which would otherwise inhibit the utilization of density bonus
incentives on specific sites. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1521: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
CHILDCARE FACILITY: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by California Government Code section 65915, or its successor statute.
DENSITY BONUS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by California Government Code section 65915, or its successor statute.
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLDS: Includes lower income households, persons and families of low or moderate income, qualifying senior residents, and very low
income households.
ELIGIBLE UNITS: Dwelling units that are restricted to occupancy by eligible households.
LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLDS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by California Health And Safety Code section 50079.5, or its
successor statute.
PERSONS AND FAMILIES OF LOW OR MODERATE INCOME: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to those terms by California Health And Safety
Code section 50093, or its successor statute.
QUALIFYING SENIOR RESIDENT: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to the term "qualifying resident" by section 51.3 of the California Civil Code, or
its successor statute.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by section 51.3 of the California Civil Code, or its
successor statute.
VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to that term by California Health And Safety Code section 50105, or its
successor. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1522: DENSITY BONUS PERMIT REQUIRED:
No developer shall be granted a density bonus or other incentive pursuant to this article unless that developer has been issued a density bonus permit
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1523: APPLICABILITY OF OTHER REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically authorized by a density bonus permit, no development shall be constructed pursuant to this article except in compliance
with each provision of this chapter that is applicable to the zone in which the development is located, including any requirement for discretionary review of
a development project, such as development plan review. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1524: APPLICATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 547/797
In addition to any other discretionary review required for a proposed housing project, applications for a density bonus permit shall be filed with the director
of community development on a form approved by the director. The application shall be filed concurrently with an application for a development plan
review. The fee for processing a density bonus permit application shall be one-half (1/2) the fee for processing a development plan review application.
(Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1525: REVIEW OF APPLICATION:
The planning commission shall process the application for a density bonus permit in the same manner as, and concurrently with, the application for a
development plan review that is required by article 31 of this chapter for development of a density bonus project. Public noticing shall be completed in
accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-1526: GRANT OF DENSITY BONUS:
A. Section 65915 Projects: Except as otherwise provided in this article, the planning commission shall grant a density bonus permit to any project for which
a density bonus and incentives or concessions are required pursuant to California Government Code section 65915. The density bonus permit shall
provide for a density bonus and at least one of the construction incentives described in section 10-3-1526.5 of this article in accordance with the
following criteria:
1. Base Density Bonus:
a. The planning commission shall grant a density bonus permit that authorizes development of a project with a twenty percent (20%) density bonus
and at least one of the construction incentives set forth in section 10-3-1526.5 of this chapter when the applicant for a housing development
agrees to construct at least any one of the following:
(1) Five percent (5%) of the total units of a housing development for very low income households; or
(2) Ten percent (10%) of the total units of a housing development for lower income households; or
(3) A senior citizen housing development.
b. The planning commission shall grant a density bonus permit that authorizes development of a project with a five percent (5%) density bonus and
at least one of the construction incentives set forth in section 10-3-1526.5 of this chapter when the applicant for the housing development agrees
to construct ten percent (10%) of the total dwelling units in a condominium project, as defined in subdivision (f) of section 1351 of the California
Civil Code or its successor statute, or in a planned development, as defined in subdivision (k) of section 1351 of the California Civil Code or its
successor statute, for persons and families of moderate income.
2. Additional Density Bonus: In addition to the base density bonus granted by the planning commission pursuant to subsection A1 of this section, a
density bonus permit issued pursuant to this article shall authorize an additional density bonus under the following circumstances:
a. For each one percent (1%) increase in the number of units above the initial five percent (5%) threshold of units affordable to very low income
households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent (2.5%) up to a maximum of thirty five percent (35%); or
b. For each one percent (1%) increase in the number of units above the initial ten percent (10%) threshold of units affordable to lower income
households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent (1.5%) up to a maximum of thirty five percent (35%); or
c. For each one percent (1%) increase in the number of units in a condominium development above the initial ten percent (10%) threshold of units
affordable to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent (1%) up to a maximum of thirty five percent
(35%).
B. Section 65915.5 Projects: If the city is required to issue a density bonus under California Government Code section 65915.5, the density bonus permit
shall authorize development of a project with either a twenty five percent (25%) density bonus or with other incentives that are of equivalent financial
value to the twenty five percent (25%) density bonus. Such other incentives shall be limited to financial incentives or any combination of density bonus,
financial incentives, and construction incentives set forth in this section and section 10-3-1526.5 of this chapter.
With regard to construction incentives granted pursuant to this section, any requirement to designate units for lower income or very low income
households may be satisfied by designating such units for persons and families of low and moderate income. Similarly, for the purpose of construction
incentives granted pursuant to this section, any reference in section 10-3-1526.5 of this chapter to units designated for lower and very low income
households shall include units designated for persons and families of low and moderate income.
C. Fractional Units: For the purposes of this section, all density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
(Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1526.5: GRANT OF CONSTRUCTION INCENTIVES:
A. Number Of Incentives: In addition to the density bonus granted pursuant to section 10-3-1526 of this article, an applicant for any project for which a
density bonus and incentives or concessions are required pursuant to California Government Code section 65915 shall be entitled to receive the
following number of construction incentives:
1. One incentive for a project that includes at least ten percent (10%) of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent (5%) for very
low income households, or at least ten percent (10%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development.
2. Two (2) incentives for a project that includes at least twenty percent (20%) of the total units for lower income households, at least ten percent (10%)
for very low income households, or at least twenty percent (20%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 548/797
3. Three (3) incentives for a project that includes at least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen percent
(15%) for very low income households, or at least thirty percent (30%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development.
B. Qualifying Incentives: The exact construction incentive(s) to be offered to a project that qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to Government Code
section 65915 and section 10-3-1526 of this article shall be determined by the planning commission as part of its review of each application.
C. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, with regard to developments that qualify for a construction incentive pursuant to California
Government Code section 65915, the planning commission need not provide a construction incentive in addition to the applicable density bonus if the
commission makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that either:
1. The requested incentive is not required to encourage the provision of housing at affordable housing costs as defined in California Health and Safety
Code section 50052.5 nor is the incentive necessary to encourage the provision of housing at rents that are set as specified in California
Government Code section 65915; or
2. The requested incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in California Government Code section 65589.5 or its successor statute,
upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and
for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to
low and moderate income households. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1527: LAND DONATIONS; CHILDCARE FACILITIES:
A. Land Donations: If an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city as
provided in California Government Code section 65915, or its successor statute, the planning commission shall grant a density bonus permit that
authorizes a density bonus as required by section 65915, or its successor statute.
B. Childcare Facilities: If the applicant for a project that qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to section 10-3-1526 of this article proposed to include a
childcare facility on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the planning commission shall grant the applicant one of the following:
1. An additional density bonus in an amount equal to or greater to the square footage in the childcare facility; or
2. An additional construction incentive set forth in section 10-3-1526.5 of this article that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the
construction of the childcare facility.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the planning commission shall not grant an additional density bonus or construction incentive for a childcare facility if,
the commission finds, based on substantial evidence, that the community is already served by adequate childcare facilities. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-
16-2005)
10-3-1528: OCCUPANCY PRIORITY:
A. Displaced Tenants: If tenants are required to vacate existing dwelling units so that an owner or developer may perform any construction, renovation or
addition pursuant to a density bonus permit, then each tenant shall be given a right of first refusal to occupy any unit for which the tenant qualifies in the
newly constructed or renovated building. Tenants shall be offered the units in the following priority:
1. Households in which at least one member is sixty two (62) years of age or older;
2. Households with the lowest annual income.
B. Lower And Very Low Income Households: After accommodating displaced tenants as provided in subsection A of this section, during the affordability
period described in section 10-3-1529 of this article for rental units designated for lower and very low income households, and subject to any limitations
imposed by federal or state law, the owner or developer shall offer the designated affordable units in the following priority:
1. Qualified households in which at least one member is:
a. Employed by the Beverly Hills Unified School District as a state certified classroom teacher; or
b. Employed by the Beverly Hills police department as a sworn law enforcement officer; or
c. Employed by the Beverly Hills fire department as a sworn firefighter;
2. Households with the lowest annual income;
3. All other qualified households.
C. Moderate Income Households:
During the initial sale of units designated for sale to moderate income households, and subject to any limitations imposed by federal or state law, the
owner or developer shall offer the designated units in the following priority:
1. Qualified households in which at least one member is:
a. Employed by the Beverly Hills Unified School District as a state certified classroom teacher; or
b. Employed by the Beverly Hills police department as a sworn law enforcement officer; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 549/797
c. Employed by the Beverly Hills fire department as a sworn firefighter;
2. Households with the lowest annual income;
3. All other qualified households. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1529: ELIGIBILITY GUARANTEES:
Prior to the construction of a development project pursuant to a density bonus permit, the developer shall ensure continued affordability of units designated
for lower and very low income households to the satisfaction of the city attorney and as required by California Government Code section 65915 or its
successor statute.
Also prior to the construction of a development project pursuant to a density bonus permit, with regard to dwelling units designated for qualifying senior
residents, the developer shall ensure continued restriction of those units to qualifying senior residents and qualified permanent residents to the satisfaction
of the city attorney and as provided in California Civil Code section 51.3 or its successor statute.
Additionally, prior to the issuance of a density bonus permit for a development in which the units will be sold to moderate income households, the
developer shall ensure that the initial occupants of such units meet the applicable income limits to the satisfaction of the city attorney and as required by
California Government Code section 65915 or its successor statute. In addition, the developer shall ensure that, upon resale, the city recaptures its
proportionate share of the appreciation of such units to the satisfaction of the city attorney and as required by California Government Code section 65915
or its successor statute. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1529.5: WAIVERS:
In addition to any construction incentive requested by an applicant pursuant to section 10-3-1526.5 of this article, if an applicant for a density bonus permit
demonstrates that certain zoning or development standards are the sole reason that eligible units cannot be developed in an economically feasible manner
on a specific site, and the applicant demonstrates that no other incentive provided in this article will cause development of the eligible units to become
economically feasible, then the planning commission may grant a waiver of the subject zoning or development standards as part of the density bonus
permit. The applicant shall bear the burden of proving, through substantial evidence, that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the affordable
housing units economically feasible. At a minimum, any request for a waiver of zoning or development standards pursuant to this section shall be
accompanied by a pro forma or other financial analysis prepared by a qualified expert demonstrating that the proposed waiver or modification is necessary
to make the affordable units economically feasible. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1530: APPEALS:
Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this article may be appealed by the applicant or any other interested party as provided in title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
10-3-1530.5: GUIDELINES:
All applications for a density bonus permit shall be processed pursuant to the guidelines for density bonus permit applications approved by the city council
and on file in the department of community development. (Ord. 05-O-2482, eff. 9-16-2005)
Article 15.3. Residential-Parking Zone (R-4-P)
10-3-1531: CREATION OF THE R-4-P ZONE:
There is hereby created a residential parking zone (R-4-P). (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1532: OBJECTIVES OF THE R-4-P ZONE:
For the purposes of article 18.4 of this chapter regarding planned development, the objectives of the R-4-P zone shall be as follows:
A. To ensure that there is an appropriate transition and buffer zone between commercial uses and residential uses.
B. To protect the health, safety and welfare of residents in the R-4X2 zone.
C. To ensure that the scale of development in the R-4-P zone provides a transition that balances the scale of development in adjacent commercial and
residential zones. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1533: USES PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided or restricted by this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the R-4-P zone shall be used for any purpose
except the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 550/797
A. Multiple-family dwelling units.
B. Retail ancillary uses that are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
C. Ancillary parking facilities that are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord.
91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1534: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
Those residential uses conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone shall also be permitted in the R-4-P zone if authorized by a conditional use permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1535: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article.
ANCILLARY PARKING FACILITIES: Parking facilities that are accessory to, and service, a "retail department store", as defined in article 18.2 of this
chapter, or other commercial office or retail uses.
RETAIL ANCILLARY USES: Loading uses, storage uses, mechanical equipment operations, transformers, and similar uses which are accessory to, and
service, a "retail department store", as defined in article 18.2 of this chapter, or other retail use located in a C-R-PD zone. "Retail ancillary uses" shall not
include parking uses or any use that includes floor area accessible to customers of a retail department store. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1536: ZONING RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, those regulations governing the development of multiple-family dwellings in the R-4 zone shall also govern the
development of multiple-family dwellings in the R-4-P zone. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1537: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUFFER:
Notwithstanding any other transition requirements between residential and nonresidential zones, the following buffers shall be provided between
residential uses of the R-4-P or R-4X2 zones and nonresidential uses of either the C-R-PD or R-4-P zones. The buffers shall be provided in the R-4-P
zone, and if residential development is constructed in the R-4-P zone, then the buffer shall be provided on a site area that contains a residential use.
A. Surface And Below Grade Parking: If on any one block, only surface and below grade parking is provided within ninety feet (90') of R-4X2 zoned
property, then a minimum eighteen foot (18') wide alley and a minimum nine foot (9') wide area of landscaping shall be provided between residential
and nonresidential uses. At least two feet (2') of this nine foot (9') area of landscaping shall be provided between the alley and the nonresidential use.
B. Above Grade Parking: If above grade parking, other than surface parking, is provided on the same block and within ninety feet (90') of R-4X2 zoned
property, then a minimum twenty foot (20') wide alley and a minimum ten foot (10') wide area of landscaping shall be provided between residential and
nonresidential uses. At least three feet (3') of this ten foot (10') area of landscaping shall be provided between the alley and the nonresidential use.
C. Maximum Height Of Structures: The maximum height of structures that are appurtenant to the parking facility, such as lighting standards, vents and
elevator shafts, shall be established by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
D. Buffer: Within the R-4-P zone, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer shall be provided between residential and nonresidential uses. The buffer shall include
a minimum twenty foot (20') alley and a minimum of ten feet (10') of landscaping. Each side of the alley shall have not less than three feet (3') of
landscaping. The buffer shall be provided by the developer of the new use when such use is different in kind from the existing contiguous use. For the
purposes of this section, a vacant lot shall not be treated as a different use.
In lieu of an alley required under subsection A, B, or D of this section, the planning commission may require a landscaped area of equivalent width as
part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
The landscaped areas required by this section shall conform to a landscaping plan that is reviewed by the planning commission as part of a planned
development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. The landscaped areas shall provide a visual buffer between residential and nonresidential uses.
(Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2150, eff. 9-11-1992)
10-3-1538: RETAIL ANCILLARY USES:
A. Any retail ancillary use located in the R-4-P zone shall be set back at least ninety feet (90') from all R-4X2 zoned property that is not otherwise
separated from such use by a public street.
B. Retail ancillary uses located in the R-4-P zone shall maintain a fifteen foot (15') setback along any public street unless a lesser setback is established
by the planning commission as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 551/797
C. Structures containing retail ancillary uses located in the R-4-P zone shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height unless the planning commission
establishes a different maximum height as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. The planning commission
shall not establish a maximum height that exceeds thirty five feet (35') or allows the height of the roof plate to exceed twenty five feet (25').
D. Loading facilities located in the R-4-P zone shall be fully enclosed. All loading and unloading operations shall take place within the enclosed loading
facility and the facility shall have subsurface access to all retail stores served by the loading facility. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1539: ANCILLARY PARKING FACILITIES:
Ancillary parking facilities shall not have vehicular access to or from any alley that also provides access to residential uses.
In addition, all ancillary parking facilities located in the R-4-P zone shall be governed by the following restrictions:
A. Between Peck Drive And Camden Drive: Parking facilities located between Peck Drive and Camden Drive shall not exceed a height of ten feet (10').
For the purposes of this section, height shall be measured pursuant to the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, except
that the exemptions from the height measurement contained in subsections A7 through A9 of said definition shall not apply. Furthermore,
notwithstanding the height requirements of this section and of the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, the planning
commission may require the construction of a wall surrounding the roof level of parking for the purpose of mitigating light and noise impacts from the
parking facilities.
B. Street Setback: A minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') shall be provided along all public streets unless a lesser setback is approved by the planning
commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
The wall height requirements of section 10-3-2733 and subsection 10-3-3719H of this chapter shall not apply to parking provided on the roof of a
parking facility. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1540: MIXED USES:
No lot in the R-4-P zone shall be used for both residential and nonresidential purposes. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1541: ANCILLARY PARKING FACILITY USES:
No portion of any ancillary parking facility shall be rented or leased for the purpose of providing parking for employees or patrons of uses not located in the
C-R-PD zone, unless authorized by the city council for the purpose of improving traffic and parking circulation. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1542: WALLS:
Except as otherwise provided by this section, walls shall be provided for ancillary parking facilities in accordance with section 10-3-2730.2 of this chapter
and the following:
A. Walls located in the R-4-P zone shall not exceed a height of three feet (3') if such wall is located in any required setback along a public street.
B. Walls not governed by the provisions of subsection A of this section or by the provisions of section 10-3-2730.2 of this chapter shall not exceed a height
of seven feet (7').
C. As part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, the planning commission may approve minimum wall heights that are lower
than those set forth in subsection 10-3-2730.2B of this chapter, but not lower than four feet (4'). (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2150,
eff. 9-11-1992)
10-3-1543: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-4, except the business of an apartment house. All property and buildings in zone R-4 hereby are limited to residential
uses, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 15.5. Beverly Hills Hotel Specific Plan Area
10-3-1550: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof within the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan area shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built
upon, used or occupied except for hotel and ancillary purposes consistent with the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan. However, if all hotel uses cease to exist
within the specific plan area, then the specific plan area may be used for single-family residential purposes consistent with the standards applicable to
development in the R-1.X zone. (Ord. 92-O-2151, eff. 10-9-1992)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 552/797
10-3-1551: DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and notwithstanding the location of the Beverly Hills hotel
specific plan area within the R-1.X zone, hotel and ancillary facilities development that is consistent with the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan shall not be
governed by any other regulations of this chapter governing development, including those regulations governing development in residential zones and the
provisions of article 28.6 of this chapter governing the development of hotels. (Ord. 92-O-2151, eff. 10-9-1992)
10-3-1552: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW REQUIRED:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-1551 of this article, development within the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan area shall be subject to the
provisions of article 30 of this chapter concerning architectural review. (Ord. 92-O-2151, eff. 10-9-1992)
10-3-1553: CONDITIONS ENSURING IMPLEMENTATION OF BEVERLY HILLS HOTEL SPECIFIC PLAN:
All development within the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan area shall be reviewed by the director of planning and community development, or the director's
designee, for compliance with the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan. The director shall have the authority to impose any conditions upon such development
that are not inconsistent with the Beverly Hills hotel specific plan and that are necessary or appropriate to ensure compliance with the Beverly Hills hotel
specific plan. (Ord. 92-O-2151, eff. 10-9-1992)
10-3-1554: BUSINESSES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
Except as provided in article 43 of this chapter, no business shall be conducted or maintained in any building or upon any lot or premises, or upon any
portion of either thereof, in zone R-4, except the business of a hotel. All property and buildings in zone R-4 hereby are limited to residential uses or hotel
and ancillary purposes consistent with the Beverly Hills specific plan. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 15.6. Beverly Hills Gardens Specific Plan Area
10-3-1560: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof within the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan area shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built
upon, used or occupied except as authorized by the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan. (Ord. 04-O-2452, eff. 9-3-2004)
10-3-1561: DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, development in accordance with the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan shall not be governed by any
other regulations of this chapter governing development, including, without limitation, those regulations governing development in commercial zones and
the provisions of article 28.6 of this chapter governing the development of hotels. (Ord. 04-O-2452, eff. 9-3-2004)
10-3-1562: CONDITIONS ENSURING IMPLEMENTATION OF BEVERLY HILLS GARDENS SPECIFIC PLAN:
All development within the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan area shall be reviewed by the director of community development, or the director's
designee, for compliance with the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan. The director shall have the authority to impose any conditions upon such
development that are not inconsistent with the Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan and that are necessary or appropriate to ensure compliance with the
Beverly Hills Gardens specific plan. (Ord. 04-O-2452, eff. 9-3-2004)
Article 15.7. 9900 Wilshire Specific Plan
10-3-1570: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, roadway, open space, building or portion thereof within the area of the 9900 Wilshire specific plan shall be erected, constructed, built,
altered, enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except as authorized by and in conformance with the 9900 Wilshire specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2550, eff. 7-4-
2008)
10-3-1571: DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter and chapter 4 of this title, development in accordance with the 9900 Wilshire specific plan shall not be
governed by any other regulations of this chapter or chapter 4 of this title governing development, including, without limitation, those regulations governing
development in commercial zones, unless otherwise provided in the specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2550, eff. 7-4-2008)
10-3-1572: CONDITIONS ENSURING IMPLEMENTATION OF 9900 WILSHIRE SPECIFIC PLAN:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 553/797
All development within the 9900 Wilshire specific plan shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of the 9900 Wilshire specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2550, eff.
7-4-2008)
Article 15.8. Beverly Hilton Specific Plan
10-3-1580: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, roadway, open space, building or portion thereof within the area of the Beverly Hilton specific plan shall be erected, constructed, built,
altered, enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except as authorized by and in conformance with the Beverly Hilton specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2549, eff. 6-6-
2008)
10-3-1581: DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter and chapter 4 of this title, development in accordance with the Beverly Hilton specific plan shall not be
governed by any other regulations of this chapter or chapter 4 of this title governing development, including, without limitation, those regulations governing
development in commercial zones, unless otherwise provided in the specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2549, eff. 6-6-2008)
10-3-1582: CONDITIONS ENSURING IMPLEMENTATION OF BEVERLY HILTON SPECIFIC PLAN:
All development within the Beverly Hilton specific plan shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of the Beverly Hilton specific plan. (Ord. 08-O-2549,
eff. 6-6-2008)
Article 16. Commercial Zone (C-3)
10-3-1601: USES PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone C-3 shall be used for any purpose other than the following:
Cabaret within the business triangle subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1620 of this chapter. For the purposes of this use, "business triangle" shall
mean the area bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway), and the centerline of the alley
between Canon Drive and Crescent Drive.
Cafe.
Carpenter shop.
Cinema or theater.
Conservatory.
Dancing academy.
Dressmaking or millinery store.
Exercise club.
Library.
Lunchroom.
Office (excluding medical uses).
Paint, paperhanger, or decorating shop or store.
Parking garage.
Photography gallery.
Plumbing shop.
Private training center of no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Roofing or plastering store or office.
Shop for the conducting of wholesale or retail business.
Store.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 554/797
Studio.
Tailor.
Upholsterer.
Any similar use. (1962 Code § 10-401; amd. Ord. 69-O-1349, eff. 7-1-1969; Ord. 69-O-1357, eff. 10-16-1969, retroactive to 10-1-1969; Ord. 80-O-1770,
eff. 10-2-1980; Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 02-O-2409, eff. 11-8-2002; Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1602: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS:
No building, structure, or improvement shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in zone C-3 which is designed, arranged, or
intended to be used or occupied, and no building now existing or hereafter to be constructed in zone C-3 shall be used or occupied for any purpose other
than as:
Cafe.
Carpenter shops.
Church.
Clubhouse.
Commercial garages.
Conservatories.
Dancing academies.
Dressmaking or millinery shops or stores.
Hotel.
Library.
Lunchroom.
Offices (excluding medical uses).
Paint, paperhanger, and decorating stores.
Photographic galleries.
Places of amusement.
Playground.
Plumbing shops.
Roofing or plastering stores or offices.
School.
Store or shop for conducting wholesale or retail businesses.
Studios.
Tailors.
Upholsterers.
Other similar enterprises and institutions, except as in this chapter otherwise provided. (1962 Code § 10-402; amd. Ord. 80-O-1770, eff. 10-2-1980; Ord.
11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1603: BUSINESSES EXCLUDED:
The following uses shall be prohibited in the C-3 Zone:
Adult hotels/motels and sexual encounter centers as defined in section 10-3-2771 of this chapter.
Automatic machine self-service type laundries containing more than five (5) machines of the usual household type or larger.
Car washes employing more than four (4) employees or involving machinery other than water treatment equipment as necessary to comply with local,
State and Federal law, but excepting car washes that are conditionally permitted pursuant to car washes listed in section 10-3-1604 of this article.
Dyeing establishments.
Hospitals in which patients are permitted to remain overnight.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 555/797
Machine laundries.
Medical uses as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter except for medical uses that comply with section 10-3-1620.1 of this article and cosmetic spas
that comply with section 10-3-1620.2 of this article.
Public and private stables.
Rug cleaning establishments.
Sanatoriums in which patients are permitted to remain overnight.
Self-service laundries.
Sheet metal shops.
Steam laundries.
Undertaking establishments. (1962 Code § 10-404; amd. Ord. 69-O-1349, eff. 7-1-1969; Ord. 69-O-1357, eff. 10-16-1969, retroactive to 10-1-1969; Ord.
91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; Ord. 9-O-2336, eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011;
Ord. 19-O-2786, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-1604: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3 Zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Alternative parking facilities used to provide required parking for commercial uses, excluding medical uses, pursuant to section 10-3-2730.4 of this chapter.
Amusement parks.
Brewing or manufacture of alcoholic beverages that is ancillary to a dining or bar use or is ancillary to a retail store that sells alcoholic beverages.
Car washes that:
A. Are enclosed in a building;
B. Exclusively serve a business whose operation is primarily devoted to the sales, long term leasing or rental of automobiles or other motorized
vehicles;
C. Are located on the site of the business being served; and
D. Do not exceed twenty feet (20') in width or forty feet (40') in length.
When reviewing the conditional use permit application for such car washes, the Planning Commission shall consider the conditional use permit
criteria set forth in section 10-3-1613 of this article.
Childcare uses licensed pursuant to State law.
Convenience stores not occupying a tenant space whose primary entrance opens into the interior of a commercial building.
Cosmetic spas pursuant to section 10-3-1620.2 of this article.
Drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1612 of this article.
Educational institutions.
Hotels, subject to the provisions of article 28.6 of this chapter.
Mini-shopping centers, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1611 of this article.
Museums.
Nightclubs within the business triangle, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1619 of this article. For the purposes of this use, the "business triangle"
shall mean the area bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard, south roadway, and the centerline of the
alley between Canon Drive and Crescent Drive.
Off site parking pursuant to section 10-3-2733 of this chapter.
Pet boarding facility pursuant to section 10-3-1620.3 of this article.
Private training centers of more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 556/797
Vehicles sales, service or fuel stations, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1613 of this article and not otherwise prohibited by section 10-3-1603 of
this article.
A. The establishment or expansion of any activity that qualifies as a vehicle sales, service or fuel station use shall require a separate conditional use
permit.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this use, a vehicle sales, service or fuel station that involves only the installation of vehicle accessories shall not
require a conditional use permit unless such vehicle sales, service or fuel station is located adjacent to a Residential Zone or separated from a
Residential Zone only by a public right-of-way. For the purposes of this use, the term "vehicle accessories" shall include, but not be limited to, tires
and alarms, but shall not include engine or body parts. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-
9-1994; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 98-O-2295, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 99-O-2336, eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012; Ord. 16-O-
2712, eff. 12-22-2016; Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017; Ord. 19-O-2786, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-1604.5: OVERNIGHT STAYS IN SPECIALTY CLINICS; RESTRICTIONS:
A. Overnight Stays Permitted: Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, overnight stays in specialty clinics shall be permitted, subject to the
restrictions set forth in subsection D of this section.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
OVERNIGHT: The period of each day from ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
SLEEP DISORDER CENTER: A medical facility accredited by the American Board of Sleep Medicine that provides comprehensive clinical diagnostic
evaluations and treatment to patients with symptoms that indicate the presence of a sleep disorder.
SPECIALTY CLINIC: An outpatient health facility, or clinic, licensed by the State of California or operated by a physician or dentist licensed by the
State of California, that is not part of a hospital and that provides elective, ambulatory surgical care for patients who remain less than twenty four (24)
hours. Specialty clinic shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of facilities:
1. Surgical clinics as defined by California Health and Safety Code section 1204 or its successor;
2. Sleep disorder centers, but only to the extent surgery is performed to correct sleep disorder conditions.
C. Exclusions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following uses:
1. Alternative birth centers as defined by California Health and Safety Code section 1204 or its successor;
2. Chronic dialysis clinics as defined by California Health and Safety Code or its successor;
3. Hospitals in which patients are permitted to remain overnight;
4. Rehabilitation clinics or centers, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation clinics as defined by California Health and Safety Code section 1204 or its
successor, substance abuse rehabilitation centers, and physical therapy clinics;
5. Sanitariums in which patients are permitted to remain overnight;
6. Sleep disorder centers, except to the extent surgery is performed on site to correct sleep disorders;
7. Urgent care centers, walk-in health clinics, or emergency centers which provide twenty four (24) hour patient care.
D. Restrictions: The following restrictions shall apply to any specialty clinic that allows overnight stays pursuant to this section:
1. No overnight stays shall be permitted in any specialty clinic unless the owner or operator of such clinic or center first obtains an overnight stay permit
in accordance with the provisions of article 36.5 of this chapter.
2. No more than a total of four (4) patients at one time may remain overnight in any specialty clinic, regardless of the number of physicians or surgeons
affiliated with such clinic. Nothing in this section shall supersede any federal, state, or local law regulating specialty clinics, including, but not limited
to, any regulations that regulate the number of recovery beds per operating bed that a specialty clinic must provide.
3. The building housing the specialty clinic shall provide on site parking that complies with all applicable parking requirements of this code, but in no
event shall such parking be provided at a rate less than one space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of area for all existing buildings. Such on
site parking shall be available free of charge for any employees using the facility between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M.
4. No overnight stays will be permitted at any specialty clinic on Saturday or Sunday.
5. The specialty clinic shall comply with all provisions of article 36.5 of this chapter.
6. The specialty clinic shall comply with all applicable provisions of chapter 4 of this title, including, without limitation, section 10-4-604 of this title. The
only permitted sign referring to hours of operation shall be one business identification sign for each fifty feet (50') of ground floor street frontage that a
business occupies along a face of a building.
7. The specialty clinic shall comply with all applicable building codes.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 557/797
8. The specialty clinic shall not discharge patients between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. For the purposes of this
section, "discharge" shall mean to release the patient from the specialty clinic.
9. Overnight stays in a specialty clinic shall only be permitted for patients who are recovering from surgeries performed at that specialty clinic earlier in
the day.
10. The specialty clinic shall not perform any surgeries between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent a specialty clinic from administering emergency care between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. to a patient recovering from an earlier surgery performed at the same specialty clinic.
11. The specialty clinic shall permit no more than one family member or other visitors of patients to stay at the clinic or center during overnight hours.
12. The specialty clinic shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, including, without limitation, all licensing requirements established
by the appropriate governing body.
13. The specialty clinic shall not receive deliveries nor permit any loading or unloading activities during the overnight hours unless: a) the deliveries,
loading, or unloading operation is conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, or b) the deliveries, loading, or unloading operation is conducted
exclusively from a public right of way that is not adjacent to a residential zone or RMCP zone.
14. All doors in the specialty clinic which face a residential zone shall remain closed at all times during the overnight hours except from the immediate
purpose of ingress or egress.
15. Employees of the specialty clinic shall not congregate behind the building housing the specialty clinic or in any open area or public right of way
separating the building from a residential zone or RMCP zone during overnight hours.
16. Specialty clinics, or the physicians or dentists who operate such specialty clinics, must be licensed by the state of California. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff.
2-8-2002; amd. Ord. 04-O-2439, eff. 2-6-2004)
10-3-1605: MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENTS; RESTRICTIONS:
A. Occupancy Permits; Applications; Fees: Except as otherwise authorized by article 43 of this chapter, all manufacturing of every kind and character and
to any degree or extent shall be expressly prohibited in all residential zones in the city. All manufacturing of every kind and character and to any degree
or extent shall be expressly prohibited in zone C-3 unless a preliminary permit shall have been obtained from the building and safety director after a
hearing concerning the location and the proposed use to determine that the proposed manufacturing will not be a detriment to the neighborhood or
objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, vibration, or other attributes of the proposed use.
Applications for such preliminary permits shall be made to the building and safety department setting forth in general the use proposed, the type of
building proposed, and any and all details the applicant wishes to be considered to indicate that the proposed use will not be a nuisance and that the
building proposed will be adequate for the use intended. A hearing on such application shall be held before the director of building and safety, the city
manager, the director of public works, the chief of the fire department, and the police chief, or their duly authorized representatives, as a committee.
Any interested person may appeal to the city council from action of the committee as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
B. Use Of Front Portion Of Building: No manufacturing shall be permitted unless the front portion of the ground floor of the building used or proposed to be
used for such manufacturing is constructed, designed, and used for the purposes provided for in section 10-3-1601 of this article.
No manufacturing establishment in which any substantial portion of the product fabricated or manufactured is not sold at retail on the premises shall be
permitted in any portion of zone C-3 which adjoins any residential zone. Premises shall be deemed to adjoin even though separated by a street or alley
or other easement.
C. Sale Of Products: The fact that the major portion of the manufactured product is to be sold at retail on the premises may be a factor considered by the
city in granting a variance for such manufacturing, and the fact that the major portion of the manufactured product is to be sold at wholesale or is to be
sold at retail at other locations may be a factor considered by the city in denying such variance but shall not be controlling.
D. Storage Areas; Fences: Any storage area outside a building to be used in connection with such manufacturing shall be enclosed by a solid wall or
noninflammable fence, and no material shall be stored in such area to a height greater than that of the wall or fence enclosing the storage area. No
such fence adjoining or separated by only a street or alley from a residential area shall exceed six feet (6') in height.
E. Power: The type and amount of power to be used in such manufacturing shall be considered by the city, and exceptionally high voltage or amperage
may be a cause for denying the proposed variance.
F. Revocation Of Occupancy Permit: After the granting of a permit by the city and the issuance of an occupancy permit, and after such manufacturing has
begun, the superintendent of the building department, if he finds from investigation that odor, dust, smoke, fumes, noise, vibration, or other attributes of
such manufacturing may be or become a detriment to the neighborhood or objectionable to the residents in the neighborhood, may require the
installation of additional equipment or alteration or addition to the manufacturing establishment to prevent such detriment or objection, and upon failure
to make such changes in accordance with his directions within a reasonable time, the occupancy permit may be suspended or revoked, or the permit
may be referred back to the council for further action.
G. Granting Of Permit; Violations: An occupancy permit for such manufacturing business shall be granted by the building department to the owner or
operator of such business only after a permit for such use has been obtained from the city, and any manufacturing in zone C-3 without such occupancy
permit or such special permit, in violation of any condition of such permit shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor for each and every day such
manufacturing continues. (1962 Code § 10-406; amd. Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-1606: STORAGE WAREHOUSES; RESTRICTIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 558/797
No furniture storage warehouse or wholesale storage warehouse shall be erected, constructed, established, maintained, used, or occupied in zones R-1,
R-1.5, and R-4, and any and all such uses, occupancies, establishments, and buildings, and any combinations thereof, are hereby expressly excluded
from zones R-1, R-1.5, and R-4. No furniture storage warehouse, wholesale warehouse, or combination warehouse shall be permitted in zone C-3 unless
the front portion of the ground floor of any building along and adjoining the public street to be used for either of such purposes is constructed, designed,
and used as an office or for such other retail business as is provided for in zone C-3 in section 10-3-1601 of this article. (1962 Code § 10-405)
10-3-1607: DRY CLEANING PLANTS; RESTRICTIONS:
Dry cleaning plants and pressing plants of all kinds shall be excluded from zones R-1, R-1.5, and R-4 and shall be only permitted in zone C-3 under the
following conditions:
A. Noise And Odor: No noise, odor, or other evidence of dry cleaning or pressing shall be detectable by a person outside such building or outside the
portion of the building used for cleaning or pressing.
B. Cleaning Fluid And Capacity: No explosive or inflammable cleaning fluid shall be used in dry cleaning plants except when used in self-contained
cleaning machines or units and unless the same has a flash point of not less than 138.5 degrees Fahrenheit. Any such installation shall be in
conformity with the state fire marshal and the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state.
C. One Dry Cleaning Unit Only: No more than one complete unit of dry cleaning equipment or machinery shall be installed in one premises.
D. Retail Dry Cleaning And Pressing Only: The business of dry cleaning, pressing, or ironing conducted in zone C-3 shall be strictly retail, and no
wholesale dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing shall be permitted. Garments shall be cleaned only when brought to such place of business by the owner of
the garments or by the members of his family or his employees, or when collected by the proprietor of the dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing plant
directly from the residences of the owners of such garments. Under no circumstances shall work be done for independent operators engaged in the
business of pressing, ironing, spotting, or dry cleaning garments, or collecting garments for any of such purposes.
E. Location Of Equipment: Equipment for dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing shall not be installed in the front portion of the ground floor of any building
along or adjoining any public street, and any such equipment if adjacent to or visible from the public street or sidewalk, shall be shielded from
pedestrians on the public street or sidewalk by a masonry or similar substantial wall at least six feet (6') in height.
F. Use Of Front Portion Of Building: The front portion of the ground floor of any premises used for dry cleaning, ironing, or pressing of garments shall be
designed and used for the receiving from the customer and returning to the customer of the garments to be processed and shall not be used for any
portion of the work on the garments.
G. Approval Of The Chief Of The Fire Department: Before installing any cleaning, ironing, or pressing equipment in any premises in zone C-3, it shall be
necessary to obtain the approval of the chief of the fire department and the chief building inspector for such equipment and the use of such equipment
in such premises. In no case shall equipment or the use thereof be approved which is or may create a fire hazard or become a menace to life or
property, or become a nuisance. (1962 Code § 10-408)
10-3-1608: HAND LAUNDRIES; RESTRICTIONS:
Hand laundries shall be permitted in zone C-3 only on the following conditions:
A. Washing Machines And Mangles: Hand laundries shall use only washing machines of the ordinary household type, not to exceed four (4) in number and
not more than one mangle which shall be of the ordinary household type.
B. Steam Boilers: Steam boilers shall not be permitted in any hand laundry, but hot water heaters of the ordinary household type may be used.
C. Machines To Be Electric Driven: All machines used in connection with any such laundry shall be individually driven by electric motors.
D. Enclosure Required For Clothes Lines: Should any of the clothes washed in such laundry be hung on the outside of the building or on top of the
building in which the laundry is operated, the space where clothes are hung shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least seven feet (7') above the
ground level or roof level.
E. Noise Restrictions: Such hand laundries may be maintained or operated only when the noise of laundry operations cannot be detected by a person
outside the building in which a laundry is being conducted. (1962 Code § 10-409)
10-3-1609: EXCEPTIONS; LOT 484, TRACT 4988:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, there shall be no entrance from Tower Drive to any retail business building erected on lot 484, tract
4988, and no store erected or maintained on said lot shall front on Tower Drive. (1962 Code § 10-407)
10-3-1610: MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR VEHICLE SALES, SERVICE OR FUEL STATIONS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 559/797
A. Goods, wares, and merchandise, including, but not limited to, automobile parts, accessories, and supplies, shall not be displayed or stored, nor shall
auto body repair or major mechanical repair services be performed, except within an enclosed permanent structure. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to oil can racks at gas pumps or to the display of a maximum of five (5) automobile tires provided such display is located within five feet
(5') of the main structure.
B. The premises shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition at all times.
C. Drainage facilities, protective devices, retaining structures, or buttress fills shall be installed and maintained to ensure that water and other liquids
accumulating on the premises do not drain across public sidewalks. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface waters to the nearest
practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the director of planning and/or other appropriate governmental agency as a safe place
to deposit such waters.
D. Automobile service stations existing on May 18, 1971, shall comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section on or before November 18, 1971,
and shall comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section on or before May 18, 1972. (Ord. 71-O-1414, eff. 6-17-1971; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133,
eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1611: MINI-SHOPPING CENTERS; RESTRICTIONS:
Mini-shopping centers shall be permitted only on properties greater than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet in the C-3 zone which properties are
located along streets other than Wilshire Boulevard and outside of the area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard to the south, by the centerline of Crescent
Drive to the east, and by the centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard to the north and west, subject to the following conditions:
A. A conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter, shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any building permit. The
provisions of section 4.9 of council resolution 82-R-6525 do not apply to mini-shopping centers.
B. A conditional use permit may be issued only if the planning commission finds:
1. The proposed center will not be detrimental to and will be compatible with surrounding uses and properties and the public welfare;
2. Vehicle traffic generated by the proposed center, based on the current Institute of Traffic Engineers publication entitled "Trip Generation" or, if not
specified therein, as designated by the transportation official, will not substantially exceed either of the following per one thousand (1,000) gross
square feet of floor area:
a. Sixteen (16) vehicle trips per hour; or
b. Two hundred (200) vehicle trips per day;
3. Traffic entering onto or exiting from the proposed center will not cause traffic or pedestrian hazards or undue traffic congestion affecting surrounding
areas, including, but not limited to, alleys and residential properties;
4. The design of the proposed center will be compatible with surrounding uses and properties;
5. The types of uses proposed for the center will be compatible with adjacent uses;
6. The hours of operation of the uses proposed for the center will not interfere with neighboring uses or properties;
7. The proposed center will have adequate buffering between the center and adjacent residential areas;
8. The proposed center's lighting and venting will not adversely affect neighboring uses or properties; and
9. The proposed center will have an adequate parking plan and parking layout. (Ord. 87-O-2009, eff. 11-19-1987)
10-3-1612: DRIVE-UP, DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES; RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities shall be permitted only on property located in the commercial
zones, subject to the following conditions:
A. A conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter, shall be obtained prior to the establishment of such facilities, or the
issuance of building permits therefor.
B. In addition to the criteria set forth in sections 10-3-3800 through 10-3-3803 of this chapter, the following factors shall be considered in connection with
the review of a conditional use permit application for a drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facility:
1. Whether the proposed facility is compatible with the area and neighboring uses;
2. Whether the facility would create or cause any of the following:
a. An adverse traffic impact or a traffic safety hazard, including, but not limited to, an adverse impact on traffic circulation;
b. Pedestrian-vehicle conflicts or pedestrian safety hazards;
c. An accumulation of garbage or trash;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 560/797
d. Excessive noise;
e. Intrusive lighting;
f. Excessive or unpleasant odors;
g. Noxious fumes;
h. Interference with neighboring properties or uses due to activities associated with the proposed facility or due to its hours of operation;
3. Whether the facility can be located or situated in such a manner so that:
a. Trash facilities can be located to accommodate patrons using the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities in an area away from adjacent
residential uses;
b. Lighting, noise, fumes, rodents, pests and odors can either be eliminated, mitigated or reduced so as to not adversely affect neighboring
properties or uses;
c. Traffic generated by the facility can flow smoothly, both on site and off site, without creating an adverse traffic impact, or a traffic or safety hazard
to vehicles or pedestrians;
d. The impact on neighboring properties or uses due to activities associated with the proposed facility or due to its hours of operation does not
exceed acceptable levels.
C. Upon application for a conditional use permit, the planning commission may approve, deny or conditionally approve such application. The planning
commission may impose any conditions which are necessary to preserve the public health, welfare or safety or to mitigate any potential adverse
impacts resulting from the establishment of drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities.
D. Consistent with the restrictions set forth in section 10-3-1610 of this article, automobile service stations may provide drive-up, drive-in or drive-through
facilities for the sale of petroleum products and the minor maintenance of automobiles provided that any other sale or service is conducted within an
enclosed building that offers no drive-up, drive-in or drive-through service. (Ord. 89-O-2063, eff. 7-6-1989)
10-3-1613: VEHICLE SALES, SERVICE OR FUEL STATIONS; CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT CRITERIA:
In addition to the criteria set forth in article 38 of this chapter, the following criteria shall be considered by the planning commission when reviewing
conditional use permit applications for vehicle sales, service or fuel station uses:
A. Whether the proposed use is compatible with the area and surrounding uses;
B. Whether the proposed use will have adequate buffering between the use and residential areas;
C. Whether the proposed use will create an adverse traffic impact or a traffic safety hazard to pedestrians or to vehicles, including, but not limited to, an
adverse impact on traffic circulation or parking;
D. Whether the proposed use will create excessive noise, unpleasant odors, noxious fumes, excessive lighting, or substantial interference with neighboring
properties or uses due to the activities associated with the proposed use or its hours of operation.
The planning commission may impose any conditions which are necessary to preserve the public health, welfare or safety, or to mitigate any potential
adverse impacts resulting from the establishment of a vehicle sales, service or fuel station use. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1614: AUTOMOBILE BODY AND FENDER REPAIR SHOPS; RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition to the requirements of section 10-3-1604 of this article, automobile body and fender
repair shops shall be permitted only if enclosed in a building and if all auto body and fender work is conducted more than seventy five feet (75') from any
window or door in the exterior wall of such building. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1615: AUTOMOBILE PAINT SHOPS; RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition to the requirements of section 10-3-1604 of this article, automobile paint shops shall be
permitted only if enclosed in a building and if all painting is conducted more than seventy five feet (75') from any window or door in the exterior wall of such
building and the building is equipped with an effective and efficient exhaust fan sufficient to collect all paint particles, fumes, and excess paint spray,
precipitate all solid matter inside the building, and exhaust the air and odor at such height, in such direction, and in such a matter that it shall not be or
become noisy, offensive, or an annoyance to persons outside the building in which the automobile paint shop is located. (Ord. 91-O-02133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1616: PRIVATE TRAINING CENTERS; ANNUAL AFFIDAVIT:
The owner or the operator of a private training center shall annually sign and submit an affidavit to the city certifying that: a) there is a ratio of no more than
five (5) students to every one instructor and/or trainer during exercise or training activities, and b) no more than fifteen (15) people including exercise
instructors and trainers, engage in exercise or training activities at any one time. (Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 561/797
10-3-1617: EXERCISE CLUBS AND PRIVATE TRAINING CENTERS; RESTRICTIONS:
Unless authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of subsection 10-3-1655B of this chapter, no exercise club or private
training center: a) shall be located on the ground floor of any building located within the business triangle area bounded by the centerline of Santa Monica
Boulevard North Roadway, the centerline of Crescent Drive, the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard west of Beverly Drive, and the first lot line north of
Wilshire Boulevard for that area east of Beverly Drive, or b) shall include any window that allows exercise areas of such club or center to be viewed from a
public street or sidewalk. (Ord. 94-O-205, eff. 8-6-1994; amd. Ord. 02-O-2392, eff. 3-8-2002)
10-3-1618: EXERCISE CLUBS AND PRIVATE TRAINING CENTERS; PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
A. All exercise clubs and private training centers shall provide parking to their patrons at a fee no greater than that charged at the nearest public parking lot
owned by the city of Beverly Hills.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2730 of this chapter, the planning commission may issue a conditional use permit to allow up to fifty
percent (50%) of the parking facilities of a use that is primarily daytime use to be used to satisfy the parking facilities required by this article for an
exercise club or private training center considered to be primarily an early morning and/or nighttime use, provided the latter use has different peak
hours of operation than the daytime use, and provided further that all of the following criteria are met:
1. The parking facilities are located on site in an existing building; and
2. The parking facilities have a minimum of five hundred (500) parking spaces; and
3. A parking utilization study prepared by a certified traffic engineer establishes, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, that the parking facilities
required by this chapter exceed the demand for parking spaces that will be generated by the proposed use and the other uses in the subject building.
(Ord. 94-O-205, eff. 8-6-1994; amd. Ord. 02-O-2415, eff. 12-19-2002; Ord. 12-O-2628, eff. 9-23-2012)
10-3-1619: NIGHTCLUBS; RESTRICTIONS AND FINDINGS:
A nightclub located on the ground floor of a building shall be no more than thirty five feet (35') wide, including, without limitation, the street frontage.
However, this limitation shall only apply to the front half of the nightclub or the front sixty feet (60') of the nightclub, whichever is less. For the purposes of
this section, the "front" of the nightclub shall mean the portion of the nightclub located closest to the front lot line.
A. Corner Lots: If a nightclub has frontage along two (2) streets, then the width limitation of this section shall apply along each street frontage, but the
planning commission, as part of the conditional use permit approving the nightclub, may allow the nightclub to exceed the width limitations of this
section along any street frontage that is not the front of the nightclub.
B. Spacing: No nightclub shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of another nightclub. Nor shall there be more than one nightclub on any block or
at any intersection. A nightclub shall be considered to be at an intersection if it is located on a corner lot adjacent to the intersection of two (2) or more
streets.
C. Conditional Use Permit Findings: The planning commission shall not issue a conditional use permit for a nightclub unless the planning commission
makes the following findings in addition to the findings set forth in section 10-3-3800 of this chapter:
1. Operation of the nightclub shall not substantially impact upon traffic within its area of the city as defined by the department of planning and
community development;
2. Operation of the nightclub will be compatible with uses in the area and will not contribute to a concentration of nightclubs that will adversely affect
other uses in the area; and
3. Off site parking, if provided for the nightclub pursuant to section 10-3-2733 of this chapter, shall not create an adverse impact on surrounding uses,
parking resources or traffic due to the distance between the parking and the nightclub, the walking route, the affordability of parking or the anticipated
propensity of patrons to utilize the off site parking. (Ord. 98-O-2295, eff. 5-1-1998)
10-3-1620: CABARETS:
All cabarets shall comply with all of the following standards:
A. Queuing: No cabaret shall permit the queuing of patrons in the public right of way. Nor shall any cabaret permit the queuing of patrons in any stairwell or
adjacent to any public entrance to the cabaret.
B. Employee Parking: All cabarets shall provide adequate parking on site for all employees or shall provide employee parking free of charge in a location
approved by the director of transportation.
C. Parking: All off street parking areas and entries to the cabaret shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system that
provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on parking surfaces and walkways.
D. Noise: The premises within which the cabaret is located shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside the premises
shall not be audible anywhere on adjacent property, public rights of way or within any separate unit within the same building.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 562/797
E. Exterior Openings: To prevent noise generated inside the premises from adversely impacting adjacent property, exterior doors and windows of the
cabaret shall not be propped or kept open at any time while the cabaret is open for business.
F. Street Frontage: A cabaret located on the ground floor of a building shall be no more than thirty five feet (35') wide, including, without limitation, the
street frontage. However, this limitation shall only apply to the front half of the cabaret or the front sixty feet (60') of the cabaret, whichever is less. For
the purposes of this section, the "front" of the cabaret shall mean the portion of the cabaret located closest to the front lot line.
1. Corner lots: If a cabaret has frontage along two (2) streets, then the width limitation set forth in this section shall apply along each street frontage.
(Ord. 02-O-2409, eff. 11-8-2002)
10-3-1620.1: MEDICAL USES:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 10-3-1601 and 10-3-1602 of this chapter, buildings that received a certificate of occupancy from the city prior
to February 11, 2011, may be used for medical uses provided that either: 1) the amount of floor area occupied by medical uses does not exceed the
amount of floor area occupied by legally permitted medical uses on February 11, 2011, or 2) the building is located in a medical overlay zone and the
medical uses are approved as part of a planned development. Notwithstanding section 10-3-4101 of this chapter, medical uses may relocate within the
building provided that the total amount of floor area occupied by medical uses does not increase beyond the amount of floor area occupied by lawfully
permitted medical uses on February 11, 2011.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section and section 10-3-4101 of this chapter, building owners of buildings that received a certificate of occupancy
from the city prior to February 11, 2011, may add up to six thousand (6,000) square feet of medical uses to the building by converting general office
space to a medical use, even though the building is not located in a medical overlay zone, if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The building is located on property in one of the following commercial zones: C-3, C-3T-1, C-3T-2, C-3T-3, C-R-PD, C-R, C-3A, C-3B, or E-O-PD.
2. If the property is located in the pedestrian oriented area, as defined in section 10-3-1653 of this chapter, the community development director issues
a minor accommodation pursuant to the provisions of article 36 of this chapter to authorize a medical use to occupy a space in a pedestrian oriented
area provided that all other requirements of this section are met and the director makes all of the findings pursuant to subsection 10-3-1655A of this
chapter.
3. The building contains one or more legal medical uses prior to application for either a building permit or minor accommodation pursuant to this
section.
4. No new medical uses are located on the ground floor within the pedestrian oriented area. For development located outside of the pedestrian oriented
area, no new medical uses are located within the first forty feet (40') measured from the front building facade, on the ground floor of any building with
a depth of one hundred feet (100') or greater. For buildings with a depth of less than one hundred feet (100') and that are located on irregularly
shaped lots, medical uses may be permitted in all or part of the first forty feet (40') upon a finding by the director of community development that: a)
all other provisions of this subsection B have been met and b) the proposed expansion of medical use does not adversely impact surrounding
development. Facades facing a "side street", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, shall not be considered a front building facade for
purposes of this section.
5. Parking for the new medical use is provided pursuant to the requirements of section 10-3-2730 of this chapter or pursuant to a restriping permit
issued before December 16, 2005.
6. No existing floor area may be removed, demolished or vacated to satisfy the parking requirements for a medical use.
7. The medical use complies with the restrictions of the zone or underlying zone.
8. The additional space shall not be occupied by a "specialty clinic" as defined in section 10-3-1604.5 of this article.
9. The building owner has submitted documentation in form and content satisfactory to the Director of Community Development that the proposed
medical use meets the conditions of this subsection B.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-4101 of this chapter, a legal nonconforming medical use located in a building that has been damaged by
a disaster to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, may be reestablished without application of the Medical Use Overlay
Zone, provided the reconstructed building complies with applicable zoning standards, including parking requirements, in place at the time a building
permit is issued for the replacement building. In no event shall the amount of floor area occupied by nonconforming medical uses in the replacement
building exceed the floor area that would have been permitted in the damaged building.
D. In order to implement the requirements of this section, no building owner shall utilize the provisions set forth in this section to relocate or expand
medical uses unless the building owner has submitted documentation to the Director of Community Development, in form and content satisfactory to
the Director, documenting the amount of floor area occupied by legally permitted medical uses on February 11, 2011. Such documentation shall be
provided no later than August 11, 2011, or the provisions of this section shall not be available to the building owner. This date may be extended by the
Director. Additionally, if the submitted documentation includes any false statements or misrepresentations, then the building owner shall not be able to
utilize the provisions of this section.
E. The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for reviews and approvals required by this section.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, a cosmetic spa permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.2 of this article is not subject to the
regulations of this section. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011; amd. Ord. 19-O-2786, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-1620.2: COSMETIC SPAS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 563/797
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a cosmetic spa shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
A. Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter, shall be obtained prior to the establishment of
such facilities, or the issuance of building permits therefor.
B. Standards: All cosmetic spas must comply with the following standards:
1. Use Of Front Portion For Retail Space: A cosmetic spa located on the ground floor facing a street must:
a. Maintain a retail business facing the street occupying a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet or one percent (1%) of the ground floor area,
whichever is greater; and
b. Not provide treatment services within the first ten feet (10') behind the storefront facing the street; and
c. Maintain operating hours on Saturdays, consistent with other commercial businesses in the vicinity.
2. Design Standards: Display windows for ground-level business shall be maintained in a transparent manner to the greatest extent possible. Obscure
glazing, such as tinting and mirroring, as well as interior walls against storefronts, are to be avoided whenever possible. However, decorative glass
etching, and merchandise display windows are encouraged. Window coverings are not permitted on the ground floor during business hours.
3. Parking: Parking shall be provided pursuant to the requirements for "commercial uses not otherwise specified in this section" in section 10-3-2730 of
this chapter; or other reasonable alternatives that satisfy the transportation and parking needs of the proposed use provided by article 27 of this
chapter.
4. Medical Office Prohibited: No portion of a cosmetic spa shall be used as a medical office, as that term is defined in this chapter.
5. Regulations: When cosmetic spa facilities are developed as permitted by this section, the regulations of this section govern. This section does not
regulate medical uses authorized to operate pursuant to section 10-3-1620.1 of this article or article 18.5 of this chapter.
6. Compliance With Zone: The cosmetic spa complies with the restrictions of the zone or underlying zone.
7. Anesthesia: A cosmetic spa may use local anesthetic in connection with its services but shall not offer services which require any other form of
regional, or general anesthesia.
8. Services: A cosmetic spa may include services provided by a duly licensed medical professional but shall not offer services that are eligible for
coverage by medical insurance.
C. Findings: In addition to the criteria set forth in article 38 of this chapter, the following criteria shall be considered by the Planning Commission when
reviewing conditional use permit applications for cosmetic spa uses:
1. The proposed use meets all development standards of the zone, including providing adequate parking consistent with required spaces for
commercial uses pursuant to section 10-3-2730 of this chapter; or other reasonable alternatives that satisfy the transportation and parking needs of
the proposed use provided by article 27 of this chapter.
2. The proposed use and design of any ground floor street frontage will contribute to and enhance the retail atmosphere of the surrounding area and
will not undermine efforts to foster a pedestrian-friendly environment in the vicinity.
3. The proposed use is compatible with and will not result in substantial adverse impacts to surrounding uses.
4. The proposed use fosters an appropriate mix of uses that promotes a balance of services, amenities and uses that meet a range of neighborhood,
Citywide and regional needs. (Ord. 19-O-2786, 8-16-2019)
10-3-1620.3: PET BOARDING FACILITIES:
Pet boarding facilities, as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter may be conditionally permitted as an ancillary use on properties in the C-3, C-3T-2,
and C-5 Zones subject to the following:
A. Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter, shall be obtained prior to the issuance of any
building permit for a pet boarding facility or commencement of any pet boarding facility use.
B. Standards: All pet boarding facilities shall comply with the following standards:
1. No more than thirty percent (30%) of the floor area of the business in which the boarding facility is located shall be used for a pet boarding facility;
2. No more than forty (40) animals shall be boarded on site at one time;
3. Boarding shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building. Exterior boarding, training and exercise facilities are not permitted;
4. Adequate enclosures shall be provided to keep animals from roaming freely within the building;
5. Adequate space within boarding areas for exercise exists for all pets on the premises;
6. Each dog boarding crate shall provide enough space for the dog to turn about freely, and stand, sit and lie in a comfortable, normal position. The
interior height of the enclosure must be at least six inches (6") higher than the head of the dog in the enclosure measured when the dog is standing
in a comfortable position;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 564/797
7. The facility must have a minimum of sixty (60) square feet of dedicated boarding area per animal;
8. Each cat boarding crate shall provide enough space for the cat to turn about freely, and stand, sit and lie in a comfortable and normal position. In
addition, an enclosure for a cat shall provide an elevated platform appropriate for the size of the cat;
9. Food waste, used bedding, debris and other waste shall be removed from all areas of the facility at least twice a day;
10. The operator of any pet boarding facility shall assign a staff member to check the public areas (alleys and sidewalks) adjacent to the facility at least
twice per day. Any animal waste related to the operation of the facility shall be cleaned up immediately;
11. The boarding facility shall be licensed by the City of Los Angeles;
12. The pet boarding facility shall have an emergency evacuation plan and employees shall be trained regarding the plan. At a minimum this plan shall
include:
a. A list of required emergency items to have on site;
b. A complete plan to address various types of disasters including transportation plan, gathering points, and a roll call system;
c. An established set of rules and regulations pertaining to disasters;
d. Communications procedures during a disaster;
e. A schedule for drills;
f. Identified temporary boarding sites for animals;
g. Established policies for dealing with injured animals, including identification of preselected veterinary facilities at which emergency care can be
provided twenty four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week;
13. Proof of current vaccinations shall be required for all animals prior to accepting a pet for care or boarding services and copies of records shall be
kept for each animal. This shall include rabies vaccination for dogs;
14. The pet boarding area shall be separate from the retail, grooming, or animal food storage areas;
15. The facility shall submit for approval a waste removal plan to the city;
16. No noise, odor, or other evidence of pet care shall be detectible by a person outside a building housing a pet boarding facility;
17. Use of front portion of the retail space: A pet boarding facility shall not occupy the first twenty feet (20') behind the storefront facing a street on the
ground floor of any retail space that contains pet boarding;
18. There shall be no fewer than two (2) caretakers present at all times when boarding is taking place. A third caretaker shall be required when there
are more than thirty five (35) boarded animals being cared for at one facility;
19. Staff on site shall have the following knowledge and credentials:
a. Ability to drive a car and possession of a valid driver's license;
b. Dog and cat CPR training;
c. At least six (6) months' experience at a facility that boards pets;
It is not necessary that one person meet all three (3) criteria, however, the collective staff on site at any given time must meet the criteria;
20. Interior space that includes adequate air conditioning and ventilation as to not require the opening of windows to avoid potential noise impacts;
21. No more than three (3) pets shall be walked by one caretaker at one time. The planning commission may impose conditions related to the route for
dog walking;
22. The applicant shall submit the dog walking route(s) being proposed to the city for review and approval. Any dog walking route for a pet boarding
facility located in the "business triangle" (defined below) shall proceed immediately to South Santa Monica Boulevard or Crescent Drive and take the
shortest route possible along these streets to an area outside of and away from the business triangle.
23. The pet boarding facility shall not be allowed in retail establishments that are immediately adjacent to residential properties.
24. Outside of the "business triangle" (defined below), a pet boarding facility shall not be allowed in a building with nonconforming parking, loading or
any nonconforming use.
C. Findings: In addition to the findings outlined in article 38 of this chapter, a conditional use permit shall only be issued if the planning commission finds
that:
1. The proposed use is compatible with the area and surrounding uses;
2. Adequate loading and unloading space exists for the purpose of dropping off and picking up pets; and
3. Traffic entering or existing from the proposed pet boarding facility will not cause traffic or pedestrian hazards or undue congestion in the surrounding
areas.
D. Maximum Number Of Animals: The planning commission, during its review of the conditional use permit, shall establish a maximum number of animals
that may be in the pet boarding facility at one time, provided that such number shall not exceed forty (40) animals.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 565/797
E. Parking: The addition of an ancillary pet boarding facility shall not increase the required parking above the parking required for the primary use. If valet
parking is required by the conditional use permit, signage shall be located both on the inside and outside of the premises identifying the location of the
valet parking. Proof of such signage shall be provided to the city upon request.
F. Business Triangle: Only one pet boarding facility shall be allowed in the business triangle. For purposes of this section, "business triangle" is defined as
the area bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard north roadway, and the centerline of Crescent
Drive.
G. Review Or Revocation: A conditional use permit that has been issued for the purpose of establishing a pet boarding facility may be reviewed by the
planning commission and revoked if it is found that any one or more of the following has occurred:
1. The permittee has failed to maintain the premises in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition;
2. The permittee is not adhering to the standards outlined in subsection B of this section;
3. The permittee failed to provide any animal in his or her control with adequate care, nutritious food in appropriate quantities suitable for the animal,
free and easy access to potable water, and appropriate shelter; or
4. Documented evidence is submitted showing violations of any conditions of the approval that result in substantial noise, odor, or other disturbance of
occupants or patrons of adjoining or nearby businesses and residences.
H. Sunset: The provisions allowing and regulating pet boarding facilities shall remain in effect for one year after adoption. The city council or planning
commission may take action pursuant to this section on applications filed on or before December 1, 2017, and timely applications may be processed to
conclusion. Unless the city council extends this section, the section shall be repealed as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on December
1, 2017. Conditional use permits granted during the effectiveness of these provisions may continue operating in conformance with the conditions of
approval, and be extended as authorized in the conditional use permit, unless the conditional use permit is revoked by the city after a duly noticed
hearing for failure to comply with the conditions of approval or because of unforeseen impacts of the use. (Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017)
Article 16.2. Commercial-Transition Zone (C-3T-1)
10-3-1621: ZONE C-3T-1 CREATED:
There is hereby created a commercial-transition zone (C-3T-1) to provide for compatible transitions between certain areas where residential and
commercial uses abut each other. (Ord. 86-O-1984, eff. 1-1-1987)
10-3-1622: USES AND RESTRICTIONS:
All uses permitted and conditionally permitted in the C-3 zone shall be permitted and conditionally permitted, respectively, in the C-3T-1 zone pursuant to
the procedures set forth in article 16 of this chapter. In addition, the following restrictions shall be applicable to development in the C-3T-1 zone:
A. All provisions of article 19.5 of this chapter;
B. The height of any building or structure shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is less; and
C. All restrictions applicable to the C-3 zone. (Ord. 86-O-1984, eff. 1-1-1987; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
Article 16.3. Commercial-Transition Zone (C-3T-2)
10-3-1631: ZONE C-3T-2 CREATED:
There is hereby created a commercial-transition zone (C-3T-2) to provide for compatible transitions between certain areas where residential and
commercial uses abut each other. (Ord. 86-O-1985, eff. 1-1-1987)
10-3-1632: USES AND RESTRICTIONS:
All uses permitted and conditionally permitted in the C-3 zone shall be permitted and conditionally permitted, respectively, in the C-3T-2 zone pursuant to
the procedures set forth in article 16 of this chapter. The following additional restrictions shall also be applicable:
A. All provisions of article 19.5 of this chapter;
B. The height of any building or structure shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35'), whichever is less, and the density shall not exceed 1.33 to
one (1.33:1), with the exception that the planning commission, pursuant to the criteria for a conditional use permit set forth in article 38 of this chapter,
and without a mandatory environmental impact report, may approve a structure not exceeding three (3) stories or forty five feet (45') and/or a density
not exceeding two to one (2:1), provided the development complies with the following conditions:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 566/797
1. An additional setback shall be required from the rear property line; provided, further, such additional setback shall not exceed thirty three percent
(33%) of the lot depth for any portion of the structure below two (2) stories and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the lot depth for the third story.
2. The design of the facade and the structure facing residential uses shall be harmonious with the adjacent residential character in architectural style,
color, and material.
3. Landscaping or other parklike amenities shall be required within the rear setback in conjunction with the design for loading, parking, trash removal,
and access to and from the site.
4. Appropriate restrictions shall be imposed upon the use of the structure, including the hours of operation, additional parking, and parking restrictions
in order to assure adequate on site parking and to limit the types of uses creating problems of noise, odor, or glare.
5. The intensity of use shall not exceed either sixteen (16) vehicle trips per hour, or two hundred (200) vehicle trips per day for each one thousand
(1,000) gross square feet of floor area for uses as specified in the most recent edition of the Institute of Traffic Engineers' publication entitled "Trip
Generation", and if the use is not specified in such publication, the vehicle traffic generation for the proposed use shall be designated by the director
of transportation.
C. All restrictions applicable to the C-3 zone. (Ord. 86-O-1985, eff. 1-1-1987; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991)
10-3-1633: INTENSIFICATION OF EXISTING NONCONFORMING USES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 41 of this chapter, if intensification of a major commercial space located in the "Olympic commercial-residential
transition area", as defined in subsection A of this section, is proposed, such proposal shall comply with current parking and loading standards set forth in
sections 10-3-2729, 10-3-2730, 10-3-2741, 10-3-2742, and 10-3-2743 of this chapter, unless, pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of this section, the
planning commission approves and establishes parking standards, loading standards, or both, that differ from the otherwise applicable standards.
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:
INTENSIFICATION OF USE: A change in use where the new use is listed in a higher tier on the list set forth in subsection B of this section than the
previous use. Tier 2, for example, is higher than tier 1.
MAJOR COMMERCIAL SPACE: Buildings and tenant spaces that meet any of the following:
1. Existing commercial buildings with twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more of "floor area" as defined by section 10-3-100 of this chapter,
which is proposed to be occupied by a single tenant or business, even if a reduction in the floor area below twelve thousand (12,000) square
feet is proposed, or
2. Existing multiple-tenant commercial buildings that include one or more spaces with twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more of "floor area"
as defined by section 10-3-100 of this chapter which is proposed to be intensified, even if a reduction in the floor area of one or more of the
spaces with twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more is proposed, or
3. Existing multiple-tenant commercial buildings that are proposed to be reconfigured to create one or more new tenant spaces with twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet or more of "floor area" as defined by section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
OLYMPIC COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION AREA: The portion of the C-3T-2 zone located between Rexford Drive and the alley
immediately west of Robertson Boulevard.
REGULAR OPERATION: A permitted or existing nonconforming use that is open for business to the general public during a use's customary
business hours.
B. Intensity Of Use: To determine whether a change of use is an intensification of use, uses have been classified into the following three (3) tiers of land
use intensity. Tier 1 represents the lowest intensity of use, tier 2 represents a higher intensity of use than tier 1, and tier 3 represents the highest
intensity of use.
Tier 1 shall include: warehousing or storage, miniwarehouses, antique stores, furniture stores, car sales or service, surface parking, and other similar
uses as determined by the director of community development.
Tier 2 shall include: apparel stores, hardware stores, toy stores, general retail stores, general offices, health/fitness clubs, and other similar uses as
determined by the director of community development.
Tier 3 shall include: restaurants, supermarkets, drugstores, convenience markets, video rental stores, educational institutions, religious institutions,
medical offices, beauty shops, and other similar uses as determined by the director of community development.
In determining the tier in which a specific use belongs, the director of community development may consider all relevant factors including, without
limitation, parking demand and traffic generation as indicated in ITE "Parking Generation", 3rd edition; ULI "Shared Parking", 2nd edition; ITE "Trip
Generation", 7th edition, or any combination thereof; vehicle trips generated by the use; the judgment of the deputy city manager of capital assets; and
any data or evidence and supporting analysis provided by a registered engineer.
C. Planning Commission Authority: A project applicant may apply to the planning commission for a change to the parking standards, loading standards, or
both, required by this section. The application shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the procedures established for the city's development plan
review process as set forth in article 31 of this chapter. The planning commission may establish parking requirements that differ from those
requirements set forth in section 10-3-2729 or 10-3-2730 of this chapter if, in addition to the development plan review findings of section 10-3-3104 of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 567/797
this chapter, the planning commission determines that the use will generate a need for parking different than the amount or layout of parking required
under section 10-3-2730 of this chapter or the commission determines that the parking demand will be met by means other than those means specified
in section 10-3-2730 of this chapter; provided further, that the planning commission may not reduce the required parking to less than the amount of
parking that can currently be accommodated on the subject site.
The planning commission may also establish loading requirements that are different than those requirements established in sections 10-3-2740
through 10-3-2742 of this chapter if, in addition to the development plan review findings of section 10-3-3104 of this chapter, the planning commission
determines that the use's loading needs can be accommodated with a number of spaces, layout, or both, that differs from the requirements of sections
10-3-2740 through 10-3-2742 of this chapter, or if the commission determines that the use's loading requirements will be met by means other than
those specified in sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2742 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-2565, eff. 5-8-2009; amd. Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
Article 16.4. Commercial-Transition Zone (C-3T-3)
10-3-1641: ZONE C-3T-3 CREATED:
There is hereby created a commercial-transition zone (C-3T-3) to provide for compatible transitions between certain areas where all or a part of singlefamily
residential and commercial property are directly across the street from each other. (Ord. 87-O-2013, eff. 1-14-1988)
10-3-1642: USES AND RESTRICTIONS:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone C-3T-3 shall be erected, constructed, built, altered, enlarged, built upon, used or occupied except for
general office purposes. All other uses permitted or conditionally permitted in zone C-3, including medical office and medical laboratory uses, shall only be
permitted if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the procedures contained in article 38 of this chapter. In addition, such lot, premises,
building or portion thereof shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. All provisions of article 19.5 of this chapter;
B. A commercial structure shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height, whichever is less, within the first thirty feet (30') in depth from
that segment of the property line of the commercial parcel which is directly opposite a one-family residential zone. No mechanical penthouse, structure
enclosing elevators or stairwells, or structure for unoccupied architectural features shall be permitted within such thirty foot (30') portion of the parcel;
C. A six foot (6') landscaped setback composed of mature vegetation of sufficient density to provide a texture, buffer, or screen as deemed appropriate for
the location by the architectural commission shall be required along the commercial property line facing the residential zone; and
D. All restrictions applicable to C-3 zone. (Ord. 87-O-2013, eff. 1-14-1988; amd. Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 99-O-2333, eff. 10-15-1999)
Article 16.5. Restricted Uses In Pedestrian Oriented Areas
10-3-1651: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city's urban design policies call for an urban village design in certain retail areas to promote pedestrian usage. The city council finds that it is
necessary to restrict the uses within these areas in order to preserve the urban village atmosphere and promote pedestrian friendly development. The city
council further finds that it is necessary and desirable to protect the public health, safety and general welfare to prevent the commercial spaces in these
areas from being dominated by nonretail uses in order to preserve the city's retail tax base and ensure the city's continued ability to provide essential
services to its residents. (Ord. 81-O-1784, eff. 3-18-1981; amd. Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002)
10-3-1652: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
GROUND FLOOR: Any floor level located within a vertical distance of eight feet (8') above the curb level or five feet (5') below the curb level of the
adjacent street.
NONRETAIL USE: Any use not defined as a "retail use" pursuant to this article, including, without limiting the foregoing definition, banks, financial lending
institutions, real estate offices, title companies, escrow companies, professional offices (e.g., accountants, architects, lawyers or travel agents),
manufacturing uses, medical laboratories and offices, hospitals, dry cleaners, veterinary clinics, tailors, spas without a retail component, exercise or health
clubs and private training centers, and motion picture plants or studios, but excluding hotels.
RESTRICTED USE: Any nonretail use or car dealer.
RETAIL USE: A use which carries on as its principal business the selling of tangible commodities, goods, merchandise or wares, including the selling of
food and beverages, directly to the ultimate consumers. For the purposes of this article, notwithstanding and without limiting the foregoing definition, "retail
use" shall include restaurants, bars, nightclubs, theaters, beauty shops, nail salons, and spas with a retail component, and retail businesses as defined in
section 10-3-100 of this chapter, but shall exclude car dealers. (Ord. 81-O-1784, eff. 3-18-1981; amd. Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002; Ord. 11-O-2602, eff.
2-11-2011)
10-3-1653: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED AREAS DESIGNATED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 568/797
The following areas, as shown on the pedestrian oriented areas map on file in the department of planning and community development, are hereby
designated as "pedestrian oriented areas":
A. South Beverly Drive To Gregory Way: All those parcels east of the first alley running parallel to and west of South Beverly Drive, and all those parcels
west of the first alley running parallel to and east of South Beverly Drive from Wilshire Boulevard to Gregory Way, including those parcels having
frontage on Wilshire Boulevard and located on the southeast and southwest corners of the intersection of Beverly Drive and Wilshire Boulevard and
those parcels having frontage on Gregory Way and located on the northeast and northwest corners of the intersection of South Beverly Drive and
Gregory Way.
B. North Beverly Drive To Santa Monica Boulevard: All those parcels east of the first alley running parallel to and west of North Beverly Drive, and all those
parcels west of the first alley running parallel to and east of North Beverly Drive, from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard, including those
parcels having frontage on Wilshire Boulevard and located on the northeast and northwest corners of the intersection of Beverly Drive and Wilshire
Boulevard and those parcels having frontage on the south side of the south roadway of Santa Monica Boulevard and located on the southeast and
southwest corners of the intersection of North Beverly Drive and Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway).
C. North Cañon Drive To Santa Monica Boulevard: All those parcels east of the first alley running parallel to and west of North Cañon Drive, and all those
parcels west of the first alley running parallel to and east of North Cañon Drive, from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard, including those
parcels having frontage on Wilshire Boulevard and located on the northeast and northwest corners of the intersection of Cañon Drive and Wilshire
Boulevard and those parcels having frontage on the south side of the south roadway of Santa Monica Boulevard and located on the southeast and
southwest corners of the intersection of North Cañon Drive and Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway).
D. North Rodeo Drive To Santa Monica Boulevard: All those parcels east of the first alley running parallel to and west of North Rodeo Drive, and all those
parcels west of the first alley running parallel to and east of North Rodeo Drive, from Wilshire Boulevard to Santa Monica Boulevard, including those
parcels having frontage on Wilshire Boulevard and located on the northeast and northwest corners of the intersection of Rodeo Drive and Wilshire
Boulevard and those parcels having frontage on the south side of the south roadway of Santa Monica Boulevard and located on the southeast and
southwest corners of the intersection of North Rodeo Drive and Santa Monica Boulevard (south roadway).
E. Brighton Way: All those parcels having frontage on Brighton Way from Cañon Drive to Wilshire Boulevard, including those parcels having frontage on
Wilshire Boulevard and located on the northeast and northwest corners of the intersection of Brighton Way and Wilshire Boulevard.
F. Dayton Way: All those parcels having frontage on Dayton Way from Cañon Drive to Wilshire Boulevard, including those parcels having frontage on
Wilshire Boulevard and located on the northeast and southeast corners of the intersection of Dayton Way and Wilshire Boulevard. (Ord. 81-O-1784, eff.
3-18-1981; amd. Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002)
10-3-1654: USES PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED:
A. No use other than a retail use or a hotel shall occupy a space with more than twenty five feet (25') of street frontage on the ground floor of any building
or structure located in a pedestrian oriented area.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, for any building or structure situated at the corner of two (2) streets located in a pedestrian oriented area
and with frontage on both streets, a use other than a retail use or a hotel may occupy a space with up to twenty five feet (25') of ground floor street
frontage on each street for a total ground floor street frontage of up to fifty feet (50').
C. Medical uses shall be prohibited in a pedestrian oriented area except as allowed pursuant to section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter.
D. Those portions of licensed pharmacies devoted to dispensing prescription medicine shall be prohibited on the ground floor of buildings within the first
thirty feet (30') behind the storefront facing a street. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1655: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the director of planning and community development may issue a minor accommodation pursuant to
the provisions of article 36 of this chapter to authorize a restricted use to occupy a space in a pedestrian oriented area with a width of up to thirty feet
(30') provided that the director makes the following findings:
1. The proposed restricted use is compatible with and will not result in any substantial adverse impacts to surrounding uses;
2. Granting the request for a minor accommodation will leave ample space available for future retail uses and will not result in an overconcentration of
nonpedestrian oriented uses in the block in which the proposed restricted use will be located;
3. The architectural style of the facade for the proposed restricted use is compatible with adjacent development and is consistent with the city's urban
design policies;
4. A restricted use is appropriate for the proposed space because:
a. Structural constraints imposed by the design of the building are unduly restrictive on the use of the subject lease space thereby limiting the
opportunity for retail or hotel uses in the proposed space; or
b. The configuration of the building in which the proposed space is located is not suited to pedestrian oriented retail uses and does not contribute to
the pedestrian experience.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 569/797
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the planning commission may issue a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of article 38
of this chapter to allow a restricted use to occupy any space subject to the provisions of this article. In addition to considering the criteria for conditional
use permits set forth in article 38 of this chapter, the planning commission shall make the following findings:
1. The proposed restricted use is compatible with and will not result in any substantial adverse impacts to surrounding uses;
2. Granting the request for a conditional use permit will not result in an overconcentration of nonpedestrian oriented uses in the block in which the
proposed restricted use will be located;
Article 17. Commercial Zone (C-3A)
10-3-1701: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in zone C-3A shall be used for any purpose other than as a:
Cafe.
Carpenter shop.
Cinema.
Conservatory.
Dancing academy.
Dressmaking or millinery store.
Exercise club.
Library.
Lunchroom.
Office (excluding medical uses).
Paint, paperhanger, and decorating shop or store.
Photograph gallery.
Plumbing shop.
Private training center of no more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Retail tailor.
Roofing or plastering store or office.
Store or shop for the conducting of wholesale or retail business.
Studio.
Theater.
Upholsterer.
Or similar use. (1962 Code § 10-420; amd. Ord. 80-O-1770, eff. 10-2-1980; Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 11-O-
2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1702: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3A zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Alternative parking facilities used to provide required parking for commercial uses, excluding medical uses, pursuant to section 10-3-2730.4 of this chapter.
Amusement parks.
Brewing or manufacture of alcoholic beverages that is ancillary to a dining or bar use or is ancillary to a retail store that sells alcoholic beverages.
Car washes that:
A. Are enclosed in a building;
B. Exclusively serve a business whose operation is primarily devoted to the sales, long term leasing or rental of automobiles or other motorized
vehicles;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 570/797
C. Are located on the site of the business being served; and
D. Do not exceed twenty feet (20') in width or forty feet (40') in length.
When reviewing the conditional use permit application for such car washes, the planning commission shall consider the conditional use permit
criteria set forth in section 10-3-1613 of this chapter.
Childcare uses licensed pursuant to state law.
Clubs.
Convenience stores not occupying a tenant space whose primary entrance opens into the interior of a commercial building.
Drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1612 of this chapter.
Educational institutions.
Hotels, subject to the provisions of article 28.6 of this chapter.
Mini-shopping centers, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1611 of this chapter.
Museums.
Off site parking pursuant to section 10-3-2733 of this chapter.
Private training centers of more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions.
Vehicle sales, service or fuel stations, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1613 of this chapter, and not otherwise prohibited by section 10-3-1603 of
this chapter.
A. The establishment or expansion of any activity that qualifies as a vehicle sales, service or fuel station use shall require a separate conditional use
permit.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this use, a vehicle sales, service or fuel station that involves only the installation of vehicle accessories shall not
require a conditional use permit unless such vehicle sales, service or fuel station is located adjacent to a residential zone or separated from a
residential zone only by a public right of way. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "vehicle accessories" shall include tires, but shall not
include engine or body parts. (Ord. 91-O-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 99-O-2336,
eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012; Ord. 16-O-2712, eff. 12-22-2016)
10-3-1703: PROHIBITED USES:
Medical uses, except as permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
Article 18. Commercial Zone (C-3B)
10-3-1801: ZONE C-3B CREATED; USES PERMITTED:
The uses of property in zone C-3B, a business zone, hereby are limited and defined as follows:
No lot in zone C-3B shall be used for any purpose other than a purpose permitted in zone C-3A, except that no manufacturing shall be permitted therein
except retail merchandise to be sold upon and delivered from the premises to the ultimate consumer and in which not more than ten (10) persons are
employed and in which no motor larger than one horsepower is used for such manufacturing. Automobile parking and the structures therefor shall be
permitted in zone C-3B. No structure for any purpose shall be constructed or permitted in zone C-3B higher than two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35'),
whichever is higher. No structure shall be constructed or permitted in zone C-3B which has a total floor area to site area ratio greater than two to one (2:1).
No front or side setback need be maintained. Any automobile parking required for any structure in zone C-3B shall be provided in said zone or in the C-3
business zone as provided by this code. (1962 Code § 10-421; amd. Ord. 80-O-1770, eff. 10-2-1980)
10-3-1802: CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3B zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this
chapter:
Alternative parking facilities used to provide required parking for commercial uses, excluding medical uses, pursuant to section 10-3-2730.4 of this chapter.
Amusement parks.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 571/797
Brewing or manufacture of alcoholic beverages that is ancillary to a dining or bar use or is ancillary to a retail store that sells alcoholic beverages.
Car washes that:
A. Are enclosed in a building;
B. Exclusively serve a business whose operation is primarily devoted to the sales, long term leasing or rental of automobiles or other motorized
vehicles;
C. Are located on the site of the business being served; and
D. Do not exceed twenty feet (20') in width or forty feet (40') in length.
When reviewing the conditional use permit application for such car washes, the planning commission shall consider the conditional use permit
criteria set forth in section 10-3-1613 of this chapter.
Childcare uses licensed pursuant to state law.
Clubs.
Convenience stores not occupying a tenant space whose primary entrance opens into the interior of a commercial building.
Drive-up, drive-in and drive-through facilities, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1612 of this chapter.
Educational institutions.
Hotels, subject to the provisions of article 28.6 of this chapter.
Mini-shopping centers, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1611 of this chapter.
Museums.
Off site parking pursuant to section 10-3-2733 of this chapter.
Private training centers of more than two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area.
Public utility uses, except as provided in section 10-3-2754 of this chapter.
Religious institutions.
Vehicle sales, service or fuel stations, subject to the provisions of section 10-3-1613 of this chapter and not otherwise prohibited by section 10-3-1603 of
this chapter.
A. The establishment or expansion of any activity that qualifies as a vehicle sales, service or fuel station use shall require a separate conditional use
permit.
B. Notwithstanding other provisions of this use, a vehicle sales, service or fuel station that involves only the installation of vehicle accessories, shall not
require a conditional use permit unless such vehicle sales, service or fuel station is located adjacent to a residential zone or separated from a
residential zone only by a public right of way. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "vehicle accessories" shall include tires, but shall not
include engine or body parts. (Ord. 91-O-2123, eff. 12-5-1991; amd. Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 99-O-2336,
eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012; Ord. 16-O-2712, eff. 12-22-2016)
10-3-1803: PROHIBITED USES:
Medical uses, except as permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
Article 18.2. Commercial Retail Planned Development Overlay Zone (C-R-PD)
10-3-1821: CREATION OF THE C-R-PD ZONE:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the commercial retail planned development overlay zone (C-R-PD). (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-
1991)
10-3-1822: OBJECTIVES OF THE C-R-PD ZONE:
For the purposes of article 18.4 of this chapter regarding planned development, the objectives of the C-R-PD zone shall be as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 572/797
A. To provide additional opportunities to locate quality retail department stores that would not otherwise be encouraged by the underlying zone in order to
maintain and strengthen the economic base of the city;
B. To foster well planned retail activity in the city's major shopping areas consistent with the stability and quality of adjacent residential neighborhoods;
C. To facilitate and encourage pedestrian circulation and reduce vehicular traffic between department store areas and the city's business triangle through
enhancements to roadways and the streetscape and other techniques;
D. To ensure that development in the C-R-PD zone is integrated with the neighboring residential uses through consideration of such features as facade
modulation, setbacks, open space, design, use of materials and colors, landscaping, location of driveways, ease of parking and other means;
E. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents, businesses and visitors of the C-R-PD zone and surrounding areas;
F. To foster development in the C-R-PD zone that is environmentally sensitive;
G. To encourage, through planned development, the prudent use of scarce natural and physical resources;
H. To ensure that development, which includes floor area in excess of the density or other zoning limitations of an underlying zone, shall not be a right of
the property owner, but instead shall be permitted only upon a determination that such development would meet the objectives set forth in this section;
I. To ensure that development in the C-R-PD zone will not materially and adversely affect the privacy of dwellings adjacent to the C-R-PD zone. (Ord. 91-
O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2150, eff. 9-11-1992)
10-3-1823: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
CONVENIENCE SERVICES: Those services primarily for the convenience of the patrons of a retail department store, such as beauty salons and
restaurants, that are customarily provided in a retail department store in the city of Beverly Hills and similar service oriented activities.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district which governs the same territory as an underlying zone, but provides alternative development standards for a specified
type of development or use.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter.
RETAIL DEPARTMENT STORE: A single business establishment of the highest quality which sells several lines of tangible commodities directly to
consumers and is organized in separate departments. Retail department store shall not include "discount stores", "warehouse stores" or "factory outlet
stores" as those terms are customarily used or other stores of a similar kind. The kind of stores specifically excluded herein from the definition of "retail
department store" shall not be considered as an exclusive listing of the stores that are not retail department stores for the purposes of this article.
UNDERLYING ZONE: The primary zone designation which would govern development on a particular site if such development were not otherwise
governed by an overlay zone. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1824: USES PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided or restricted by this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the C-R-PD zone shall be used for any purpose
except the following:
A. Uses permitted in the applicable underlying zone that meet the development standards of the underlying zone.
B. Retail department stores and ancillary uses approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this
chapter. Retail department stores may include convenience service uses that are accessory to a retail department store.
C. Convenience service uses, provided that any change from convenience service uses approved as part of a planned development pursuant to article
18.4 of this chapter shall be permitted only with the prior approval of the director of planning and community development. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-
1991)
10-3-1825: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article for retail department stores and ancillary uses, development in a C-R-PD zone shall comply with
the zoning regulations applicable to the underlying zone. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1826: HEIGHT LIMIT OF DEPARTMENT STORES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 573/797
No retail department store shall be constructed, altered, or enlarged in the C-R-PD zone except in accordance with the following height restrictions:
A. Stories: No retail department store shall exceed five (5) stories, measured as set forth in the definition of "story" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
B. Height: No retail department store shall exceed a height of eighty five feet (85') when located within a commercial underlying zone.
C. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding subsection A7 of the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter,
unoccupied architectural features may exceed the height limits of this section by not more than fifteen feet (15') in height if such unoccupied
architectural features are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
D. Vertical Circulation Spaces: Vertical circulation spaces such as stair shafts, elevator shafts, or escalators shall not be subject to the five-story limitation
set forth in subsection A of this section if such vertical circulation spaces are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development
pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to exempt such vertical circulation spaces from the height limit set
forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 93-O-2183, eff. 12-3-1993)
10-3-1827: DENSITY:
Retail department stores located in the C-R-PD zone shall have a floor area ratio no greater than five to one (5:1). For the purposes of this section, "floor
area ratio" shall mean the ratio of floor area to that portion of the site area located in a C-R-PD zone.
However, within the C-R-PD zone, the planning commission shall not permit more than one hundred thirty four thousand six hundred (134,600) square feet
of retail department store floor area to be developed in excess of the density limits of the underlying commercial zone. Furthermore, the planning
commission shall not permit any retail department store floor area to be developed in excess of the density limits of the underlying commercial zone if,
after development of the retail department store, floor area devoted to other purposes would exceed a floor area ratio of two to one (2:1). For the purposes
of this section, a retail department store loading area in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet shall be considered retail department store floor area.
In order to implement the density restrictions contained in this section, the planning commission shall not approve any retail department store development
if such development, combined with existing development and unexpired planned development approvals, shall cause the retail department store floor
area of the C-R-PD zone to exceed the density limits of the underlying commercial zone by more than one hundred thirty four thousand six hundred
(134,600) square feet.
In addition, if the permitted retail department store floor area of existing development and unexpired planned development approvals in the C-R-PD zone
exceeds the density limits of the underlying commercial zone by more than one hundred thirty four thousand six hundred (134,600) square feet, then no
further applications for retail department store planned development approval shall be accepted. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2150,
eff. 9-11-1992)
10-3-1828: CONVENIENCE SERVICE ACTIVITIES:
Convenience service activities may be permitted on any floor except the ground floor. However, the total floor area occupied by convenience services shall
not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area of the building. Furthermore, signage for convenience service activities shall be restricted to areas
within the retail department store. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1829: PARKING, ACCESS, AND CIRCULATION:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, parking for retail department stores and ancillary facilities located in the C-R-PD zone shall be provided in
accordance with sections 10-3-2727 through 10-3-2736 inclusive of this chapter.
A. Notwithstanding section 10-3-2730 of this chapter, as part of a planned development application pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, the planning
commission may establish the minimum number of parking spaces required to serve a retail department store or convenience service use. The
planning commission shall not establish a minimum number of parking spaces that alters the number of parking spaces otherwise required by this code
by more than ten percent (10%). In addition, the planning commission may permit up to twenty percent (20%) of the required parking spaces to be
provided as compact or tandem spaces.
B. As part of a planned development application pursuant to article 18.4, the planning commission may require up to one hundred additional parking
spaces to be provided to serve legally nonconforming commercial structures which are altered or expanded pursuant to this article.
C. All parking that is required by this article shall conform to a parking program approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development
approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. The parking program shall include monitoring programs and may include measures such as: 1) free
parking for employees, and 2) free validated self and valet parking for patrons, as necessary to minimize the parking and circulation impacts of the
project on the surrounding streets and to ensure that vehicle queuing will not occur in the public right of way nor impede access to a parking facility.
The monitoring program shall be implemented by the applicant at its expense. In addition, the monitoring program shall provide the city with continuing
jurisdiction to require the implementation of additional measures by the applicant to ensure that vehicles will not impede traffic in the public right of way.
D. Any department store developed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide a valet queuing area of sufficient size and configuration to ensure
that vehicle queuing will not occur in the public right of way nor impede access to a parking facility.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 574/797
E. Any retail department store or ancillary use shall be designed to prevent vehicular traffic generated by such development from using any alley located
immediately adjacent to an R-4X2 zone.
F. Parking required pursuant to this article for any retail department store shall be located on or adjacent to the site area of such store unless otherwise
approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. If approved, the facility containing such
parking shall be located no more than seventy five feet (75') from the retail department store site area.
G. Notwithstanding section 10-3-2734 of this chapter, parking shall not be provided on a separate lot from the use which it serves, except as provided in
this section.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code regarding parking for restaurant uses, the amount of parking required per square foot for restaurants
that are convenience service activities shall be equivalent to the amount of parking required per square foot for retail department stores. (Ord. 91-O-
2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1830: SETBACKS:
Retail department stores and ancillary facilities in the C-R-PD zone shall maintain the following setback distances.
A. Any ancillary parking facility that is constructed or enlarged in an underlying residential zone shall maintain a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback along all
public streets unless a lesser setback is approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this
chapter.
B. Loading facilities shall be set back not less than one hundred eighty feet (180') from an R-4X2 zone and shall maintain a minimum fifteen foot (15')
setback along any public street unless lesser setbacks are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article
18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1831: LOADING AND ANCILLARY FACILITIES:
In addition to the setback requirements contained in section 10-3-1830 of this article, loading facilities shall be governed by the following provisions:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the number and size of required loading spaces for a retail department store that is located in the C-RPD
zone may be established by the planning commission as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
B. Loading facilities located in the C-R-PD zone shall be fully enclosed unless otherwise approved by the planning commission as part of a planned
development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. All loading and unloading operations shall take place within the enclosed loading facility
and the facility shall have subsurface access to all retail stores served by the loading facility unless otherwise approved by the planning commission as
part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1832: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUFFERS:
Notwithstanding any other transition requirements between residential and nonresidential zones, the transition requirements of section 10-3-1537 of this
chapter shall govern the transition requirements between nonresidential uses located in the C-R-PD zone and residential uses. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-
1991)
10-3-1833: GEOTECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
No new building shall be constructed in the C-R-PD zone unless the construction of such new building complies with the following requirements:
A. A licensed geologist provided by the owner and directed by the city shall determine whether any transverse geologic fault is present on the site where
the new building is proposed. Such determination shall be made by one or both of the following methods:
1. Observation and evaluation of one east-west and one north-south trench to be temporarily constructed in conformance with the standards specified
by the California division of mines and geology; and/or
2. Observation of site excavation work combined with an evaluation of soil samples from not less than three (3) drill locations.
Should a fault be identified, then a report of the geologist shall specify appropriate mitigation measures to be implemented with the approval of the
department of building and safety.
B. Foundations shall be placed below a depth of thirty feet (30'), unless an alternate foundation design which will provide equivalent protection against
liquefaction impacts is approved by the department of building and safety.
C. In the event that excavation, other than that required for geotechnical testing pursuant to subsection A of this section, is necessary for the construction
of a project, the excavation design shall provide for support of the vertical slopes of the excavation to minimize lateral movement by a system of soldier
piles and lagging or other engineered system designed to minimize lateral movement. (Ord. 92-O-2150, eff. 9-11-1992)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 575/797
10-3-1834: PRIVACY PROTECTION:
No building or addition to a building shall be constructed in the C-R-PD zone except in conformance with one of the following requirements:
A. The southerly wall or walls of such building or addition shall be constructed without openings that would allow occupants of C-R-PD zone to view
adjacent multiple-family developments; or
B. Landscaping shall be provided of sufficient density to screen any openings which would otherwise allow occupants of the C-R-PD zone to view adjacent
multiple-family developments; or
C. The structure or addition, or the southerly portion of the project site, shall be designed in a manner that would permit additional site or building
improvements to screen the view of adjacent residential development from occupants of the C-R-PD zone. The planning commission, through the
planned development process shall require that such additional improvements be made if, at any time, a property adjacent to the C-R-PD zone is
developed with a residential structure. (Ord. 92-O-2150, eff. 9-11-1992)
Article 18.4. Planned Development
10-3-1841: APPLICABILITY:
A property owner may apply for a planned development approval if such approval is required or authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-
1991)
10-3-1842: APPLICATION:
All planned development applications shall contain the following information:
A. The proposed distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land, including open space, in the subject zone and adjacent to the subject site including,
but not limited to, site plans, photographs, elevations, garage layouts and landscaping plans.
B. The proposed physical improvements.
C. The proposed distribution, location, extent, and capacity of major components of public and private transportation, infrastructure, and other essential
facilities proposed or affected by the proposal within the subject zone.
D. A program of implementation and operational measures which assure that the objectives of the subject zone are advanced, including a parking
program.
E. A construction management program which addresses the following issues:
1. Fugitive dust,
2. Noise attenuation,
3. Air quality,
4. Hours of operation,
5. Street circulation and parking,
6. Employee parking,
7. Truck routing and staging,
8. Public notifications,
9. Pedestrian safety,
10. Holiday season considerations,
11. Truck traffic scheduling, and
12. Coordination with other construction activities in the vicinity of the project. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-2150, eff. 9-11-1992)
10-3-1843: PUBLIC HEARING:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding any application for a planned development. Noticing shall be completed in accordance
with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 576/797
10-3-1844: APPROVALS:
The Planning Commission may approve a planned development if the commission finds that the proposal will meet the requirements of this Code and will
advance objectives of the zone in which it is located. The Planning Commission may impose such conditions and restrictions on the approval as are
necessary to ensure that the planned development will advance objectives of the zone.
A. Vested Rights: The approval of a planned development shall not create any right to an extension of such approval or any vested right to develop the
subject property in a manner that does not comply with the laws and regulations in effect at the time that the applicant obtains a building permit.
B. Notice Of Decision: Notice of the decision of the Planning Commission shall be provided to the applicant in the manner specified for notice of a hearing
pursuant to section 10-3-1843 of this chapter.
C. Traffic Monitoring After Development Approval: The Planning Commission shall require as a condition of a planned development approval that the traffic
generated by the development be periodically monitored, at the expense of the applicant, to ensure that the actual levels of traffic do not significantly
exceed the levels of traffic anticipated by the environmental review of the development when it was approved. In the event that such monitoring shows
there has been a significant increase in the anticipated traffic generation, the Planning Commission may impose additional traffic mitigation measures
on the development that are reasonably necessary to mitigate the traffic to the anticipated levels. (Ord. 11-O-2610, eff. 8-7-2011)
10-3-1845: APPEALS:
The decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to this article may be appealed by the City Council in the manner provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1
of this Code. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1846: PERFORMANCE BOND OR FINANCIAL INFORMATION REQUIRED:
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction authorized by a planned development approval pursuant to this article, the applicant shall
provide the City with one of the following:
A. A performance bond or other security, in an amount satisfactory to the Director of Building and Safety, and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney to
ensure that the subject project will be completed as authorized by the building permit for such project, or
B. Evidence, satisfactory to the Director of Finance Administration, which demonstrates that the planned development approval applicant has the financial
capability to complete the subject project as authorized by the building permit for such project. Such evidence may include, but shall not be limited to,
proof of adequate construction financing. (Ord. 91-O-2127, eff. 11-8-1991)
10-3-1847: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in a resolution, development agreement, or other City approval granting a planned development approval, the exercise of rights
granted in such approval shall be commenced in accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2610, eff. 8-7-
2011)
Article 18.5. Medical Use Overlay Zone (C-PD-M)
10-3-1851: C-PD-M ZONE CREATED:
There is hereby created and established in the City an overlay zone, designated as the Medical Use Overlay Zone (C-PD-M). (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-
2011)
10-3-1852: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City Council finds and determines that it is necessary to restrict further intensification of medical uses in the City in order to limit commercial intrusion
into residential areas, prevent adverse traffic and parking impacts, maintain and promote the character and image of the City, foster economic vitality and
encourage pedestrian activity in retail areas. The Medical Use Overlay Zone establishes a process to allow limited expansion of medical uses at
appropriate locations in the City and in a manner that is consistent with the underlying zoning district and the elements of the general plan. These
regulations impose additional requirements to ensure that a medical use shall not be incompatible with uses permitted in adjacent areas and will not result
in negative long term impacts to the City. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1853: APPLICATION OF THE C-PD-M OVERLAY ZONE:
The C-PD-M Overlay Zone may be applied only to property located in one or more of the following Commercial Zones: C-3, C-3T-1, C-3T-2, C-3T-3, C-RPD,
C-R, C-3A and C-3B. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1854: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 577/797
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article regarding medical uses, development in a C-PD-M Zone shall comply with the zoning regulations
applicable to the underlying zone. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1855: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
DEVELOPMENT: For the purposes of this article, "develop" shall include the conversion of any existing general office or other commercial space to a
medical use, the enlargement of any existing building where the enlargement would be occupied in part or in whole by a medical use, as well as the new
construction or erection of a building proposed to be occupied in part or in whole by a medical use.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1856: USES PERMITTED:
Permitted uses of properties in a Medical Use Overlay Zone shall include medical uses, in addition to any other uses permitted or conditionally permitted in
the underlying zone. When medical uses are developed as permitted by this article, the regulations of this article shall govern whenever such regulations
are different than other regulations set forth in this chapter. No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the C-PD-M Zone shall be used for any purpose
except those approved by the Planning Commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding this section and any other provision in this article, a cosmetic spa permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.2 of this chapter is not subject
to the regulations of this article. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011; amd. Ord. 19-O-2786, 8-16-2019)
10-3-1857: OBJECTIVES:
The objectives of the C-PD-M Zone shall be as follows:
A. Medical uses in the particular location are consistent with the elements of the City's general plan and purpose and intent of this article.
B. The proposed development and medical use:
1. Will not result in detrimental impacts to existing or anticipated residential or commercial development in the vicinity of the project with regard to
density, height, scale and massing of the streetscape, garden quality of the City, or any combination thereof; unless the reviewing authority finds the
development benefits outweigh the detrimental impacts;
2. Will promote harmonious development in the area; and
3. Will not adversely interfere with the use and enjoyment of residential properties in the vicinity of the proposed development.
C. The proposed development and medical use will not result in detrimental impacts to existing or anticipated residential or commercial development in the
vicinity of the project with regard to traffic levels, traffic safety, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, pedestrian safety hazards, parking demand, parking design,
loading or manner of operation, unless the reviewing authority finds the development benefits outweigh the detrimental impacts. The development shall
provide parking that is designed for ease of use and efficiency, with vehicle ingress and egress and patient drop off and pick up locations that would not
adversely impact adjacent properties.
D. The proposed development and medical use will contribute to and enhance the character of the neighborhood and location, will contribute positively to
the image of the city, shall not undermine efforts to maintain and foster an appropriate mix of uses in the city including a pedestrian friendly
environment in the vicinity of the development.
E. The proposed development and medical use contribute to and enhance the city's economic base and granting the request will leave ample space
available for future commercial growth including business headquarters, entertainment businesses, information/technology businesses, retail
businesses and other businesses as determined by the city.
F. A public benefit shall be offered to the city and the public benefit shall, at a minimum, offset any long term impacts to the city that result from allowing a
medical use in the city's limited commercial areas. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1858: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to any development to which the medical use overlay zone is applied:
A. All restrictions applicable to the zone or underlying zone;
B. Medical uses shall not be permitted on the ground floor of any building in the pedestrian oriented zone unless the city council finds, based on
substantial evidence, that the proposed location is not pedestrian oriented and is unlikely to become pedestrian oriented in the future; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 578/797
C. Free parking shall be provided for patrons and employees of medical uses in the development and parking shall be provided that complies with all
applicable parking requirements in this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10-3-1859: PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL:
A. The procedure for applying the C-PD-M zone to any property in the city shall be the same as described in article 39 of this chapter for a zoning
amendment.
B. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve, deny or conditionally approve an application for a planned
development. In making a recommendation to grant a planned development approval, the planning commission shall recommend such conditions on
the approval that are reasonable and necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare and to offset any potential adverse impacts resulting
from the medical uses.
C. An application for a zoning amendment to apply the C-PD-M zone to a property in the city shall be processed concurrently with an application for a
planned development for a project with medical uses proposed on the same property. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
Article 18.6. Entertainment Office Planned Development Overlay Zone (E-O-PD)
10-3-1860: CREATION OF THE OVERLAY ZONE:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the entertainment office planned development overlay zone (E-O-PD). (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-
2008)
10-3-1861: OBJECTIVES OF THE E-O-PD OVERLAY ZONE:
The objectives of the E-O-PD overlay zone shall be as follows:
A. To provide additional opportunities to locate a quality major entertainment talent agency that would not otherwise be allowed by the underlying zone due
to height and floor area ratio limitations, in order to maintain and strengthen the economic base of the city;
B. To encourage the development and redevelopment of the property at 231-265 North Beverly Drive to provide for single- and multi-tenant entertainment
talent agency businesses not currently available in the city;
C. To provide for the enhancement of employment and commerce within the project area by locating new entertainment talent agency offices in the area;
D. To provide retail/commercial and entertainment talent agency business uses responsive to the city's needs and regional market forces;
E. To encourage the provision of pedestrian friendly amenities at the street level;
F. To augment the city's economic base by providing tax generating revenues from sales from the retail/commercial stores, increased business license
fees from the entertainment talent agency business, and increased assessed land and building values, which should generate additional property
taxes;
G. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents, businesses and visitors of the E-O-PD overlay zone and surrounding areas;
H. To foster development in the E-O-PD overlay zone that is environmentally sensitive;
I. To ensure that development, which includes floor area in excess of the density or other zoning limitations of an underlying zone and deviations from the
parking stall size and configuration standards of an underlying zone, shall not be a right of the property owner, but instead shall be permitted only upon
a determination that such development would meet the objectives set forth in this section; and
J. To ensure that development in the E-O-PD overlay zone will not materially and adversely affect the businesses adjacent to the E-O-PD overlay zone.
(Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
10-3-1862: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this article:
ANCILLARY COMMERCIAL: Commercial uses that are ancillary to an entertainment talent agency business, such as food service, reprographics,
newsstands, and similar service oriented activities.
ENTERTAINMENT TALENT AGENCY: A business establishment with representation in multiple sectors of the entertainment industry, including, for
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 579/797
example, motion pictures, television, music, modeling, Broadway theater, sports, book publishing, and commercial endorsements.
OVERLAY ZONE: A zoning district which governs the same territory as an underlying zone, but provides alternative development standards for a specified
type of development or use.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter.
TANDEM SPACE: A parking space that can only be accessed through another parking space.
UNDERLYING ZONE: The primary zone designation which would govern development on a particular site if such development were not otherwise
governed by an overlay zone. (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
10-3-1863: PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED USES:
Except as otherwise provided or restricted by this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the E-O-PD overlay zone shall be used for any
purpose except the uses permitted in the applicable underlying zone.
The following uses shall not be permitted in an E-O-PD overlay zone without the prior approval of the planning commission:
Commercial exercise clubs and training centers.
Hair salons.
Medical laboratories.
Medical offices.
Nail salons.
Nonoffice retail establishments, except on the ground floor and any mezzanine.
Real estate offices.
Restaurants in excess of five percent (5%) of the total gross square footage of the building.
Ancillary commercial uses may be permitted on any floor. However, the total floor area occupied by ancillary commercial uses above the ground floor shall
not exceed five percent (5%) of the floor area of the building. (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
10-3-1864: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, development and uses in an E-O-PD overlay zone shall comply with the zoning regulations
applicable to the underlying zone. (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
10-3-1865: HEIGHT LIMIT:
Building projects shall be constructed, altered, or enlarged in the E-O-PD overlay zone in accordance with the following height restrictions:
A. Stories: No building project shall exceed six (6) stories, measured as set forth in the definition of "story" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
B. Height: Building height shall not exceed eighty eight feet (88'), except that up to a maximum of ninety two feet (92') may be permitted at the discretion of
the director of community development due to technical difficulties that may be encountered during construction, when located within a commercial
underlying zone.
C. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding subsection A7 of the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter,
unoccupied architectural features may exceed the height limits of this section by not more than fifteen feet (15') in height if such unoccupied
architectural features are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
D. Vertical Circulation Spaces: Vertical circulation spaces such as stair shafts or elevator shafts shall not be subject to the six story limitation set forth in
subsection A of this section if such vertical circulation spaces are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to
article 18.4 of this chapter.
E. Mechanical Penthouse: A mechanical penthouse may exceed the story limitation set forth in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-
2008)
10-3-1866: DENSITY:
A building project located in the E-O-PD overlay zone shall have a floor area ratio no greater than three and six-tenths to one (3.6:1). (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff.
1-18-2008)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 580/797
10-3-1867: PARKING, ACCESS, AND CIRCULATION:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, parking for a building project located in the E-O-PD overlay zone shall be provided in accordance with
sections 10-3-2727 through 10-3-2736, inclusive, of this chapter.
A. As part of a planned development application pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, the planning commission, after reviewing a parking program with a
finding that the proposed parking plan will have no adverse impact to the site or the surrounding properties, may allow tandem spaces and/or compact
spaces as follows:
1. Tandem spaces may be used, measuring not less than nine feet by seventeen feet (9' x 17'). The amount of tandem parking spaces shall be in
conformance with an approved parking program pursuant to subsection B of this section.
2. Compact spaces may be used, measuring not less than seven and one-half feet by seventeen feet (7.5' x 17') to satisfy up to seventeen percent
(17%) of the parking requirement.
3. Parking spaces that are both compact and tandem may be used, measuring not less than seven and one-half feet by seventeen feet (7.5' x 17') to
satisfy up to seven percent (7%) of the parking requirement.
B. All parking that is required by this article shall conform to a parking program approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development
approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. The parking program shall include monitoring programs and may include measures such as: 1) free
parking for employees, and 2) free validated self and valet parking for patrons, as necessary to minimize the parking and circulation impacts of the
project on the surrounding streets and to ensure that vehicle queuing will not occur in the public right of way or impede access to a parking facility. The
monitoring program shall be implemented by the applicant, tenant or building owner at its expense. In addition, the monitoring program shall provide
the city with continuing jurisdiction to require the implementation of additional measures by the applicant to ensure vehicles will not impede traffic in the
public right of way.
C. Any building project developed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide a valet queuing area of sufficient size and configuration to ensure
that vehicle queuing will not occur in the public right of way or impede access to a parking facility.
D. Parking spaces in a building in the E-O-PD overlay zone shall not be leased or rented to persons who are not tenants of the building except as may be
allowed by a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
10-3-1868: LOADING AND ANCILLARY FACILITIES:
Loading facilities shall be governed by the following provisions:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the number and size of required loading spaces for a building project that is located in the E-O-PD
overlay zone may be established by the planning commission as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord.
07-O-2542, eff. 1-18-2008)
Article 19. Commercial Zone (C-4)
10-3-1900: (Rep. by Res., 4-27-1967)
Article 19.3. Mixed Use Planned Development Overlay Zone (M-PD-2)
10-3-1930: M-PD-2 ZONE CREATED:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the mixed use planned development overlay zone (M-PD-2). (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1931: APPLICATION OF M-PD-2 ZONE:
The M-PD-2 zone shall apply to the following areas, as shown on the mixed use planned development map, a copy of which is on file in the department of
planning and community development and attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein:
All those parcels having frontage on the north side of Wilshire Boulevard, east of the alley running parallel to and west of Crescent Drive, and all those
parcels having frontage on the west side of Crescent Drive north of Wilshire Boulevard and south of Clifton Way. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1932: OBJECTIVES OF THE M-PD-2 ZONE:
The objectives of the M-PD-2 zone shall be as follows:
A. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone is consistent with the general plan and any specific plans adopted for the area.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 581/797
B. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote
harmonious development of the area.
C. To provide for mixed use development that is compatible with the scale and massing of the surrounding neighborhood, through appropriate height,
modulation, upper story setbacks, and/or other similar measures.
D. To provide pedestrian friendly amenities along the street level, and setbacks that are generally consistent with other development along the west side of
Crescent Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Santa Monica Boulevard (South Roadway).
E. To promote a combination of land uses and densities within the M-PD-2 zone that will not unduly induce significantly greater traffic to nearby
neighborhood streets; provided, however, that achievement of this objective is to be balanced with other public policy considerations in the event that
such considerations are found to be of an overriding nature.
F. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone will not create any significant, adverse traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or
pedestrian safety hazards and will minimize impediments to vehicular circulation and pedestrian safety.
G. To foster uniform planning and development of all parcels in the M-PD-2 zone to ensure unified development in the overlay zone.
H. To protect the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1933: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall govern this article:
ENTERTAINMENT USE: Any entertainment, other than "live musical accompaniment to dining" as defined in section 10-3-2703 of this chapter, and shall
include, but not be limited to, movie theaters, playhouses, video arcades, nightclubs, and similar uses.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1934: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the M-PD-2 zone shall be used for any purpose except those approved by the planning commission as part
of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1935: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, a mixed use development may include any use permitted in the applicable underlying zone; provided,
however, that in any mixed use development that includes more than one underlying zone, no use may be permitted in any portion of the mixed use
development which does not otherwise conform to uses permitted by the underlying zone applicable to such portion of the mixed use development.
B. Restaurants and bars may be permitted as part of a planned development but only in portions of a mixed use development with an underlying zoning of
C-3 or RMCP.
C. No medical uses may be included in a mixed use development.
D. No entertainment uses may be included in a mixed use development.
E. Residential uses included as part of a mixed use development shall only be permitted in those portions of the development in which the underlying zone
is the RMCP zone.
F. Commercial uses included as part of a mixed use development shall only be permitted in those portions of the development in which the underlying
zone is the C-3 zone.
G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the planning commission may permit the combination of residential uses and residential and
commercial parking facilities on a lot in either the RMCP or C-3 zone in conjunction with the approval of a mixed use development through a planned
development permit pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
H. Any use not expressly authorized by this article is hereby prohibited in a mixed use development.
I. No mixed use development shall include a supermarket.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 582/797
J. Serviced residence uses may be permitted as part of a planned development but only in those portions of a mixed use development with an underlying
zoning of RMCP. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-2-2003; amd. Ord. 14-O-2654, eff. 3-21-2014)
10-3-1936: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article for mixed use developments, development in an M-PD-2 zone shall comply with the zoning
regulations applicable to the underlying zone.
Nothing in this article shall require a development to comply with the provisions of the M-PD-2 overlay zone if the development fully conforms to the
requirements of the underlying zone. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-2-2003)
10-3-1937: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
No mixed use development shall be constructed, altered, or enlarged in the M-PD-2 zone except in accordance with the following height restrictions:
A. Commercial Component: No building, structure improvement, or any part thereof, erected, constructed or maintained as part of the commercial
component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall exceed forty five feet (45') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter, or four (4)
stories, whichever is less. The first two (2) levels of above grade parking facilities shall not be considered when determining the number of stories in a
building or structure pursuant to this section, provided that any above grade level(s) containing parking facilities are separated from any street frontage
by a permitted use other than parking.
B. Residential Component: No building, structure, improvement, or any part thereof, erected, constructed or maintained as part of the residential
component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall exceed sixty feet (60') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter, or five (5)
stories, whichever is less. The first two (2) levels of above grade parking facilities shall not be considered when determining the number of stories in a
building or structure pursuant to this section, provided that any above grade level(s) containing parking facilities are separated from any street frontage
by a permitted use other than parking.
C. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, unoccupied architectural features such as skylights and
clerestories may exceed the height limits established by this section by not more than ten feet (10') in height if such unoccupied architectural features
are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter and do not exceed thirty three
percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located and no such feature exceeds or intersects a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof
upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
D. Rooftop Uses: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, rooftop restrooms described in this chapter that are approved by the planning
commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter may exceed the height limits established by this section by not
more than ten feet (10') in height provided the structure housing the restroom facility is set back from the intersection of the roof deck and the face of
any exterior wall of the floor immediately below that faces a public right of way so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of such
exterior wall is not intersected. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-2-2003)
10-3-1938: DENSITY:
A. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone, including all components,
shall have a maximum aggregate floor area ratio no greater than 2.5 to one (2.5:1). Above grade parking facilities shall not be considered when
calculating the floor area ratio of a mixed use development pursuant to this section, provided that any above grade level(s) containing parking facilities
are separated from any street frontage by a permitted use other than parking.
B. Maximum Commercial Floor Area: The maximum permitted floor area devoted to commercial uses in the M-PD-2 zone shall be forty thousand (40,000)
square feet.
C. Maximum Number Of Residential Units: The number of residential units that may be included in a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall not
exceed one dwelling unit per one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet of residential floor area or eighty eight (88) dwelling units, whichever is
greater. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1939: PARKING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, parking for mixed use developments located in the M-PD-2 zone shall be provided in accordance with
this section.
A. A mixed use development shall provide parking for the commercial and residential components which are physically separated. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the planning commission may permit, as part of a planned development approved pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, access between
parking facilities for the commercial and residential components if it finds that such access would advance the objectives of the M-PD-2 zone as set
forth in section 10-3-1932 of this chapter.
B. Parking for all uses in a mixed use development shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 583/797
C. If parking is provided aboveground, all parking, except for driveways and access to loading areas, shall be located behind a permitted use other than
parking to prevent direct visibility from adjacent streets unless otherwise approved by the planning commission through a planned development
pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
D. The planning commission may permit, as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, no more than ten percent
(10%) of the parking spaces required to be provided for serviced residences to be used for taxi and limousine staging. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-2-2003;
amd. Ord. 14-O-2654, eff. 3-21-2014)
10-3-1940: SETBACKS:
Mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone shall maintain the following setbacks:
A. Commercial Uses:
1. Wilshire Boulevard (Front) Setback: No minimum setback shall be required from the property line along the Wilshire Boulevard frontage of the
commercial component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone.
2. Crescent Drive (Street Side) Setback: A minimum setback of five feet (5') shall be required from the street side property line along the Crescent
Drive frontage of the commercial component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone.
3. Alley (Side) Setback: No minimum setback shall be required along the alley (side) of the commercial component of a mixed use development in the
M-PD-2 zone.
B. Residential/Parking Uses:
1. Crescent Drive (Front) Setback: The residential/parking component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall maintain a minimum six
and one-half foot (6.5') setback and a minimum average setback of fourteen feet (14') from the front (Crescent Drive) property line. Unless otherwise
approved as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, no portion of any front yard within a mixed use development in
the M-PD-2 zone shall be paved, except for not more than one walkway not exceeding five feet (5') in width and one driveway not exceeding the
width of its curb cut.
2. Clifton Way (Street Side) Setback: The residential/parking component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall maintain a minimum
five foot (5') setback on the ground level and a minimum seven and one-half foot (7.5') setback on all upper levels from the street side (Clifton Way)
property line.
3. Alley (Rear) Setback: No minimum setback shall be required along the alley (rear) of the residential/parking component of a mixed use development
in the M-PD-2 zone.
4. Corner Of Clifton Way And Crescent Drive: Where the rights of way of Crescent Drive and Clifton Way do not form a right angle, the
residential/parking component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone shall maintain a minimum three foot (3') setback from the property
line at the corner of Clifton Way and Crescent Drive.
5. Commercial/Residential Separation: No dwelling unit shall be constructed closer than thirty feet (30') from a commercial structure. No structure or
element of a building may encroach into the required commercial/residential separation of a mixed use development in the M-PD-2 zone except the
following:
a. Balconies that comply with all of the following provisions:
(1) The balcony does not project more than twenty four inches (24") into the required separation;
(2) The total length of the balcony at any one story does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall on which it is located;
(3) The end of any balcony is not closer than three feet (3') to the front or rear corner of the building; and
(4) The enclosure of the balcony does not exceed fifty four inches (54") in height.
b. Patios that comply with all of the following provisions:
(1) The patio does not project more than eight feet (8') into the required separation;
(2) The enclosure of the patio does not exceed seventy two inches (72") in height.
c. Roof eaves projecting no more than twenty inches (20") into the required separation, provided that such eaves have been approved by the
architectural commission.
d. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, bay windows, and window and door accents, but excluding balconies, projecting no more
than twelve inches (12") into the required separation. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1941: LOADING FACILITIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, loading facilities for mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone shall be provided in accordance with
sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744 inclusive of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1942: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLING UNITS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 584/797
A. The following minimum floor area requirements shall apply to all dwelling units within a mixed use development:
1. Efficiency Unit: An efficiency unit shall have a minimum floor area of six hundred (600) square feet.
2. One Bedroom: A one bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of eight hundred (800) square feet.
3. Two Bedrooms: A two (2) bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
4. Three Or More Bedrooms: A dwelling unit with three (3) or more bedrooms shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1943: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE REQUIRED:
The residential components of all mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone shall provide outdoor living space in accordance with the requirements of
section 10-3-2803 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1944: ROOFTOP USES:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code and subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, the planning commission may permit, as part of a
planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone to exceed height, story and density
limitations otherwise applicable to mixed use developments in order to permit the establishment of rooftop pools and spas and related restroom
facilities provided that:
1. The planning commission makes the findings set forth in subsection 10-3-2804B of this chapter regarding the rooftop restroom facilities.
2. The additional height above the maximum height limit otherwise applicable to the mixed use development will not exceed ten feet (10').
3. The mixed use development includes a maximum of two (2) rooftop restroom facilities.
4. The aggregate floor area of all rooftop restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet or such
minimum floor area as may be required by federal or state law, whichever is greater.
5. Any rooftop restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are
located.
6. Any rooftop restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall be set back from the face of any exterior wall of the floor immediately below so
that a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of the nearest outside wall is not intersected.
7. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A6 of this section, a rooftop structure may intersect a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane
of the nearest outside wall provided that the exterior wall of the rooftop structure is constructed in the same plane as the exterior wall of the floor
below and the rooftop structure will not exceed the applicable maximum allowable height otherwise permitted by more than forty five inches (45").
8. No food or beverage service, other than vending machines, shall be provided in connection with any rooftop pool use.
9. Use of the rooftop pool facilities shall be restricted to residents and guests of residents of the mixed use development.
10. No admittance or use fees shall be charged to use the rooftop pool facilities. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the imposition or collection of
home owner association fees on residents of a mixed use development to offset the costs of operating and maintaining such rooftop pool facilities.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter permitting certain elements to be located above maximum height limits, only those elements required
by law to project above the roof deck shall be permitted to exceed the ten foot (10') height limit of the structure enclosing the rooftop use permitted
hereby. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1945: COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall be incorporated into all mixed use developments in the M-PD-2 zone:
A. Noise Attenuation:
1. All dwelling units shall be constructed with double glazed glass windows.
2. The exterior walls of all dwelling units, and any interior walls or floor/ceilings that separate dwelling units from commercial uses shall comply with the
sound transmission standards set forth in sections 1208 and 1208A of the Uniform Building Code, as amended by the 1998 California Building Code,
or their successors.
3. All dwelling units shall be equipped with internal air conditioning.
B. Odors: Air conditioning systems for the residential component shall be located and designed in a manner sufficient to prevent adverse impacts from
odors generated by the commercial component.
C. Miscellaneous:
1. Parking shall be located underground or behind a permitted use other than parking to prevent direct visibility from Crescent Drive and Wilshire
Boulevard. Parking spaces for commercial tenants and their customers shall be physically separated from parking spaces for residents of the mixed
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 585/797
use development so that entry to the parking area for the residential component is restricted to prohibit access by patrons and tenants of the
commercial component.
2. Commercial and residential uses shall have separate entrances. Commercial freight elevators and entrances shall also be separate from the
residential component. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
10-3-1946: APPLICATION OF TRANSITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise provided in this article, all uses in a mixed use development shall comply with the general operational requirements set forth in section
10-3-1956 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2417, eff. 1-3-2003)
Article 19.5. Transition Between Commercial And Residential Uses
10-3-1951: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
ADJACENT TO A RESIDENTIAL ZONE: A site that shares a property line with a residentially zoned property or is separated from a residentially zoned
property by a public alley. Any portion of public right of way which abuts a residentially zoned property shall be deemed to be adjacent to a residential
zone.
COMMERCIAL REFUSE BIN: A trash container which is designed for front loading refuse collection trucks and is utilized by a commercial establishment.
COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION AREA: That portion of a commercial zone or the RMCP zone that is located within one hundred seventy feet
(170') of either a residential zone or the RMCP zone. "Commercial-residential transition area" shall also include sites located within a residential zone
which are used primarily by commercial uses which were legally authorized prior to the change to a residential zone classification. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, "commercial-residential transition area" shall not include either those properties located on the northerly side of the street on Santa Monica
Boulevard, south roadway, or those properties located on the southerly side of the street on Wilshire Boulevard west of Santa Monica Boulevard, north
roadway.
DELIVERY, LOADING, OR UNLOADING: The transfer of a shipment of goods, wares, merchandise, mail, or similar items, to or from a vehicle, or the
loading of persons into a vehicle, or the unloading of persons from a vehicle.
EXTENDED HOURS: The time between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on the following weekday, and the time
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on the following weekend day or holiday.
EXTENDED HOURS OPERATION: A commercial use that receives patrons during extended hours. (Ord. 81-O-1797, eff. 6-11-1981; amd. Ord. 96-O-
2270, eff. 11-27-1996; Ord. 99-O-2324, eff. 3-19-1999)
10-3-1952: COMMERCIAL USE SETBACKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any building, structure, or improvement, or any part thereof, on a site located in a nonresidential
zone and located adjacent to a residential zone unless the following setbacks are maintained:
A. If the nonresidential site abuts an alley which separates the nonresidential zone from the residential zone, no building, structure, or improvement, either
above or less than eight feet (8') below the grade level, except a wall or other improvement otherwise permitted by this article shall be located within six
feet (6') of the edge of the alley adjacent to such site; or
B. If there is no alley between the nonresidential site and the residential zone, the following setbacks shall be maintained, except as otherwise permitted
by this article:
1. No building, structure, or improvement located less than eight feet (8') below the grade level shall be located within six feet (6') of the property line
abutting the residential zone.
2. No building, structure, or improvement, or any part thereof, up to thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories in height, whichever is less, shall be located within
ten feet (10') of the property line abutting the residential zone.
3. No part of any building, structure, or improvement more than thirty feet (30') or two (2) stories in height, whichever is less, shall be located within
twenty feet (20') of the property line abutting the residential zone.
C. The director of planning and community development, pursuant to article 36 of this chapter, may permit improvements in the setback required by
subsection B of this section as is necessary to accommodate building code requirements if the director of planning and community development finds
that the proposal will be compatible with the adjacent residential area.
D. If a retail department store is developed in accordance with the commercial retail planned development overlay zone (C-R-PD) standards set forth in
article 18.2 of this chapter, subsections A and B of this section shall not apply, and such retail department store shall be developed in accordance with
the setback requirements of said article 18.2 of this chapter. (Ord. 81-O-1797, eff. 6-11-1981; amd. Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 96-O-2270,
eff. 11-27-1996)
10-3-1953: WALLS REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL-NONRESIDENTIAL TRANSITION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 586/797
Notwithstanding the setback requirements of section 10-3-1952 of this article, no person shall erect, construct, or enlarge any building, structure or
improvement on a nonresidential site adjacent to a residential zone unless that person constructs a wall along the property line separating the residential
and nonresidential uses.
A. Nonresidential Site That Abuts An Alley: If the nonresidential site is separated from the residential zone by an alley, then a three foot (3') high solid
masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained along the property line that abuts the alley. There shall be no opening in such wall; provided,
however, there may be an opening a maximum of twenty five feet (25') wide in such wall as is necessary to accommodate a driveway providing access
to the parking area or loading dock of the structure from the alley when such access is otherwise permitted by the city engineer or the director of
building and safety. The director of planning and community development, pursuant to article 36 of this chapter, may permit openings not exceeding a
width of five feet (5') in such wall as is necessary to accommodate building code requirements if the director of planning and community development
finds that the proposal will be compatible with the adjacent residential area.
1. Materials Allowed: A reviewing authority may allow the use of any wall material other than masonry, and may further allow a wall constructed of
material other than masonry to be a maximum height of three feet six inches (3'6"), provided the reviewing authority finds that the alternative wall
material or design and the additional height will not have a substantial adverse impact on the adjacent residential property.
2. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection A, a reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation pursuant to
article 36 of this chapter to allow an opening of up to thirty feet (30') in width in a wall along the property line that abuts the alley, provided the
reviewing authority finds that the increased size of the opening will not have a substantial adverse impact on traffic safety, noise, the scale and
massing of the streetscape, or garden quality of the city.
B. Nonresidential Site That Abuts A Residential Rear Property Line: If the nonresidential site abuts the rear property line of a residential site, then a solid
masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained along the nonresidential property line. The height of the wall shall be at least six feet (6'), but shall
not exceed the maximum height permitted along the abutting residential property line.
1. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection B, a reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation pursuant to
article 36 of this chapter to allow a wall of up to ten feet (10') in height along a property line abutting a residential rear property line, provided the
reviewing authority finds that the wall will not have a substantial adverse impact on traffic safety, the scale and massing of the streetscape, or garden
quality of the city.
A reviewing authority may also issue a minor accommodation to allow for any wall material other than masonry, provided the reviewing authority finds
that the choice of alternate wall material will not have a substantial adverse impact on the privacy, security or residential quality of the adjacent
residential property.
C. Nonresidential Site That Abuts A Residential Side Property Line: If the nonresidential site abuts the side property line of a residential site, then a solid
masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained along the nonresidential property line. Within the area abutting the front yard of the residential
property, the wall shall be constructed at the maximum height permitted along the abutting residential property line. Within all other areas, the height of
the wall shall be at least six feet (6'), but shall not exceed the maximum height permitted along the abutting residential property line.
1. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection C, a reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation pursuant to
article 36 of this chapter to allow a wall of up to ten feet (10') in height along a property line abutting a residential side property line, provided the
reviewing authority finds that the wall will not have a substantial adverse impact on traffic safety, the scale and massing of the streetscape, or garden
quality of the city.
A reviewing authority may also issue a minor accommodation to allow for any wall material other than masonry, provided the reviewing authority finds
that the choice of alternate wall material will not have a substantial adverse impact on the privacy, security or residential quality of the adjacent
residential property.
D. Finish: All walls constructed pursuant to this section shall be finished on each side of the wall. (Ord. 81-O-1797, eff. 6-11-1981; amd. Ord. 96-O-2270,
eff. 11-27-1996; Ord. 98-O-2293, eff. 4-17-1998; Ord. 01-O-2389, eff. 1-10-2002; Ord. 02-O-2395, eff. 4-5-2002)
10-3-1954: LANDSCAPING OF SETBACKS FOR COMMERCIAL USES:
A. Landscaping Plans: The setback area required pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3-1952 of this article shall be improved with landscaping in
conformance with a plan which meets all of the following criteria and which has been reviewed and approved by the architectural commission in
accordance with section 10-3-3007 of this chapter:
1. Landscaping shall be of a type and density to provide a texture, buffer, or screen between nonresidential and residential zones as deemed
appropriate for the location by the architectural commission.
2. Landscaping shall be of a type and size which will provide such texture, buffer, or screen to a reasonable extent when initially planted and which will
grow to a size and configuration to achieve the full intent of such buffer within a reasonable amount of time.
3. Plants shall be of an appropriate type so as to minimize the dropping of leaves or needles onto adjacent properties or alleys or shall be capable of
being readily maintained so as to minimize such dropping.
4. Plants shall have a root structure which will not displace or damage paved areas and which will not interfere with nearby utility systems.
B. Landscaping Maintenance: Such landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of a landscape maintenance plan approved by the
architectural commission which shall provide for the irrigation, fertilization, trimming and replacement of plants on a schedule appropriate to the types
and quantities of plants utilized in such landscaping. (Ord. 81-O-1797, eff. 6-11-1981; amd. Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996)
10-3-1955: COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION; GENERAL DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 587/797
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any building, structure, or improvement, or any
part thereof, on a site located in a nonresidential zone and located adjacent to a residential zone unless all of the following conditions are met:
A. No mechanical venting faces any residential use;
B. No mirrored or reflective glass or material is used on the facade of the building, structure, or improvement which faces any residential use;
C. No loading dock faces any residential use; provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to any site which is not a corner site and which abuts an
alley which separates the nonresidential zone from the residential zone; and
D. The building, structure, or improvement is designed to allow for adequate sight lines for vehicular ingress to and egress from each adjacent residential
use or alley. (Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996)
10-3-1956: COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION; GENERAL OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, either directly or indirectly, any
commercial use on a site located in a commercial-residential transition area except in conformance with the following requirements:
1. No deliveries shall be received, and no loading, or unloading shall be permitted during extended hours unless:
a. The deliveries, loading, or unloading operation is conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, or
b. The deliveries, loading, or unloading operation is conducted exclusively from a public right of way that is not adjacent to a residential zone or
RMCP zone.
2. Refuse shall not be deposited into a commercial refuse bin located outside of an enclosed structure on private property or on a public right of way
that is adjacent to a residential zone or RMCP zone during extended hours unless such refuse is in sealed bags.
3. Commercial refuse bins shall not be moved in a public right of way adjacent to a residential zone or RMCP zone, or within the area between a
commercial structure and a residential zone or RMCP zone during extended hours, except by waste haulers operating pursuant to a franchise with
the city that permits such activity during extended hours.
4. All commercial refuse bins shall be equipped with nonmetallic lids which shall remain closed at all times.
5. For those businesses operating pursuant to an extended hours permit issued pursuant to section 10-3-1958 of this article, the name and telephone
number of a person who will be available during the operational hours of the business to address a problem with the subject establishment shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the exterior of the building housing the establishment. The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and the
letters on the sign shall be not less than one-half inch (1/2") nor more than one inch (1") in height. The contact person shall be the business owner,
business manager, or other similar person who has sufficient authority over the business to address problems that may disturb neighbors.
6. All doors facing a residential zone shall remain closed at all times during extended hours except for the immediate purpose of ingress or egress. All
windows to food preparation areas that face a residential zone shall remain closed at all times during extended hours.
7. Employees, agents, associates, or contractors of a nonresidential use shall not congregate behind the nonresidential structure or in any open area or
public right of way separating a nonresidential structure and a residential zone or RMCP zone during extended hours.
8. All businesses in the commercial-residential transition area shall comply with all provisions of title 5, chapter 1, article 1 of this code, regarding
general noise regulations. In order to promote compliance with said provisions, and in addition to said provisions, all businesses in the commercialresidential
transition area shall comply with the following requirements:
a. The employees, agents, associates, or contractors of a business shall not engage in conduct or activity which substantially or unreasonably
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity
residing in the area during extended hours.
b. No activity shall be conducted on the premises in a manner which substantially or unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding
neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area during extended hours.
c. The factors which shall be considered in determining whether activity described in subsections A8a and A8b of this section violates this section
shall be the criteria specified under section 5-1-104 of this code, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The volume of the noise;
(2) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
(3) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
(4) The volume of the background noise;
(5) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
(6) The time of day or night the noise occurs;
(7) The duration of the noise;
(8) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 588/797
B. The operational requirements set forth in subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
1. The following business classifications:
a. Professions and semiprofessions (classification C), as defined under subsection 3-1-219C of this code, excluding medical offices and medical
laboratories as defined under section 10-3-100 of this chapter;
b. Residential or commercial property rental and leasing (classifications E and F), as defined under subsections 3-1-219E and F of this code;
c. Agencies, lenders, brokerages, and other similar services (classification G), as defined under subsection 3-1-219G of this code;
d. Depository financial institutions, branch and sales office locations (classification H), as defined under subsection 3-1-219H of this code;
e. Corporate offices; or
2. Hotels and hotel appurtenant service uses as defined in article 28.6 of this chapter; or
3. Projects approved by the planning commission or the city council on an appeal through any of the following procedures when the resolution of
approval specifically and explicitly addressed extended hours activities associated with the project:
a. Development plan review;
b. Conditional use permit;
c. Planned development review; or
4. Vehicle fuel stations.
C. A minor accommodation may be granted pursuant to the procedures and requirements of article 36 of this chapter, to relieve an applicant of one or
more of the operational requirements prescribed by subsections A1 through A7 of this section if the director of planning and community development
finds:
1. The applicant cannot comply with the subject requirements, and
2. The applicant will comply with subsection A8 of this section. (Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996; amd. Ord. 99-O-2324, eff. 3-19-1999; Ord. 05-O-
2489, eff. 12-16-2005)
10-3-1957: TRANSITIONAL USE LICENSES:
A. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no commercial activity shall be commenced or conducted in a commercial-residential transitional
area without a valid transitional use license and, if applicable, an extended hours permit. The department of finance administration shall issue a
transitional use license upon compliance with the following requirements:
1. The applicant agrees in writing that:
a. The applicant has read and understands the requirements of this article; and
b. The subject business will, at all times, comply with all requirements of this article, including any conditions imposed pursuant to this article by the
director of building and safety to ensure compliance with all requirements of this article; and
c. In the event that the Director of Planning and Community Development has a reasonable basis to believe that the subject business may be in
violation of the requirements of this article or any other provision of this Code, and that substantial progress is not being made toward the
correction of such violation, the Director of Planning and Community Development shall have the authority to refer the subject business to the
Planning Commission for revocation of the transitional use license.
2. The applicant submits a name and telephone number of a person who is available during operational hours of the business to address all problems
with the subject establishment; and
3. The subject business does not have an uncured violation of this article, any other provision of this Code, or any condition imposed on a transitional
use license or extended hours permit pursuant to section 10-3-1959 of this article, except where substantial progress is being made toward the
correction of such violation to the satisfaction of the Director of Building and Safety or the Director of Planning and Community Development; and
4. A transitional use license has not been revoked for the subject business by the Planning Commission pursuant to section 10-3-1959 of this article.
B. Transitional Use License: The Planning Commission may issue a transitional use license for a business whose transitional use license was previously
revoked, if, after conducting a public hearing in accordance to the requirements specified in section 10-3-1959 of this article, the Planning Commission
finds that the requirements specified under subsections A1 through A3 of this section have been met. In connection therewith, the Planning
Commission may impose conditions on the approval of a transitional use license to ensure conformance to the requirements specified under
subsections A1 through A3 of this section and to ensure that the permitted activity will not violate any provision of this Code. The decision of the
Planning Commission shall be appealable to the City Council as provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code.
C. No Transitional Use License Required: Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, no transitional use license shall be required for the uses exempted
under subsection 10-3-1956B of this article.
D. Filing Fees: No fee or charge shall be required for any application or form filed for a transitional use license. (Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996)
10-3-1958: EXTENDED HOURS PERMITS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 589/797
A. Extended Hours: Except as provided in subsection H of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, either directly or
indirectly, an extended hours operation on a site located in a commercial-residential transition area in the City of Beverly Hills without having procured
an extended hours permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. Every person commencing or conducting any extended hours operation shall file an
application for an extended hours permit with the Department of Planning and Community Development in a form prescribed by that department. The
City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for the review of such applications.
B. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on all applications for an extended hours permit. Upon receipt of a complete
application, the Director shall refer the project to the Planning Commission at the next feasible regular meeting, unless an extension of time is
consented to by the applicant. Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice guidelines.
C. Conditions: The Planning Commission shall grant an extended hours permit if it finds that the extended hours operation will not substantially disrupt the
peace and quiet of the adjacent neighborhood as a result of any of the following:
1. The accumulation of garbage, litter, or other waste, both on and off of the subject site;
2. Noise created by the extended hours operation or by employees or visitors entering or exiting the extended hours operation;
3. Light and glare;
4. Odors and noxious fumes;
5. Pedestrian queuing;
6. Crime or peril to personal safety and security;
7. Use of residential streets for parking which is likely to cause activity associated with the subject extended hours operation to intrude substantially into
a residential area;
8. Effects on traffic volumes and congestion on local residential streets; and
9. Cumulative impacts relating to the existing concentration of extended hours operations in the vicinity of the proposed extended hours operation.
D. Conditions Of Approval: To make the findings set forth under subsection C of this section, the planning commission may impose conditions of approval
on a project to ensure that the factors set forth under subsection C of this section will not substantially disrupt the peace and quiet of adjacent
residential and commercial uses or create significant environmental impacts on the community within the meaning of the California environmental
quality act. Such conditions may include, without limitation, restrictions or modifications to the hours of operation requested by an applicant. The
planning commission shall only impose conditions related to the impacts of an operation during extended hours.
E. Decision: The decision of the planning commission shall be by resolution. The applicant or any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal the
decision to the city council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The city council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal in a timely
manner.
F. Operative Date: The operative date of the extended hours permit shall be the fifteenth day after the date upon which the applicant receives approval of
the permit, provided no appeal has been filed on a timely basis pursuant to subsection E of this section.
G. Approval Upon Expiration Of Time Limit: In the event that the planning commission has not acted on an application for an extended hours permit in
accordance with the time limits specified under subsection B of this section, the application shall be deemed approved upon the expiration of the time
limit. An appeal period during which such approval may be appealed to the city council as prescribed in subsection E of this section shall commence
upon the expiration and deemed approval date.
H. Businesses Not Applicable: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any business that was legally operating during extended hours on
December 27, 1996, as part of its customary weekly schedule of business operations. The provisions of this section shall also not apply to any
business that was legally operating during extended hours on January 8, 1999, without the requirement of an extended hours permit, as part of its
customary weekly schedule of business operations. These exemptions shall not be transferable by the existing business to a different business. For
purposes of this section, a business shall be considered different from the existing business if:
1. The business has a different name, and
2. The business offers a product or type or style of service which, in the opinion of the director of planning, may result in additional patrons visiting the
site during extended hours or additional vehicle trips to the site during extended hours.
Changes to product or service references in the name of a business shall not be considered a change to the name of the business.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any business operating during extended hours pursuant to the exemptions set forth herein shall not expand its hours
of extended hours operation in effect on January 8, 1999, except as permitted by an extended hours permit issued pursuant to this section, subject to
the following exceptions:
a. Such business may expand its hours of extended hours operation up until and including twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, notwithstanding a shorter
period of extended hours operation in effect on January 8, 1999;
b. For any such business that was subject to and qualified for the exemption specified in this subsection H, as set forth in ordinance 96-O-2270, such
business may expand its hours of extended hours operation up until and including twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, notwithstanding there being no
hours of extended hours operation in effect on January 8, 1999.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 590/797
I. Exercise Of Rights Granted: Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting an extended hours permit, the exercise of rights granted in such
extended hours permit shall be exercised within one hundred eighty (180) days after the adoption of the final resolution granting such extended hours
permit. The planning commission may grant a six (6) month extension of the time limit contained in this subsection, or in any resolution granting a
discretionary approval, if an application therefore is made at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the time limit, or any extension thereof. Such
extension may be granted after a duly noticed public hearing held pursuant to the same procedures applicable to the approval of the original
application, if the Planning Commission determines that conditions and regulations affecting development in the City have not changed in a manner
that would warrant reconsideration of the findings and decision made at the time of the original approval. The time limit imposed pursuant to this
subsection may not be extended beyond two (2) years after the adoption of the initial final resolution granting the extended hours permit. Any decision
regarding an extension pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the appropriate review authority in the manner provided by the same
procedures applicable to the approval of the original application or, if no appeal procedures are specified, to the City Council in the manner provided by
title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996; amd. Ord. 99-O-2324, eff. 3-19-1999; Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002; Ord.
14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014; Ord. 19-O-2785, 8-16-2019)
10-3-1959: REFERRAL AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND LICENSES:
A. The Director of Planning and Community Development and the Director of Building and Safety shall develop administrative guidelines for addressing
complaints and possible violations in connection with transitional use licenses and extended hours permits, and evaluating whether a business is in
compliance with the provisions of this article and all other provisions of this Code. The guidelines shall include examples of remedies that may be
pursued by the City in response to violations of this article or other provisions of this Code. The remedies will be available as alternatives to referral of
transitional use licenses or extended hours permits to the Planning Commission for consideration of revocation of the license or permit. Such
guidelines may be amended by the Directors at the Directors' discretion. Without regard to whether the City has pursued alternative remedies, if the
Director of Planning and Community Development or the Director of Building and Safety believes that a business may not be in compliance with the
provisions of this article or any other provision of this Code, the Director of Planning and Community Development may refer the transitional use
license or extended hours permit to the Planning Commission to consider revocation or conditioning the license or permit to ensure that the permitted
activity operates in compliance with the provisions of this article and all other City laws.
B. In the event that a transitional use license or extended hours permit is referred to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing regarding the possible revocation of the license or permit or the possible imposition of conditions to ensure compliance by the licensee
or permittee with the provisions of this article and all other applicable City laws for which the licensee or permittee is found in violation. Notice of such
hearing shall be provided as set forth in subsection C of this section. The Planning Commission, after such hearing, may revoke the transitional use
license or extended hours permit if the commission determines that:
1. The permittee has violated a condition of the license or permit previously imposed pursuant to this section, or violated any provision of this Code that
governs the permitted activity; or
2. Misstatements or omissions of material facts were used in the acquisition of a transitional use license or extended hours permit.
In addition, should the Planning Commission find that the permittee is in violation of any provision of this article or other City law governing the
permitted activity, the commission may allow the transitional use license or extended hours permit to remain in force, subject to conditions to correct
and prevent a recurrence of said violation and to protect the peace and quiet of the adjacent neighborhood. In doing so, the Planning Commission
may require all future license and permit approvals for the subject business to be subject to the same conditions.
C. At least ten (10) days prior to any hearing by the Planning Commission, notice of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by first
class mail in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice guidelines.
D. The applicant or any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to this article may appeal the decision to the City Council as
provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996; amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-1960: VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES:
A. The operation of a business in violation of this article is a nuisance. Each person violating this article is subject to all remedies allowed by law. (Ord. 11-
O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
Article 19.6. Adaptive Reuse Planned Development Overlay Zone (C-3 (AR))
10-3-1961: C-3 (AR) ZONE CREATED:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the adaptive reuse planned development overlay zone (C-3 (AR)). (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1962: APPLICATION OF C-3 (AR) ZONE:
The C-3 (AR) zone shall apply to lots 200 and 201 of tract 4988 in the city as per map book 54, pages 98 and 99, records of the county recorder. (Ord. 03-
O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1963: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall govern this article:
ADAPTIVE REUSE: The conversion or renovation of an existing commercial development to residential uses or a combination of residential and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 591/797
commercial uses.
ENTERTAINMENT USE: Any entertainment, other than "live musical accompaniment to dining" as defined in section 10-3-2703 of this chapter, and shall
include, but not be limited to, movie theaters, playhouses, video arcades, nightclubs, and similar uses.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1964: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the C-3 (AR) zone shall be used for any purpose except those approved by the reviewing authority as part of
a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1965: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise specified, for the purposes of this article the reviewing authority for an adaptive reuse planned development shall be the city council. The
city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the request for a planned development and shall follow the procedures set forth in article 18.4
of this chapter in reviewing said request. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1966: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
In lieu of the findings required for planned developments pursuant to section 10-3-1844 of this chapter, the reviewing authority may approve a planned
development application for an adaptive reuse development if it makes all of the following findings:
A. The proposed adaptive reuse development is consistent with the general plan and any specific plans adopted for the area.
B. The proposed adaptive reuse development will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote harmonious
development of the area.
C. The proposed adaptive reuse development will ensure the efficient use of existing resources and provide additional housing opportunities.
D. The proposed adaptive reuse development will not create any significant, adverse traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts or pedestrian
safety hazards and will minimize impediments to vehicular circulation and pedestrian safety.
E. The proposed adaptive reuse development will encourage development of pedestrian friendly environments by allowing the conversion of impersonal,
underutilized commercial buildings to residential uses while preserving a street level presence that holds the interest of pedestrians and attracting
additional neighborhood commercial uses.
F. The proposed adaptive reuse development will promote the public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1967: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the reviewing authority may permit the combination of residential and commercial uses on a lot in C-3
(AR) zone in conjunction with the approval of an adaptive reuse development through a planned development approved pursuant to article 18.4 of this
chapter.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this article, an adaptive reuse development may include any use permitted in the C-3 zone.
C. A portion of the Wilshire Boulevard frontage of all adaptive reuse developments shall be reserved for pedestrian oriented commercial uses.
D. No residential units may be located on the ground floor of an adaptive reuse development. The ground floor of an adaptive reuse development shall be
used exclusively for the following purposes: 1) the entry lobby for the residential component; 2) a media room, concierge station, gym/workout facility,
and/or other amenities for the residential component; or 3) commercial uses. The location and size of any ground floor use in an adaptive reuse
development shall be subject to review by the reviewing authority as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
E. No restaurants or bars may be included in an adaptive reuse development unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority as part of a planned
development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
F. No entertainment uses may be included in an adaptive reuse development.
G. The mezzanine or second story of an adaptive reuse development may be used for commercial office uses.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 592/797
H. No medical uses may be included in an adaptive reuse development.
I. Any use not expressly authorized by this article is hereby prohibited in an adaptive reuse development.
J. No adaptive reuse development shall include a supermarket. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1968: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article for adaptive reuse developments, development in a C-3 (AR) zone shall comply with the zoning
regulations applicable to the underlying zone. Nothing in this article shall require a development to comply with the provisions of the C-3 (AR) zone to the
extent the development fully conforms to the requirements of the underlying zone. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1969: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
A. No Additional Height: The height of an adaptive reuse development in the C-3 (AR) zone shall not be converted, altered or enlarged.
B. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, certain elements of the height of an adaptive reuse development in the C-3
(AR) zone may be increased in accordance with the following height restrictions:
1. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, unoccupied and architectural features such as skylights,
clerestories, trellises, sound barriers or walls, and wind screens may exceed the existing height of the building by not more than twelve feet (12') in
height if such unoccupied architectural features are approved by the reviewing authority as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of
this chapter and do not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located and, except for open structures (such as
trellises) and wind screens, no such feature exceeds or intersects a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five
degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
2. Rooftop Uses: Except for unoccupied architectural features or wind screens, notwithstanding any other provision of this code rooftop improvements
described in section 10-3-1976 of this article that are approved by the reviewing authority as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4
of this chapter may exceed the height limits established by this section by not more than twelve feet (12') in height provided the structure housing the
rooftop use is set back from the intersection of the roof deck and the face of any exterior wall of the floor immediately below that faces a public right
of way so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of such exterior wall is not intersected. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1969.5: SETBACKS:
A. No Alteration Of Setbacks: The building setbacks of an adaptive reuse development in the C-3 (AR) zone shall not be converted, altered or enlarged.
B. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, an adaptive reuse development in the C-3 (AR) zone may increase the
encroachment into existing setbacks of certain elements of the structure in accordance with the following restrictions:
1. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, unoccupied architectural features such as security walls and
sound barriers or walls may increase the existing encroachment into a required setback of the building if such unoccupied architectural features are
required by the reviewing authority and approved as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-
2003)
10-3-1970: DENSITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the following density limits shall apply to adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone:
A. Maximum FAR: The floor area ratio of the adaptive reuse development shall not exceed the floor area ratio for the existing commercial building being
converted.
B. Additional Floor Area For Residential Uses: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, a portion of the existing above grade parking
structure of an adaptive reuse development may be converted to residential uses or storage for residential use provided all of the following criteria are
satisfied:
1. The units in the converted area comply with the minimum unit size requirements set forth in section 10-3-1974 of this article.
2. After the conversion, the gross habitable floor area of the building, inclusive of all common areas, does not exceed the floor area of the existing
commercial building by more than fourteen percent (14%). Areas located in the parking structure and used exclusively to provide storage for
residential tenants in the adaptive reuse development shall not be considered in determining the gross habitable floor area of the building.
3. After the conversion, sufficient off street parking is provided in the parking structure to satisfy the parking requirements imposed by this chapter for
all uses in the adaptive reuse development.
C. Minimum Average Dwelling Unit Size: If the residential component of an adaptive reuse development is comprised solely of rental units, the average
floor area of all residential units in the adaptive ruse development shall be at least eight hundred (800) square feet. If any portion of the residential
component of an adaptive reuse development is comprised of condominium units, the average floor area of all residential units in the adaptive reuse
development shall be at least one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003; amd. Ord. 03-O-2434, eff. 12-6-2003)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 593/797
10-3-1971: PARKING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, parking for adaptive reuse developments located in the C-3 (AR) zone shall be provided in accordance
with this section.
A. Parking for all uses in an adaptive reuse development shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
B. An adaptive reuse development shall provide parking for the commercial and residential components that is physically separated. The adaptive reuse
development may provide a common entry driveway to access the commercial and residential parking areas; provided, that once inside the parking
facility separate parking areas are provided for residential and commercial uses and entry to the parking area for the residential component is restricted
to prohibit access by patrons and tenants of the commercial component.
C. Parking requirements for residential units in the adaptive reuse development may be satisfied through the use of tandem parking. Tandem parking may
only be used to satisfy the parking needs for units that require more than one parking space.
D. Guest parking for residential units may be provided in the commercial parking area of an adaptive reuse development. In addition, fractions of
residential parking spaces (0.5 or more) required for any dwelling unit may be located in the commercial parking area if approved by the reviewing
authority as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1972: SETBACKS FOR BALCONIES AND ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES:
Balconies, patios and certain architectural features in an adaptive reuse development in the C-3 (AR) zone shall maintain the following setbacks:
A. Balconies: An adaptive reuse development may include balconies that comply with all of the following provisions:
1. The balcony does not project more than twenty four inches (24") into any required or existing setback;
2. The total length of the balcony at any one story does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall on which it is located;
3. The end of any balcony is not closer than three feet (3') to the front or rear corner of the building; and
4. The enclosure of the balcony does not exceed fifty four inches (54") in height.
B. Eaves: Roof eaves projecting no more than twenty inches (20") into the required or existing setback, provided that such eaves have been approved by
the architectural commission.
C. Architectural Projections: Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, bay windows, and window and door accents, but excluding balconies,
projecting no more than twelve inches (12") into the required or existing setback. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1973: LOADING FACILITIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, loading facilities for adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone shall be provided in accordance with
sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744 inclusive of this chapter unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority as part of a planned development
approval pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1974: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLING UNITS:
A. The following minimum floor area requirements shall apply to all dwelling units within an adaptive reuse development:
1. Efficiency Unit: An efficiency unit shall have a minimum floor area of six hundred (600) square feet.
2. One Bedroom: A one bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of six hundred (600) square feet.
3. Two Bedrooms: A two (2) bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
4. Three Or More Bedrooms: A dwelling unit with three (3) or more bedrooms shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand four hundred (1,400)
square feet. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1975: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE REQUIRED:
The residential components of all adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone shall provide a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of outdoor
living space per dwelling unit. The outdoor living space requirement may be met through the provision of: a) private patio or balcony areas for each unit, b)
a common open area or areas accessible to all residents, or c) a combination of private and common areas. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1976: ROOFTOP USES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 594/797
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code and subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, the reviewing authority may permit, as part of a
planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone to exceed height, story and density
limitations otherwise applicable to adaptive reuse developments in order to permit the establishment of rooftop uses, including common patios/seating
areas, rooftop gardens, pools and spas and related restroom facilities provided that:
1. The reviewing authority makes the findings set forth in subsection 10-3-2804B of this chapter regarding the rooftop restroom facilities.
2. The additional height above the existing building height will not exceed twelve feet (12').
3. The adaptive reuse development includes a maximum of two (2) rooftop restroom facilities.
4. The aggregate floor area of all rooftop restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet or such
minimum floor area as may be required by federal or state law, whichever is greater.
5. The aggregate floor area of any rooftop uses permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon
which they are located unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority as part of a planned development approval pursuant to article 18.4 of
this chapter.
6. Any rooftop structures permitted pursuant to this section shall be set back from the face of any exterior wall of the floor immediately below so that a
forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of the nearest outside wall is not intersected.
7. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A6 of this section, a rooftop structure may intersect a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane
of the nearest outside wall provided that the exterior wall of the rooftop structure is constructed in the same plane as the exterior wall of the floor
below and the rooftop structure will not exceed the applicable maximum allowable height otherwise permitted by more than forty five inches (45").
8. Use of the rooftop facilities shall be restricted to residents and guests of residents of the adaptive reuse development.
9. No admittance or use fees shall be charged to use the rooftop pool facilities. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the imposition or collection of
home owner association fees on residents of an adaptive reuse development to offset the costs of operating and maintaining such rooftop pool
facilities.
10. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter permitting certain elements to be located above maximum height limits, only those elements required
by law to project above the roof deck shall be permitted to exceed the twelve foot (12') height limit of the structure enclosing the rooftop use
permitted hereby. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1977: COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall be incorporated into all adaptive reuse developments in the C-3 (AR) zone:
A. Noise Attenuation:
1. All dwelling units shall be constructed with double glazed glass windows.
2. The exterior walls of all dwelling units, and any interior walls or floor/ceilings that separate dwelling units from commercial uses shall comply with the
sound transmission standards set forth in sections 1208 and 1208A of the Uniform Building Code, as amended by the 1998 California Building Code,
or their successors.
3. All dwelling units shall be equipped with internal air conditioning.
B. Odors: Air conditioning systems for the residential component shall be located and designed in a manner sufficient to prevent adverse impacts from
odors generated by the commercial component.
C. Miscellaneous:
1. Parking spaces for commercial tenants and their customers shall be physically separated from parking spaces for residents of the adaptive reuse
development. The adaptive reuse development may provide a common entry driveway to access the commercial and residential parking areas;
provided, that once inside the parking facility separate parking areas are provided for residential and commercial uses and entry to the parking area
for the residential component is restricted to prohibit access by patrons and tenants of the commercial component.
2. The entrance(s) to the residential uses of an adaptive reuse development shall be restricted to prohibit access to the residential component by
patrons and tenants of the commercial component. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1978: APPLICATION OF TRANSITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise provided in this article, all commercial uses in an adaptive reuse development shall comply with the general operational requirements set
forth in section 10-3-1956 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-1979: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT REQUIRED:
Prior to the sale or rental of any residential unit in an adaptive reuse development, the then current owner of the adaptive reuse development or the then
current owner of a residential unit being sold or leased shall provide the prospective purchaser or renter of such unit with a written disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement shall be executed by the prospective purchaser or renter and shall clearly state that the purchaser or renter is fully informed and
acknowledges the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 595/797
A. The adaptive reuse development is located in a commercial zone;
B. The primary intent of the commercial zone is to promote commercial activity;
C. The adaptive reuse development is surrounded by and includes commercial uses;
D. Commercial uses may generate greater noise, traffic, and other impacts on the residential units than other residential uses;
E. The presence of residential units in the adaptive reuse development does not alter the nature of the underlying commercial zone or require adjacent
commercial uses or the commercial uses in the adaptive reuse development to curtail their regular activities or to comply with higher standards with
respect to noise, traffic or other impacts;
F. The adaptive reuse development is located in a commercial zone and is not eligible for inclusion in a preferential parking district nor are residents of the
adaptive reuse development eligible to participate in preferential parking zones on adjacent residential streets. (Ord. 03-O-2422, eff. 3-7-2003)
Article 19.8. Mixed Use Planned Development Overlay Zone (M-PD-3)
10-3-1980: M-PD-3 ZONE CREATED:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the mixed use planned development overlay zone (M-PD-3). (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.1: APPLICATION OF M-PD-3 ZONE:
The M-PD-3 zone shall apply to the following areas, as shown on the mixed use planned development map, a copy of which is on file in the department of
planning and community development and attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein:
All those parcels located on the southwest corner of Wilshire Boulevard and Stanley Drive, bounded by Wilshire Boulevard on the north, Stanley Drive on
the east, Charleville Boulevard on the south. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.2: OBJECTIVES OF THE M-PD-3 ZONE:
The objectives of the M-PD-3 zone shall be as follows:
A. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote
harmonious development of the area.
B. To provide for mixed use development that is compatible with the scale and massing of the surrounding neighborhood, through appropriate height,
modulation, upper story setbacks, other similar measures, or any combination thereof.
C. To provide pedestrian friendly amenities along the street level, and setbacks that are generally consistent with other development along Wilshire
Boulevard and along Stanley Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Charleville Boulevard, and along Charleville Boulevard between Stanley Drive and
Carson Road.
D. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone will not create any significant, adverse traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or
pedestrian safety hazards and will minimize impediments to vehicular circulation and pedestrian safety.
E. To foster uniform planning and development of all parcels in the M-PD-3 zone to ensure unified development in the overlay zone.
F. To protect the public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall govern this article:
ENTERTAINMENT USE: Any entertainment, other than "live musical accompaniment to dining" as defined in section 10-3-2703 of this chapter, and shall
include, but not be limited to, movie theaters, playhouses, video arcades, cabarets, nightclubs, adult entertainment businesses, and similar uses.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.4: USES PERMITTED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 596/797
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the M-PD-3 zone shall be used for any purpose except those approved by the planning commission as part
of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.5: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to mixed use developments in the M-PD-3 zone:
A. No establishments whose primary purpose or business is to sell alcoholic beverages for on site consumption, otherwise referred to as bars, may be
included in a mixed use development.
B. No medical uses may be included in a mixed use development.
C. No entertainment uses including, but not limited to, cabarets, nightclubs, and adult entertainment businesses, may be included in a mixed use
development.
D. Residential uses included as part of a mixed use development shall be permitted in all portions of the development regardless of the underlying zone,
except that residential uses shall not be permitted within the first forty feet (40') of the first floor facing arterial roadways such as Wilshire Boulevard,
measured from the building facade.
E. Commercial uses included as part of a mixed use development shall only be permitted in those portions of the development in which the underlying
zone is a commercial zone.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the planning commission may permit the combination of residential uses and residential and commercial
parking facilities on a lot in either the R-1 or C-3 zone in conjunction with the approval of a mixed use development through a planned development
permit pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter.
G. The planning commission shall have authority through conditions imposed on a planned development to prohibit other uses, on a use by use basis, if it
deems appropriate. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.6: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article for mixed use developments, development in an M-PD-3 zone shall comply with the zoning
regulations applicable to the underlying zone.
Nothing in this article shall require a development to comply with the provisions of the M-PD-3 overlay zone if the development fully conforms to the
requirements of the underlying zone. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.7: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
No mixed use development shall be constructed, altered, or enlarged in the M-PD-3 zone except in accordance with the following height restrictions:
A. Commercial Component: No building, structure, improvement, or any part thereof, erected constructed or maintained as part of the commercial
component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone shall exceed sixty one feet (61') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter, or five (5)
stories, whichever is less.
B. Residential Component: No building, structure, improvement, or any part thereof, erected constructed or maintained on any part of the project in the R-1
underlay zone shall exceed thirty three feet (33') in height, with a pitched roof, measured as set forth in this chapter, or three (3) stories, whichever is
less.
C. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, unoccupied architectural features in portions of the project subject
to the C-3 underlying zone such as skylights and clerestories may exceed the height limits established by this section by not more than ten feet (10') in
height if such unoccupied architectural features are approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of
this chapter and do not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located and no such feature exceeds or intersects a line
projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.8: DENSITY:
A. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone, including all components,
shall have a maximum aggregate floor area ratio no greater than 2.0:1. Above grade parking facilities shall not be considered when calculating the floor
area ratio of a mixed use development pursuant to this section, provided the parking complies with the requirements of subsection 10-3-1980.9C of this
article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 597/797
B. Maximum Commercial Floor Area: The maximum permitted floor area devoted to commercial uses in the M-PD-3 zone shall be six thousand three
hundred eighty three (6,383) square feet.
C. Maximum Number Of Residential Units: The number of residential units that may be included in a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone shall not
exceed three (3) dwelling units with a maximum floor area of eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet in totality (approximately 2,800 square
feet per unit) in an area with an underlying zone of R-1, and twenty one (21) dwelling units in an area with an underlying zone of C-3. Notwithstanding,
in the area with an underlying zone of C-3, a project may incorporate two (2) additional residential units, if those residential units are deed restricted
units available for moderate income households for the longest term feasible, with a minimum size of seven hundred fifty (750) square feet per
affordable unit, for a total number of twenty three (23) units in thirty three thousand two hundred thirty (33,230) square feet of area in the underlying
zone of C-3. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.9: PARKING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, parking for mixed use developments located in the M-PD-3 zone shall be provided in accordance with
this section.
A. A mixed use development shall provide parking for the commercial and residential components that can be physically separated. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the planning commission may permit, as part of a planned development, access between parking facilities for the commercial and residential
components if it finds that such access would advance the objectives of the M-PD-3 zone as set forth in section 10-3-1980.2 of this article.
B. Parking for all uses in a mixed use development shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise
modified by the planning commission through a planned development.
C. If parking is provided aboveground, all parking, except for driveways and access to loading areas, shall be located behind building space that is
dedicated to a permitted use other than parking, which building space shall be a minimum of forty feet (40') deep as measured from the building
facades facing public streets, to prevent direct visibility from adjacent streets unless otherwise approved by the planning commission through a planned
development.
D. The parking component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone shall be as approved as part of a planned development. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff.
12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.10: SETBACKS:
Mixed use developments in the M-PD-3 zone shall maintain the following setbacks:
A. Wilshire Boulevard (Front) Setback: No minimum setback shall be required from the property line along the Wilshire Boulevard frontage of the
commercial component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone. Any encroachment into the public right of way for planters or architectural
features shall require approval from the city council.
B. Stanley Drive (Street Side) Setback: A minimum setback of nine feet eleven and seven-eighths inches (9'117/8") shall be required from the street side
property line along the Stanley Drive frontage of the residential (R-1 underlay zone) component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone, and
there shall be no minimum setback required along the Stanley Drive frontage of the commercial component of the mixed use development.
C. Charleville Boulevard (Street Side) Setback: A minimum setback of ten feet three and three-fourths inches (10'33/4") shall be required from the street
side property line along the Charleville Boulevard frontage of a mixed use development in the M-PD-3 zone.
D. Side Setback Fronting Charleville: The side setback for any residential uses fronting Charleville adjacent to R-1 property to the west shall be a minimum
of thirty feet three inches (30'3") from the western property line. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.11: LOADING FACILITIES:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, loading facilities for mixed use developments in the M-PD-3 zone shall be provided in accordance with
sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744, inclusive, of this chapter, or as otherwise approved as part of a planned development. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-
2007)
10-3-1980.12: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE REQUIRED:
The residential components of all mixed use developments in the M-PD-3 zone shall provide outdoor living space in accordance with the requirements of
section 10-3-2803 of this chapter, or as otherwise approved as part of a planned development. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.13: ROOFTOP USES:
Rooftop uses shall be prohibited. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 598/797
10-3-1980.14: COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall be incorporated into all mixed use developments in the M-PD-3 zone:
A. Noise Attenuation:
1. All dwelling units shall be constructed with double glazed glass windows.
2. The exterior walls of all dwelling units, and any interior walls or floor/ceilings that separate dwelling units from commercial uses shall comply with the
sound transmission standards set forth in sections 1208 and 1208A of the uniform building code, as amended by the 1998 California building code,
or their successors.
3. All dwelling units shall be equipped with internal air conditioning, and state of the art air cleaning/filtering devices.
B. Odors: Air conditioning systems for the residential component shall be located and designed in a manner sufficient to prevent adverse impacts from
odors generated by the commercial component. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
10-3-1980.15: APPLICATION OF TRANSITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise provided in this article, all uses in a mixed use development shall comply with the general operational requirements set forth in section
10-3-1956 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2532, eff. 12-14-2007)
Article 19.9. Mixed Use Planned Development Overlay Zone (M-PD-4)
10-3-1990: CREATED:
There is hereby created an overlay zone designated as the mixed use planned development overlay zone (M-PD-4). (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.1: APPLICATION OF ZONE:
The M-PD-4 zone shall apply to the following areas, as shown on the mixed use planned development map, a copy of which is on file in the department of
planning and community development and attached as exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein:
All those parcels having frontage on the south side of Wilshire Boulevard, east of Maple Drive and west of Palm Drive, and north of the alley running
parallel to and south of Wilshire Boulevard. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.2: OBJECTIVES:
The objectives of the M-PD-4 zone shall be as follows:
A. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-4 zone will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote
harmonious development of the area.
B. To provide for mixed use development that is compatible with the scale and massing of the surrounding neighborhood, through appropriate height,
modulation, upper story setbacks, other similar measures, or any combination thereof.
C. To provide pedestrian friendly amenities along the street level, and setbacks that are generally consistent with other development along Wilshire
Boulevard and along Palm Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and Charleville Boulevard, and along Maple Drive between Wilshire Boulevard and
Charleville Boulevard.
D. To ensure that mixed use development in the M-PD-4 zone will not create any significant, adverse traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or
pedestrian safety hazards and will minimize impediments to vehicular circulation and pedestrian safety.
E. To foster uniform planning and development of all parcels in the M-PD-4 zone to ensure unified development in the overlay zone.
F. To protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.3: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following definitions shall govern this article:
ENTERTAINMENT USE: Any entertainment, other than "live musical accompaniment to dining" as defined in section 10-3-2703 of this chapter, and shall
include, but not be limited to, movie theaters, playhouses, video arcades, cabarets, nightclubs, adult entertainment businesses, and similar uses.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 599/797
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: A development that is approved pursuant to the procedures of article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.4: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the M-PD-4 zone shall be used for any purpose except those approved by the planning commission as part
of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.5: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone:
A. No establishments whose primary purpose or business is to sell alcoholic beverages for on site consumption, otherwise referred to as bars, may be
included in a mixed use development.
B. No medical uses may be included in a mixed use development.
C. No entertainment uses including, but not limited to, cabarets, nightclubs, and adult entertainment businesses, may be included in a mixed use
development.
D. No use shall be permitted in a mixed use development if that use would cause the parking generation for all uses in the mixed use development to
exceed the available parking on site as determined in accordance with this chapter.
E. Residential uses included as part of a mixed use development shall be permitted in all portions of the development regardless of the underlying zone,
except that residential uses shall not be permitted within the first forty feet (40') of the first floor facing arterial roadways such as Wilshire Boulevard,
measured from the building facade.
F. Commercial uses included as part of a mixed use development shall only be permitted in those portions of the development in which the underlying
zone is a commercial zone.
G. The planning commission shall have authority through conditions imposed on a planned development to prohibit other uses as it deems appropriate, on
a use by use basis. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.6: APPLICABILITY OF UNDERLYING ZONE REGULATIONS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article for mixed use developments, development in an M-PD-4 zone shall comply with the zoning
regulations applicable to the underlying zone.
Nothing in this article shall require a development to comply with the provisions of the M-PD-4 overlay zone if the development fully conforms to the
requirements of the underlying zone. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.7: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
No mixed use development shall be constructed, altered, or enlarged in the M-PD-4 zone except in accordance with the following height restrictions:
A. General Limitations: No building, structure, improvement, or any part thereof, erected, constructed or maintained as part of a mixed use development in
the M-PD-4 zone shall exceed sixty feet (60') in height nor shall it exceed six (6) stories, measured as set forth in this chapter, exclusive of unoccupied
architectural features and rooftop uses as provided below.
B. Unoccupied Architectural Features: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, unoccupied architectural features, such as skylights and
clerestories, structures housing mechanical equipment, antennas and similar unoccupied space may exceed the sixty foot (60') height limit established
by subsection A of this section by not more than ten feet (10') in height, and elevator penthouses may exceed the sixty foot (60') height limit by fifteen
feet (15'), if such unoccupied architectural features are approved by the Planning Commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article
18.4 of this chapter and do not exceed, in the aggregate, thirty three percent (33%) of the total roof area upon which they are located and no such
feature exceeds or intersects a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
C. Rooftop Uses: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, rooftop restrooms, fitness centers, and pools and pool related uses may exceed the
height limits established by this section by not more than ten feet (10') in height, provided that any structure housing a restroom facility and/or a fitness
center is set back from the front (Wilshire Boulevard) and side (Palm Drive and Maple Drive) perimeters of the roof by a minimum of ten feet (10'). (Ord.
07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007; amd. Ord. 18-O-2760, eff. 11-9-2018)
10-3-1990.8: DENSITY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 600/797
A. Maximum Floor Area Ratio: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, a mixed use development in the M-PD-4 Zone, including all components,
shall have a maximum aggregate floor area ratio determined by the Planning Commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of
this chapter. In no event shall the floor area ratio of a mixed use development in the M-PD-4 Zone exceed a maximum of 4.0:1. For the purposes of this
article, floor area shall be calculated using the lot of the subject site prior to any required dedications or exactions.
B. Minimum Commercial Floor Area: The minimum permitted floor area devoted to commercial uses in the M-PD-4 Zone shall be fourteen thousand
(14,000) square feet, except as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this
chapter.
C. Maximum Number Of Residential Units: The maximum number of residential units that may be included in a mixed use development in the M-PD-4
Zone shall be determined by the Planning Commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff.
10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.9: PARKING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, parking for mixed use developments located in the M-PD-4 Zone shall be provided in accordance with
this section.
A. A mixed use development shall provide parking for the commercial and residential components that can be physically separated. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Planning Commission may modify this requirement, as part of a planned development, if it finds that such access would advance the
objectives of the M-PD-4 Zone as set forth in section 10-3-1990.2 of this article.
B. Except as provided otherwise in this article, parking for all uses in a mixed use development shall be provided in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Commission may modify the parking requirements for a mixed use development,
as part of a planned development, if it finds that such modifications would advance the objectives of the M-PD-4 Zone as set forth in section 10-3-
1990.2 of this article.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, up to ten percent (10%) of the parking spaces provided in a mixed use development in the M-PD-4
Zone may be compact spaces and up to twenty percent (20%) of the total number of multiple-family dwelling units in a project may satisfy the parking
requirements of this chapter through the use of tandem parking spaces. The dimensions of each tandem space shall comply with the parking standards
adopted by the City Council and on file in the Community Development Department - Building and Safety.
D. If parking is provided above ground, all parking, except for driveways and access to loading areas, shall be located behind building space that is
dedicated to a permitted use other than parking, which building space shall be a minimum of forty feet (40') deep as measured from the building
facades facing public streets, to prevent direct visibility from adjacent streets unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission as part of a
planned development. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.10: SETBACKS:
Mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone shall maintain the following minimum setbacks:
A. Wilshire Boulevard (Front) Setback: No minimum setback shall be required from the property line along the Wilshire Boulevard frontage of a mixed use
development in the M-PD-4 zone.
B. Maple Drive (Side) Setback: A minimum setback of three feet (3') shall be required from the property line along the Maple Drive frontage of a mixed use
development in the M-PD-4 zone.
C. Palm Drive (Side) Setback: A minimum setback of nine feet (9') shall be required from the property line along the Palm Drive frontage of a mixed use
development in the M-PD-4 zone.
D. Alley (Rear) Setback: A minimum setback of five feet eight inches (5'8") shall be required from the property line along the rear alley of a mixed use
development in the M-PD-4 zone.
E. Parking Uses Setback: The minimum setback for any aboveground parking component of a mixed use development in the M-PD-4 zone shall be as
approved as part of a planned development.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, to provide visual relief and modulation of the main building facades, awnings and architectural features (including, but
not limited to, sills, eyebrows, and cornices) may encroach into the setbacks required by this section and modulation required by section 10-3-1990.11
of this article may also encroach into the setbacks if approved by the planning commission as part of a planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of
this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.11: MODULATION:
A mixed use development in the M-PD-4 zone shall be modulated as provided in planned development permit. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 601/797
10-3-1990.12: LOADING FACILITIES:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, loading facilities for mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone shall be provided in accordance with
sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744 inclusive of this chapter, or as otherwise approved as part of a planned development.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone shall provide not less than one 35-foot deep truck loading space and one
50-foot deep truck loading space accessible from Palm Drive. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.13: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE REQUIRED:
The residential component of all mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone shall provide outdoor living space in accordance with the requirements of
section 10-3-2803 of this chapter, or as otherwise approved as part of a planned development. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.14: ROOFTOP USES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code and subject to the restrictions set forth in this section, the planning commission may permit, as part of a
planned development pursuant to article 18.4 of this chapter, mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone to include rooftop pools and spas, fitness
centers, and related restroom facilities provided that:
A. The planning commission makes the findings set forth in subsection 10-3-2804B of this chapter regarding the rooftop restroom facilities.
B. The additional height above the maximum height limit otherwise applicable to the mixed use development will not exceed ten feet (10').
C. The mixed use development includes a maximum of two (2) rooftop restroom facilities.
D. The aggregate floor area of all rooftop restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet or such
minimum floor area as may be required by federal or state law, whichever is greater.
E. Any rooftop fitness centers or restroom facilities permitted pursuant to this section shall be set back from the face of any exterior wall of the floor
immediately below so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of the nearest outside wall is not intersected.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection E of this section, a rooftop structure may intersect a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of the
nearest outside wall provided that the exterior wall of the rooftop structure is constructed in the same plane as the exterior wall of the floor below and
the rooftop structure will not exceed the applicable maximum allowable height otherwise permitted by more than forty five inches (45").
G. No food or beverage service, other than vending machines, shall be provided in connection with any rooftop pool use.
H. Use of the rooftop pool facilities and fitness center shall be restricted to residents and guests of residents of the mixed use development.
I. No admittance or use fees shall be charged to use the rooftop pool facilities or fitness center. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the imposition or
collection of homeowner association fees on residents of a mixed use development to offset the costs of operating and maintaining such rooftop pool
facilities. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.15: COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall be incorporated into all mixed use developments in the M-PD-4 zone:
A. Noise Attenuation:
1. All dwelling units shall be constructed with double glazed glass windows.
2. The exterior walls of all dwelling units, and any interior walls or floor/ceilings that separate dwelling units from commercial uses shall comply with the
sound transmission standards set forth in sections 1208 and 1208A of the uniform building code, as amended by the 1998 California building code,
or their successors.
3. All dwelling units shall be equipped with internal air conditioning, and state of the art air cleaning/filtering devices.
B. Odors: Air conditioning systems for the residential component shall be located and designed in a manner sufficient to prevent adverse impacts from
odors generated by the commercial component. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
10-3-1990.16: APPLICATION OF TRANSITIONAL OPERATIONAL STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise provided in this article, all uses in a mixed use development shall comply with the general operational requirements set forth in section
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 602/797
10-3-1956 of this chapter. (Ord. 07-O-2528, eff. 10-18-2007)
Article 20. Commercial Zone (C-5)
10-3-2000: PURPOSE AND CREATION OF THE C-5 ZONE:
There is hereby created the C-5 zone. The purpose of the C-5 zone is to provide a comprehensive development plan for that portion of Beverly Hills
formerly known as the industrial area. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2001: USES PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided or restricted by this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the C-5 zone shall be used for any purpose except
the following:
Ancillary retail/service/restaurant uses that are located in a building primarily used for commercial office purposes. Retail/service/restaurant uses shall
include the following uses:
Arts/crafts store.
Bookstore.
Clothes dry cleaning, subject to the restrictions of article 16 of this chapter.
Confectionery store.
Florist.
Gift shop.
Interior design studio.
Newsstand.
Notion shop.
Office convenience store.
Pharmacy.
Photography shop.
Restaurant or cafe, except drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities and those restaurants or cafes specified in section 10-3-2003 of this chapter.
Shoe repair shop.
Stationery store.
Tailor.
Those uses determined by the director of planning and community development to be similar to the uses specifically enumerated in this use.
Bank uses.
Electrical receiving or transforming station uses.
Office uses.
Public or private utility uses. (1962 Code § 10-412; amd. Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2002: USES PROHIBITED:
The following uses shall be prohibited in the C-5 zone:
Cinema.
Department store.
Drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facility.
Game arcade.
Industrial.
Medical laboratory.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 603/797
Medical office.
Mini-shopping center.
Residential.
Vehicle sales, service or fuel station.
Veterinary hospital.
Warehouse or storage except as subordinate and appurtenant to a permitted or conditionally permitted use.
Those uses prohibited in the C-3 zone. (1962 Code § 10-412; amd. Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; Ord. 99-O-2333, eff. 10-15-1999)
10-3-2003: CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-5 zone only if authorized by a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter:
Alternative parking facilities used to provide required parking for commercial uses, excluding medical uses, pursuant to section 10-3-2730.4 of this chapter.
Brewing or manufacture of alcoholic beverages that is ancillary to a dining or bar use or is ancillary to a retail store that sells alcoholic beverages.
Car washes that:
A. Are enclosed in a building;
B. Exclusively serve a business whose operation is primarily devoted to the sales, long term leasing or rental of automobiles or other motorized
vehicles;
C. Are located on the site of the business being served; and
D. Do not exceed twenty feet (20') in width or forty feet (40') in length.
When reviewing the conditional use permit application for such car washes, the planning commission shall consider the conditional use permit
criteria set forth in section 10-3-1613 of this chapter.
Convenience stores not occupying a tenant space whose primary entrance opens into the interior of a commercial building.
Educational institution uses teaching grade levels 1 through 12.
Gymnasium uses.
Museum uses.
"Nightclub type activity" uses, as defined in section 10-3-2703 of this chapter.
Off site parking pursuant to section 10-3-2733 of this chapter.
Pet boarding facility pursuant to section 10-3-1620.3 of this chapter.
Private screening rooms appurtenant to commercial office uses.
Religious institution uses.
Restaurant uses that are located on lots that abut Maple Drive, and that are open after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. However, nothing in this section shall permit
the operation of a restaurant in violation of the requirements of section 10-3-2005 of this chapter.
Theater/auditorium uses with a maximum capacity of no more than four hundred fifty (450) persons.
Vehicle sales and service uses prohibited by section 10-3-2002 of this chapter, but in existence on September 1, 1991. Any expansion of such use shall
require a conditional use permit and shall be limited to property that is contiguous to the site area occupied by the use on September 1, 1991.
Veterinary hospital uses prohibited by section 10-3-2002 of this chapter, but in existence on September 1, 1991. Any expansion of such use shall require a
conditional use permit and shall be limited to the site area occupied by the use on September 1, 1991.
Those uses not specifically permitted or prohibited by this article or otherwise conditionally permitted by this section. (1962 Code § 10-413; amd. Ord. 94-
O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 97-O-2283, eff. 8-1-1997; Ord. 99-O-2336, eff. 11-4-1999; Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012; Ord.
16-O-2712, eff. 12-22-2016; Ord. 16-O-2715, eff. 1-7-2017)
10-3-2004: CIVIC CENTER DRIVE; USES PERMITTED:
In addition to the uses permitted by section 10-3-2001 of this chapter, a retail/service/restaurant use set forth in section 10-3-2001 of this chapter shall be
permitted on a lot that abuts that portion of Civic Center Drive parallel to Santa Monica Boulevard even though such use is not located in a building
primarily used for commercial office purposes, provided that:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 604/797
A. Such use is located in a building that was constructed before January 1, 1994, and
B. After January 1, 1994, no more than seven hundred (700) square feet of floor area are added to the building in which such use is located, and
C. After January 1, 1994, no height is added to the building in which such use is located. (1962 Code § 10-414; amd. Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2005: MAPLE DRIVE; USES RESTRICTED:
For those lots in the C-5 zone that abut Maple Drive, the following uses shall be prohibited within one hundred feet (100') of a lot line that abuts Maple
Drive:
Bank uses.
Retail/service/restaurant uses, as defined in section 10-3-2001 of this chapter, except dining facilities that are primarily for tenants and guests and which
have no entrance from the public right of way directly into the dining facilities, unless such entrance is not directly accessible from Maple Drive and such
entrance is located more than seventy five feet (75') from Maple Drive.
Savings and loan uses.
Thrift and loan uses. (Ord. 76-O-1632, eff. 1-20-1977; amd. Ord. 77-O-1675, eff. 1-12-1978; Ord. 83-O-1906, eff. 9-15-1983; Ord. 83-O-1906; Ord. 94-O-
2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2006: HEIGHT RESTRICTION:
Notwithstanding any other height requirement of this chapter, no structure in the C-5 zone shall exceed a height of forty five feet (45').
A. Height Measurement; General: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, height measurements of buildings located in the C-5 zone shall
be made in accordance with the "height of building" provisions defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter except that an unoccupied architectural
feature which otherwise meets the requirements of subsection A7 of said definition may exceed or intersect a line projecting from the perimeter of the
roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal if such architectural feature is approved by the planning commission pursuant
to section 10-3-2020 of this article.
B. Height Measurement; Maple Drive: Notwithstanding the "height of building" provisions defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, the maximum
height of that portion of a building that is within fifty feet (50') of a lot line that abuts Maple Drive shall be measured from the lowest point of that
portion of the public sidewalk along Maple Drive adjoining the site area on which the building is located.
Additionally, no mechanical equipment, stair, or elevator enclosure that exceeds a height of forty five feet (45') shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of
such Maple Drive lot line nor shall these enclosures intersect a plane extending upward at a forty five degree (45°) angle toward the interior of the site from
a line on the roof fifty feet (50') from the Maple Drive lot line. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2007: PUBLIC OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
All developments, excepts those developments on site areas that abut the northerly side of Third Street, shall provide open space within the development
site area that meets the following standards:
A. The amount of open space shall equal at least five percent (5%) of the floor area of the development. Setback areas shall not be considered open
space for the purposes of this subsection except as provided in section 10-3-2010 of this article.
B. The open space shall be visible from a public sidewalk and shall be accessible from a public sidewalk and shall be without obstruction by gates, doors
or similar features during standard business hours. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2008: MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise provided in section 10-3-2009 of this article, the following minimum setbacks shall be provided on site areas in the C-5 zone:
A. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within ten feet (10') of any lot line that abuts Alden Drive.
B. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within twenty feet (20') of any lot line that abuts Foothill Road.
C. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within five feet (5') of any lot line that abuts Third Street.
D. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within twenty five feet (25') of any lot line that abuts Maple Drive.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 605/797
E. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within five feet (5') of any lot line that abuts that portion of Civic Center Drive that
does not parallel Santa Monica Boulevard.
F. No portion of any building or structure shall be constructed or altered within fifteen feet (15') of any lot line that abuts that portion of Civic Center Drive
that is parallel to Santa Monica Boulevard. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2009: SETBACK ENCROACHMENTS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2008 of this article, the following structures may encroach into the setbacks required by that section:
A. Walls and fences of no more than forty two inches (42") in height;
B. Fine art ornamentation, fountains, pools, seating fixtures, landscaping or surface materials that complement the building design and surrounding
streetscape. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2009.5: FLOOR AREA EXEMPTION FOR STORAGE SPACE:
An existing portion of a parking garage in a commercial building may be enclosed and converted to storage space, and for the purposes of this chapter
such enclosure shall not be counted as part of the floor area of the building, if the enclosure meets the following requirements:
A. Size: The area of the enclosure shall not exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet or five percent (5%) of the floor area of the building, whichever is
less.
B. Minor Accommodation: Prior to construction, the property owner must obtain a minor accommodation permit pursuant to article 36 of this chapter. A
reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation permit if the reviewing authority finds that the proposed enclosure will not have a material
adverse effect on the parking or circulation of the building or the surrounding streets. The director of planning and community development shall not
serve as the reviewing authority for a minor accommodation to permit an enclosure in excess of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
C. Maintenance Of Required Parking: The enclosure shall not reduce or remove any parking area or parking space that is required to be provided by this
code. Prior to construction of the enclosure, the applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director of building and safety, that any parking
spaces that will be reduced or removed are not obligated, by covenant or otherwise, to provide required parking for a building on a separate site.
D. Long Term Storage: The enclosure shall be used solely for long term storage purposes. Long term storage purposes include storage of files, storage of
furniture and storage of seasonal displays. The enclosure shall not be used for warehousing of goods for sale, storage of mechanical equipment or
tools, or similar uses. Prior to construction, the property owner shall submit, in form and content satisfactory to the city attorney, a recordable covenant
which provides that the enclosure will be used solely for long term storage purposes and will be used for no other purposes. The covenant shall provide
for immediate removal of the storage area upon violation of this use restriction. In addition, the property owner and the storage manager shall submit
annual affidavits, in form and content satisfactory to the city attorney, attesting that the enclosure is being used solely for long term storage purposes
and in accordance with the requirements of this section. The affidavit shall be submitted concurrently with the business license renewal application of
the operator of the storage space. Failure to timely submit the affidavit may, without further notice, result in revocation by the director of planning and
community development of the permit to maintain the enclosure. Upon revocation of the permit, the enclosure must be removed immediately.
E. Nonoccupiable: The enclosure shall be designed so that it is not occupiable, nor readily convertible to occupiable space, as the term "occupiable" is
defined in the city's building code.
F. Lease: Any lease for storage space within the enclosure shall include a notice that the city has the authority to divest the lessee of the lessee's rights
concerning the enclosure if the city's conditions regarding the enclosure are violated. (Ord. 95-O-2234, eff. 4-7-1995)
10-3-2010: BUILDING LINE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the setback requirements contained in section 10-3-2008 of this article, certain buildings constructed in the C-5 zone shall be constructed
along building lines as shown in the "building line map of the C-5 zone" adopted by the city council and on file in the department of planning and
community development.
For the purposes of this section, a "building line" is a line at which a portion of a building must be constructed and which defines a setback or open space.
A building line is not a minimum or maximum distance requirement. Except as provided in section 10-3-2020 of this article, buildings, or portions of
buildings, must be erected at the building line itself for the purpose of defining setbacks and open space areas within the C-5 zone.
The open space area required by this section and not required by section 10-3-2008 of this article, shall be considered open space for the purposes of
section 10-3-2007 of this article. The following site areas shall be subject to building line requirements:
A. The site area at the southwesterly corner of the intersection of Civic Center Drive and Foothill Road.
B. The site area at the southeasterly corner of the intersection where Civic Center Drive turns from a predominantly north/south direction to a
predominantly east/west direction.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 606/797
C. The site area on the westerly side of Foothill Road at the intersection of Foothill Road and Alden Drive.
D. The site area that abuts Third Street at the northeasterly corner of the intersection of Third Street and Civic Center Drive.
E. The site area that abuts Civic Center Drive at the northeasterly corner of the intersection of Third Street and Civic Center Drive.
F. The site area at the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Third Street and Maple Drive.
G. The site area at the southeasterly corner of the intersection of Civic Center Drive and Third Street.
H. The site areas at the northeasterly and southeasterly corners of the intersection of Foothill Road and Alden Drive.
I. The site areas at the northeasterly, northwesterly, and southeasterly corners of the intersection of Foothill Road and Third Street.
J. The site area at the northwesterly corner of the intersection of Alden Drive and Maple Drive.
K. Two (2) site areas, one on the east side of Foothill Road and one on the west side of Foothill Road, that are located between Third Street and Alden
Drive.
Nothing in this section shall allow buildings to be constructed within the setbacks required by section 10-3-2008 of this article. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-
4-1994)
10-3-2011: SETBACK DESIGN STANDARDS:
No more than fifty percent (50%) of the setback areas required by section 10-3-2008 of this article may be paved. In addition, those areas not occupied by
walkways, driveways, or paved plazas shall be fully landscaped consistent with the character of the C-5 zone. No walls, planters, or other structural or
landscaping elements shall block visual access of required public open space areas from the public sidewalk. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2012: DRIVEWAY ACCESS STANDARDS:
No site area within the C-5 zone shall have more than one vehicular access driveway from each street which it abuts. The maximum width of each
driveway shall be twenty eight feet (28').
In addition, curb cuts for driveway access shall be prohibited along that portion of Civic Center Drive parallel to Santa Monica Boulevard and westerly of
Foothill Road. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2013: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND REQUIRED PUBLIC OPEN SPACE:
Primary pedestrian access to any building in the C-5 zone shall be visible by pedestrians from the public street. However, accessory buildings not usually
accessible to the public during business hours shall be exempted from this requirement. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2014: GENERAL SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, signage within the C-5 zone shall comply with the signage requirements contained in chapter 4 of
this title. The definitions contained in chapter 4 of this title shall govern the construction of the signage regulations contained in this article. (Ord. 94-O-
2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2015: MAPLE DRIVE RESTRICTIONS:
No signage for dining facilities shall be permitted on the Maple Drive frontage of any building in the C-5 zone. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2016: WALL SIGNS:
No portion of any wall sign in the C-5 zone shall exceed a height of twenty five feet (25') above the finished grade at the base of the wall. In addition, no
wall sign in the C-5 zone shall have an area greater than fifty (50) square feet. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2017: PROJECTING (BLADE) SIGNS:
Projecting signs in the C-5 zone may serve as business identification signs, but not building identification signs. No portion of a projecting sign shall be
less than eight feet (8') above the finished grade below such sign. No projecting sign shall be more than six inches (6") in thickness, nor project more than
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 607/797
thirty inches (30") from the wall to which it is attached. No projecting sign shall be internally illuminated or surface lighted with exposed tube lighting such
as neon. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; amd. Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-3-2018: FREESTANDING (MONUMENT) SIGNS:
Freestanding signs shall not be permitted in the C-5 zone except on site areas which have at least two hundred fifty (250) lineal feet of frontage along a
single public street. Such signs shall not exceed five feet (5') in height and shall not be pole signs.
A. Material: Freestanding signs shall be constructed of material, approved by the director of planning and community development or the architectural
commission, that is compatible with the principal material of the building that it serves.
B. Lettering: The lettering of freestanding signs shall be carved into the sign wall or attached as individual letters.
C. Lighting: Any lighting of a freestanding sign shall be external to the sign or incorporated into the rear of individual letters. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-
1994)
10-3-2019: BUILDING AND BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Building identification signs in the C-5 zone shall be limited to an area of one square foot for each lineal foot of building that fronts on the public street
which the sign faces except for retail uses located on Civic Center Drive which shall be limited to one-half (1/2) square foot for each lineal foot of building
that fronts on the public street which the sign faces.
Business identification signs in the C-5 zone shall be limited to an area of one square foot for each lineal foot of ground floor space that fronts on the street
which the sign faces and that is occupied by the business or businesses identified except for retail uses located on Civic Center Drive which shall be
limited to one-half (1/2) square foot for each lineal foot of building that fronts on the public street which the sign faces.
In addition to the signs otherwise permitted by this section, a building identification sign which does not exceed five (5) square feet of area may be placed
adjacent to an entrance if that entrance is located on a building face that does not otherwise contain a building identification sign. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-
4-1994)
10-3-2020: C-5 ZONE MINOR ACCOMMODATIONS:
Upon application by a property owner, and pursuant to the provisions of this section, the planning commission may approve unoccupied architectural
features as set forth in subsection 10-3-2006A of this article and may establish building lines in the C-5 zone other than those set forth in this article.
In addition, upon application by a property owner, and pursuant to the provisions of this article, the planning commission may establish open space
requirements in the C-5 zone less than the standards set forth in this article for: a) projects that are limited to the remodel of an existing building, and b)
additions that do not exceed ten percent (10%) of the building's square footage that was legally permitted on December 14, 1993.
A. Findings: The planning commission may approve unoccupied architectural features, establish building lines or establish open space requirements
pursuant to this section if the commission finds that such requirements will not adversely impact the present or planned character of the C-5 zone.
B. Procedure: An application to establish building setbacks, building lines and open space requirements shall be filed with the director of planning and
community development and shall be processed pursuant to the procedures provided in article 36 of this chapter for processing minor accommodations
applications. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2021: ADDITIONAL CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF PROJECTS:
Pursuant to subsection 10-3-3104B of this chapter, for those development projects in the C-5 zone that require planning commission review as part of the
development plan review procedure, the planning commission shall consider the following factors as part of the commission's determination regarding
whether a proposed development plan will promote harmonious development of the C-5 and P-S zones. The commission may base its determination on
one or more of the following factors:
A. Traffic Generation And Circulation: The planning commission may consider whether the development plan incorporates features and uses which would
generate less traffic than a comparable general office use and would adequately mitigate traffic impacts attributable to that portion of the floor area in
excess of a floor area ratio of 1.5.
B. Beneficial Primary Uses: The planning commission may consider whether the primary uses proposed in the development plan will generate less traffic
than general office uses or enhance the pedestrian oriented character of the area.
C. Beneficial Auxiliary Uses: The planning commission may consider whether the auxiliary uses proposed in the development plan include on site facilities
which reduce traffic generation such as a gymnasium, lunchroom, or daycare center or contain other uses beneficial to the city such as parking for
adjacent existing residential uses.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 608/797
D. Community Amenities: The planning commission may consider whether the development plan includes off site amenities such as daycare or parking, or
includes a contribution to city park acquisition plans or other community amenities.
E. Enhancement Of Public Open Space: The planning commission may consider whether the proposed development plan will enhance public open space.
F. Participation In Areawide Streetscape Improvement: The planning commission may consider whether the development plan includes participation in
areawide streetscape improvements.
G. Change Of Use: The planning commission may consider whether the use proposed in the development plan will be maintained.
H. Scale And Massing: The planning commission may consider the siting of structures, massing, scale, and use of open space. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-
1994)
10-3-2022: TRAFFIC GENERATION LIMITS:
For each development in the C-5 zone that requires planning commission review as part of the development plan review procedure, the planning
commission shall condition such development upon compliance with a limit on the number of peak hour trips that may be generated by that development.
The trip generation limit set by the planning commission shall not exceed the number of trips that would be generated by the development if the floor area
of each proposed use in the development were increased in proportion to its proposed floor area so that the floor area ratio of the entire development
equaled 2.0.
The number of trips to be generated by a proposed use shall be estimated based on trip generation estimates for that use contained in the most recent
"Institute Of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Manual". If the "Institute Of Traffic Engineers' Trip Generation Manual" does not contain a trip generation
estimate for a proposed use, then the applicant for the development plan review approval shall provide the planning commission with expert evidence from
a licensed traffic engineer establishing an estimate of the trip generation for the proposed use, satisfactory to the city engineer.
The applicant for the development plan review approval shall fund the city's program to monitor and enforce compliance with the trip generation limit
established pursuant to this section. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2023: ARCHITECTURAL AND URBAN DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPMENT:
Architectural and urban design guidelines for development in the C-5 zone shall be adopted by the city council and be available to the public from the
department of planning and community development. Such guidelines shall not be mandatory, but shall be considered by the architectural and planning
commissions when reviewing projects in the C-5 zone. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
Article 20.3. Public Service Zone (P-S)
10-3-2030: PUBLIC SERVICE ZONE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created the public service zone (P-S). (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2031: USES PERMITTED:
No lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the public service zone shall be used for any purpose except:
Community athletic facilities.
Human resource centers.
Municipal facilities.
Parks.
Public auditoriums.
Vehicular circulation, including ingress, and egress.
Public service uses not specifically set forth in this section. (Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; amd. Ord. 98-O-2307, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2032: USE OF LOT 7:
That portion of the P-S zone west of Foothill Road comprised of lot 7 of block 17 of tract 5647, is to be considered primarily for use for the circulation of
vehicles between Third Street and Civic Center Drive.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 609/797
A. No building or structure, whether developed by the city or private entity, shall be constructed or erected in a manner that would permanently prevent or
obstruct vehicular circulation at natural grade through this property unless the project is approved by the planning commission pursuant to section 10-3-
2034 of this article. The central fueling facility as reviewed by the planning agency on April 22, 1998, shall not be considered to be an obstruction of
vehicular circulation at natural grade.
B. For the purpose of this section, "prevent or obstruct vehicular circulation" shall mean the interruption or absence of a continuous pathway of adequate
width and height clearance to allow municipal service and emergency vehicles to travel through. For the purpose of this section, "at natural grade" shall
mean within five feet (5') of the grade indicated on the city's 1963 topographic map. (98-O-2307, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2033: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development in the public service zone shall be governed by the development standards set forth in article 20 of this chapter regarding the C-5 zone.
(Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; amd. Ord. 98-O-2037, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2034: PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW:
In the event that a project is proposed that would prevent or obstruct vehicular circulation on lot 7 as set forth in section 10-3-2032 of this article, that
project shall be reviewed by the planning commission through a public hearing process.
Article 21. Industrial Zone
10-3-2100: Rep. by Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
Article 22. Church Zone
10-3-2201: CHURCH ZONE CREATED; LOTS 1901 AND 1902, TRACT 6380:
There hereby is established and created in the city a special church zone consisting of lots 1901 and 1902 in tract 6380 to be used for church purposes.
(1962 Code §§ 10-416, 10-417)
Article 22.1. Public School Zone (S)
10-3-2211: PUBLIC SCHOOL ZONE CREATED:
There hereby is established and created a public school zone designated as the S zone consisting of the following properties:
A. Lots 6 through 18, inclusive, of block 82, of the Beverly Hills tract;
B. That portion of lot 1 of block 180, of the Beverly Hills tract, as shown on sheet no. 8 of the official zoning map; that portion of lot 1 of tract 4568 that is
within the city;
C. Lots 1429 through 1444, inclusive, lots 1537 through 1555, inclusive, and lots 1596 through 1599, inclusive, of tract 6380; lots 1 through 3, inclusive, of
tract 6935;
D. Lots 809 through 815, inclusive, lots 822 through 829, inclusive, lots 874 through 882, inclusive, lots 858 through 864, inclusive, and lots 858 through
862, inclusive, of tract 4988; the vacated portion of Arnaz Drive that abuts lots 825 through 829, inclusive;
E. Lots 843 through 844, inclusive, of tract 7710; lot 2 of tract 11964; lot E of tract 5609; lots 838 through 842, inclusive, of tract 7710. (Ord. 89-O-2075, eff.
11-16-1989)
10-3-2212: USES PERMITTED:
No building, structure, improvement, or premises shall be used, and no building, structure, or improvement shall be erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, or maintained on any lot or parcel in zone S which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used for any purpose other than as follows:
A. For public educational purposes, including without limitation the purposes specified by Education Code section 40041. Such purposes, however, shall
not include any residential, commercial, industrial or other nonpublic use or development on any lot or parcel, or portion thereof, determined by the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 610/797
governing board of the Beverly Hills Unified School District not to be needed for public school purposes unless the zoning of such lot or parcel is
changed to permit such use or development in accordance with Government Code section 65852.9;
B. With respect to the properties listed in subsection 10-3-2211E of this article, those uses permitted pursuant to section 10-5-306 of this code. (Ord. 89-O-
2075, eff. 11-16-1989)
Article 23. Transportation Zones (T-1, T-2)
10-3-2301: ZONES T-1 AND T-2 CREATED:
There is hereby created and established in the city transportation zones, designated zone T-1 and zone T-2. (1962 Code § 10-425)
10-3-2302: USES PERMITTED:
No building, structure, improvement, or premises shall be used, and no building, structure, or improvement shall be erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, or maintained on any lot or parcel of land in zone T-1 or zone T-2 except for the following purposes:
Railway transportation; and
Stations, depots, or other structures necessary or convenient for railway passengers, freight, or other strictly railroad or railway business in conjunction
with railroad service conducted in such zones.
Additionally, surface parking shall be a permitted use on those properties designated for parking on the "T zone parking map" approved by the city council
and on file in the department of planning and community development. For the purposes of this section, surface parking includes, without limitation,
vehicular access to adjacent properties, and staging for construction, film production and similar purposes. (1962 Code § 10-425; amd. Ord. 97-O-2274,
eff. 2-7-1997)
Article 23.5. Transportation Overlay Zone (T-O)
10-3-2351: T-O ZONE CREATED:
There is hereby created and established in the city a transportation overlay zone, designated T-O. (Ord. 01-O-2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2352: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The transportation overlay zone will be superimposed over the existing T zone. The transportation overlay zone establishes a process to allow limited
expansion of the uses permitted on property located within the T zone in a manner that is consistent with the underlying zoning district and the elements of
the general plan. (Ord. 01-O-2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2353: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
ADJACENT TO THE C-3 ZONE: A site that shares a property line with a lot or parcel located in the C-3 zone.
GROSS AREA: The total area enclosed by the exterior walls of a building or structure or portion thereof, including all nonhabitable space. (Ord. 01-O-
2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2354: WHERE APPLICABLE:
A transportation overlay zone may be applied in the T zone for any site which is adjacent to the C-3 zone and has a minimum area of one-half (1/2) acre.
(Ord. 01-O-2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2355: USES PERMITTED:
All uses permitted and conditionally permitted in the T zone shall be permitted and conditionally permitted, respectively, in the T-O zone pursuant to the
provisions set forth in article 23 of this chapter. In addition, the following uses shall be permitted in the T-O zone:
A. Surface parking, subject to the restrictions set forth in section 10-3-2356 of this article. Any site area, as defined by this chapter, developed with surface
parking pursuant to this provision may also include within the T-O zone a building, or portion of a building, with a gross area of two hundred seventy
five (275) square feet, provided such building is used primarily to support the surface parking use.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 611/797
B. Any accessory structure located on the site area within the T-O zone, including, but not limited to, storage tanks, light standards, freestanding signs,
landscape planters, and walls or fences, which was erected prior to June 19, 2001; provided such accessory structure is used primarily to support the
surface parking use authorized by subsection A of this section and further provided the property owner submits a scaled plot plan to the department of
planning and community development by August 19, 2001. Said plot plan shall be drawn to a reasonable scale and shall include such information as
the director of planning and community development may reasonably require. (Ord. 01-O-2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2356: RESTRICTIONS:
The following restrictions shall apply to development in the T-O zone:
A. All restrictions applicable to the T zone;
B. All provisions of article 31 of this chapter;
C. No surface parking use shall be established, maintained, used, or occupied pursuant to subsection 10-3-2355A of this article unless the operator of the
surface parking use and/or the owner of the lot or parcel on which the use is located or is to be located obtains approval from the architectural
commission of a landscaping plan in accordance with the procedures set forth in article 30 of this chapter; and
D. No surface parking use or accessory structure shall be established, maintained, used, or occupied pursuant to subsection 10-3-2355A of this article
unless the operator of the surface parking use and/or the owner of the lot or parcel on which the use is located or is to be located obtains approval from
the director of planning and community development of a plot plan setting forth the layout of the surface parking use and the location of accessory
structures on the lot or parcel. If, in the opinion of the director, the plot plan merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such
application to the planning commission for review. If the plot plan review accompanies an application for any other discretionary approval from the
planning commission, the planning commission shall be the reviewing authority for the plot plan.
1. Findings: The director or planning commission may approve a plot plan for a surface parking use only upon finding:
a. That the site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the surface parking use;
b. That the site is adequate in size and shape to provide adequate circulation for both pedestrian and vehicular traffic both on and off site.
c. The surface parking use is consistent with the elements of the city's general plan and purpose and intent of this article;
d. The surface parking use and all accessory structures, if any, maintain appropriate setbacks; and
e. The surface parking use and all accessory structures, if any, comply with all applicable provisions of this code.
2. Conditions: In granting approval for a plot plan for a surface parking use pursuant to this article, the director or planning commission shall impose
such conditions on the approval which are reasonable and necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare and to ensure the surface
parking use is compatible with the intent and purpose of this article. Such conditions may pertain to one or more of the following:
a. Setbacks and buffers;
b. Landscaping and maintenance;
c. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation and safety;
d. Such other conditions as will promote orderly and efficient development in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article. (Ord. 01-O-2377,
eff. 8-10-2001)
10-3-2357: PROCEDURES FOR APPROVAL:
The procedure for applying the T-O zone to any properties located within the T zone shall be the same as described in article 39 of this chapter for zoning
amendments. (Ord. 01-O-2377, eff. 8-10-2001)
Article 24. Single-Family Residential Development Standards For The Central Area Of
The City
10-3-2401: APPLICABILITY:
The development standards set forth in this article shall apply to all properties zoned for single-family residential uses in the Central Area of the city. (Ord.
95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2402: FLOOR AREA:
The following minimum and maximum floor area restrictions shall apply to buildings in the Central Area of the city:
A. Minimum Restrictions: Any building that serves as the primary residential building on a site area shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand six
hundred (1,600) square feet and shall have a minimum width, at its widest point, of twenty feet (20').
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 612/797
B. Maximum Restrictions: The cumulative floor area of all buildings located on a single site area in a single-family residential zone in the Central Area of
the city shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet plus forty percent (40%) of the site area on which those buildings are built.
Further, if a portion of a site area is to be dedicated to the city for the purposes of establishing or enlarging a street or an alley, and such dedication is to
be made in conjunction with a development approval, then, for the purposes of calculating the maximum permitted floor area for the proposed
development pursuant to this section, the site area shall include that portion of the site area that is to be dedicated to the city. However, the dedicated
area shall not be included in the calculation of floor area for subsequent development, including additions to the original development.
The maximum floor area restrictions set forth in subsection B of this section may be modified by a Central Area R-1 permit issued pursuant to article
24.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2403: HEIGHT IN PRINCIPAL BUILDING AREA:
A. North Of Santa Monica Boulevard: The following height restrictions shall apply to buildings located in the principal building area of a site located in the
Central Area of the city north of Santa Monica Boulevard:
1. Buildings With A Flat Roof: For a building with a flat roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet (22') and the maximum building height shall be twenty eight feet (28'). If each side yard equals or
exceeds ten feet (10'), then the maximum building height shall be thirty feet (30').
2. Buildings With A Sloped Roof: For a building with a sloped roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: Except as otherwise provided in this
section, the maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet (22') and the maximum building height shall be twenty eight feet (28'). If each side yard
equals or exceeds ten feet (10'), then the maximum building height shall be thirty two feet (32').
3. Buildings With A Sloped Roof With Ridgeline: For a building with a sloped roof with ridgeline as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: Except
as otherwise provided in this section, the maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet (22') and the maximum building height shall be thirty two
feet (32') with an average roof height of up to twenty eight feet (28'). If each side yard equals or exceeds ten feet (10'), then the maximum building
height shall be thirty four feet (34').
4. Additional Plate Height Added: For every two and one-half feet (2.5') of front setback provided in addition to the required minimum front setback as
required pursuant to this article, one foot (1') of plate height may be added to the maximum plate height, not to exceed a twenty five foot (25')
maximum plate height. If front setbacks required in section 10-3-2417 or subsection 10-3-2418A of this chapter apply to a project, such front
setbacks shall be provided in addition to a front setback provided pursuant to this subsection. If front setback averaging permitted by subsection 10-
3-2418B of this chapter is used in conjunction with an expanded front setback provided pursuant to this subsection, portions of a building may
encroach into the expanded front setback area but may not encroach beyond the original front setback line established in section 10-3-2404 of this
chapter; and, notwithstanding section 10-3-2420 of this chapter, the allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the expanded front
setback area shall be six feet (6'); provided, however, any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge which exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be open
to public view.
5. Central R-1 Permit: For buildings that are subject to a maximum height of thirty feet (30'), a reviewing authority may issue a Central R-1 permit
pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter to permit a maximum building height of up to thirty four feet (34').
B. South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: The following height restrictions shall apply to buildings located in the principal building area of a site located in the
Central Area of the city south of Santa Monica Boulevard:
1. For a building with a flat roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: The maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet (22') and the
maximum building height shall be twenty five feet (25').
2. For a building with a sloped roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: The maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet (22') and the
maximum building height shall be twenty eight feet (28').
3. For a building with a sloped roof with ridgeline as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter: The maximum plate height shall be twenty two feet
(22') and the maximum building height shall be thirty two feet (32').
4. The maximum height of structures other than buildings shall be twenty five feet (25').
C. Site Area South Of Olympic Boulevard And East Of Doheny Drive: Those buildings located in the principal building area of site areas that are southerly
of Olympic Boulevard and easterly of Doheny Drive shall be subject to the following height restrictions:
1. For the first twenty feet (20') of area behind the front yard and for the purposes of subsection 10-3-2405B of this chapter: The maximum plate height
of a building shall be ten feet (10'), the maximum height of that portion of a building covered by a flat roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this
chapter shall be twelve feet (12'), the maximum height of that portion of a building covered by a sloped roof as defined in section 10-3-100 of this
chapter shall be fourteen feet (14'), the maximum height of that portion of a building covered by a sloped roof with ridgeline as defined in section 10-
3-100 of this chapter shall be sixteen feet (16') and the maximum height of all other structures shall be twelve feet (12').
2. For that portion of the principal building area not governed by subsection C1 of this section, the maximum permitted height of buildings shall be as
set forth in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014)
10-3-2404: FRONT SETBACKS:
A. The front setback for site areas located in the Central Area of the city shall be the setback as established in the records for each site area maintained by
the city's community development department, unless that setback is not established in the city's records, or it is zero. Prior to amendment of this
section, a zero setback was interpreted to mean that no setback was established in the city's records.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 613/797
B. If the front setback for a particular site area is zero or is not established in the city's records, then the front setback for that site area shall be determined
as follows:
1. For developed site areas, the front setback shall be the lesser of either:
a. The distance between the front lot line and the closest element of the existing primary residence; or
b. The average of the front setbacks of the other site areas on the same side of the street in the same block.
2. For undeveloped lots, the front setback shall be the average of the front setbacks of the other site areas on the same side of the street in the same
block. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 07-O-2512, eff. 5-11-2007)
10-3-2405: REAR SETBACKS:
The rear setback of a site area located in the Central Area of the city shall equal thirty percent (30%) of the lot depth minus nine feet (9').
A. Principal Residential Building: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a principal residential building may encroach into a maximum of five
percent (5%) of the area of the rear yard and such encroachment shall be governed by the height restrictions set forth in section 10-3-2403 of this
chapter.
B. Doheny Drive And Olympic Boulevard: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, for those lots located easterly of Doheny Drive and southerly
of Olympic Boulevard, a maximum of four hundred fifty (450) square feet of floor area of the principal residential building may encroach into the rear
yard provided that a ten foot (10') rear setback is provided, the encroachment conforms with the height restrictions contained in subsection 10-3-
2403C1 of this chapter, and no other building is located in the accessory structure area.
C. Rear Setback Extension: If a legally constructed existing building does not conform to the setback requirement of this section, enlarging the building
through extending the existing nonconforming rear setback can be permitted provided that:
1. The existing rear setback is maintained, and the addition is not less than fifteen feet (15') from the rear property line;
2. The existing principal residential building, the addition and any accessory structure do not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard area,
excluding porches or decks that are attached to the building, and constructed in accordance with subsection 10-3-2409C of this chapter; and
3. The height of the addition located within the rear yard area does not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height and the floor area of the extension is the
lesser of one thousand (1,000) square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area, inclusive of any floor area granted pursuant to
subsection 10-3-2406C of this chapter; and the height of any porch or deck attached to a principal residential building and located within the rear
setback is not more than three feet (3') above natural grade or higher than the finished floor of the first story whichever is lower.
If an extension of a principal residential building meets the criteria of subsections C1 and C2 of this section, but does not meet the criteria of
subsection C3 of this section, then the extension may be permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 89-O-
2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 90-O-2101, eff. 10-4-1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 12-O-2623, eff. 7-8-
2012)
10-3-2406: SIDE SETBACKS:
The following side setback requirements shall govern the Central Area of the city:
A. North Of Santa Monica Boulevard: The sum of the side setbacks from the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least fifteen feet (15') plus thirty
percent (30%) of the lot width in excess of seventy feet (70'). In addition, except as otherwise provided in this section, each side setback for site areas
located north of Santa Monica Boulevard shall be at least seven and one-half feet (7.5').
1. Exception: Site area in excess of one hundred feet (100') in width. In addition to any other side setback required, if the width of a site area exceeds
one hundred feet (100'), then the side setback from the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least ten feet (10') plus ten percent (10%) of the width
of the site area in excess of one hundred feet (100').
2. Exception; Two Or More Lots: For those site areas that consist of two (2) or more lots as subdivided on July 3, 1984, the side setback shall be at
least fifteen feet (15'). In addition, the sum of the side setbacks adjacent to the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least twelve feet (12') plus
thirty percent (30%) of the lot width in excess of one hundred feet (100').
B. South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: Except as otherwise provided in this section, the minimum side setback for buildings located south of Santa Monica
Boulevard shall be five feet (5') on one side. On the other side, the minimum side setback shall be nine feet (9'). Encroachments in side setbacks
otherwise permitted pursuant to section 10-3-2409 of this chapter may not be permitted in this nine foot (9') setback area except for: 1) roof eaves
pursuant to subsection 10-3-2409B of this chapter, and 2) encroachments along the side property line for side yard fences, walls, or hedges, provided
that a flat area with a minimum width of nine feet (9') is maintained between the side property line wall, fence or hedge, and any structure or building.
Parking, including a porte-cochere covering said parking may be provided in this nine foot (9') setback area pursuant to section 10-3-2419 of this
chapter.
1. Exception: The setback requirements set forth in this subsection B shall not be applicable to: a) any corner lot, b) those site areas located south of
Olympic Boulevard and west of Roxbury Drive, nor c) those site areas located south of Olympic Boulevard and east of Doheny Drive.
a. Corner Lots And All Lots South Of Olympic Boulevard And West Of Roxbury Drive: The side setbacks for all corner lots located southerly of Santa
Monica Boulevard and those site areas located southerly of Olympic Boulevard and westerly of Roxbury Drive shall be at least five feet (5'). In
addition, the sum of the side setbacks adjacent to the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least twenty percent (20%) of the lot width.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 614/797
b. South Of Olympic Boulevard And East Of Doheny Drive: The side setbacks for site areas southerly of Olympic Boulevard and easterly of Doheny
Drive shall be five feet (5').
2. Exception; Two Or More Lots: For those buildings located on site areas that consist of two (2) or more lots as subdivided on July 3, 1984, the side
setback shall be ten feet (10') plus ten percent (10%) of the width of the lot in excess of one hundred feet (100').
C. Side Setback Extension: If a legally constructed existing building does not conform to the setback requirements of this section, the building may be
enlarged through the extension of the existing, nonconforming side setback provided that:
1. The existing setback is not less than three feet (3') and
2. The enlarged portion of the building does not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height.
a. Minor Accommodation: If the existing setback is not less than three feet (3') and the extension exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height, then the
extension may be permitted by a minor accommodation permit issued pursuant to article 36 of this chapter provided that the floor area of the
extension is less than one thousand (1,000) square feet and less than twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area inclusive of the area of any
rear yard setback extension concurrently or previously approved pursuant to subsection 10-3-2405C of this chapter, and provided that the
reviewing authority finds that the extension will not have any adverse impact on:
(1) The scale and massing of the streetscape,
(2) Neighbors' access to light and air,
(3) Neighbors' privacy, and
(4) The garden quality of the city.
Extension of a nonconforming side setback permissible by a minor accommodation at the same time as extension of a nonconforming rear
setback pursuant to section 10-3-2405 of this chapter shall be reviewed as one project and may be permitted by a single Central R-1 permit
issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter.
b. Central R-1 Permit: If the existing setback is not less than three feet (3'), the extension exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height, and the area of the
extension, inclusive of any rear yard setback extension approved pursuant to section 10-3-2405 of this chapter, exceeds one thousand (1,000)
square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area, then the extension may be permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to
article 24.5 of this chapter.
D. Application Of Side Setback Requirements To Existing Legally Nonconforming Side Yards: In all cases that the side setback requirements of this
section are applied to construction on lots with existing legally nonconforming side setbacks, the largest setback required by this section shall be
applied to the side of the lot with the largest existing side yard. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 86-O-1977, eff. 10-2-1986; Ord. 89-O-2056,
eff. 4-20-1989; Ord. 90-O-2090, eff. 3-8-1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 96-O-2261, eff. 7-5-1996; Ord. 12-O-
2623, eff. 7-8-2012; Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014; Ord. 17-O-2723, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-2407: STREET SIDE SETBACKS:
The street side setbacks for site areas located in the Central Area of the city shall be as shown on the "residential street setback map of the city of Beverly
Hills", on file in the office of the department of building and safety.
If a street side setback for a site area is not established on the residential street setback map, then the street side setback shall be five feet (5') for those
site areas located south of Santa Monica Boulevard and fifteen feet (15') for those site areas located north of Santa Monica Boulevard. (Ord. 85-O-1953,
eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 86-O-1977, eff. 10-2-1986; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2408: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN FRONT YARD:
No structure or element of a building, including light wells as defined in this chapter, may encroach into any front yard except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this Code, including, but not limited to, subsection F of this section;
B. Paving in accordance with section 10-3-2422 of this chapter;
C. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards,
unless a greater projection is permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter;
D. One covered entry porch located at or below the first floor level that is a maximum of four feet (4') in depth and which has no vertical supporting
elements;
E. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yard, unless a
greater projection is permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter; and
F. Architectural projections that project more than six inches (6") into the yard but no more than ten percent (10%) of the setback depth provided that the
following conditions are met:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 615/797
1. Walls, fences, or hedges located in the front yard shall be limited to three feet (3') in height unless approved pursuant to article 44, "R-1 Design
Review", of this chapter; and
2. Architectural projections which encroach into the front yard shall cover no more than twenty percent (20%) of the maximum potential facade of the
building, except as permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter; and
3. All paving within the front yard conforms to the requirements of section 10-3-2422 of this chapter.
For the purposes of this subsection F, the depth of an architectural projection into a front setback shall be the distance between the front setback line
and the point of the projection closest to the front lot line. (Ord. 2014-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014)
10-3-2409: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN SIDE YARDS, STREET SIDE YARDS, AND REAR YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any side yard, street side yard or rear yard except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this Code;
B. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
C. Porches and decks located at or below the first floor level provided, further, that required handrails for such elements shall not extend more than forty
two inches (42") above the first floor level;
D. Decks located at finished first floor level, covering portions of a driveway that leads directly to subterranean parking for residences, provided, further,
that required handrails for such elements shall not extend more than forty two inches (42") above the deck floor level and that the length of the deck
shall be limited to twenty four feet (24') or the width of the opening into the subterranean parking, whichever is less, provided that a substantial
landscape buffer is provided between the deck and any adjacent property;
E. Gas and electric meter enclosures projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
F. One fireplace provided one of the following two (2) criteria is met:
1. The required setback equals or exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is limited to thirty inches (30") or less, and the length of
the fireplace measured parallel to the property line does not exceed ten feet (10'); or
2. The required setback is less than seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is twelve inches (12") or less, the length of the fireplace
measured parallel to the property line does not exceed six feet (6'), and the fireplace is located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the front of the
building;
G. Swimming pools and mechanical equipment serving pools provided that the mechanical equipment complies with subsection M of this section;
H. Trash storage facilities;
I. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yards;
J. A porte-cochere, set back a minimum of four feet (4') from the front setback line, provided that no garage or carport faces the front lot line within the first
thirty eight feet (38') behind the front setback line;
K. Freestanding support structures for wireless facilities, provided that mechanical or accessory equipment servicing any such wireless facility complies
with subsection M of this section;
L. Light wells as defined in this chapter, provided that no light well is located in a side yard and, if located in a street side yard, the light well is screened
from the public right of way by a wall, fence or hedge that complies with the requirements of section 10-3-2420 of this chapter;
M. Mechanical equipment that does not exceed the maximum height requirements for walls, fences and hedges pursuant to section 10-3-2420 of this
chapter, is screened from public view, and complies throughout its operational life with the city's noise regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 1, article 2
of this code;
N. Elevators and elevator enclosures, provided the following criteria are met:
1. The subject residence is not a newly constructed building. "Newly constructed building" shall mean a building that has been constructed within the
past five (5) years or remodeled more than fifty percent (50%) during the past five (5) years as described in section 10-3-4100 of this chapter.
2. The length of the encroachment measured parallel to the property line does not exceed seven feet (7'), except that for lots located north of Santa
Monica Boulevard a minor accommodation permit may be issued to allow a greater length. In order to approve the minor accommodation permit, the
reviewing authority must find that the encroachment will not have an adverse impact on:
a. The scale and massing of the streetscape,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 616/797
b. Neighbors' access to light and air,
c. Neighbors' privacy, and
d. The garden quality of the city.
3. The aggregate length of the encroachment of the elevator and elevator enclosure together with a fireplace encroaching into the same setback,
pursuant to subsection F of this section, does not exceed thirteen feet (13'), except pursuant to a minor accommodation permit issued pursuant to
subsection N2 of this section.
4. The encroachment is not closer than three feet (3') from the front of the building.
5. The elevator and elevator enclosure does not have any windows.
6. Noise generated by the elevator complies with city noise regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 1, article 2 of this code.
7. The elevator and enclosure is designed to be compatible with the existing residence in color, material and design.
8. The encroachment into the setback does not exceed the following, provided that a minimum setback of three feet (3') shall be maintained in all
cases:
a. Thirty inches (30"), or
b. Sixty inches (60") if a minor accommodation permit pursuant to article 36 of this chapter is issued. In order to approve the minor accommodation
permit, the reviewing authority must find that the encroachment will not have an adverse impact on:
(1) The scale and massing of the streetscape,
(2) Neighbors' access to light and air,
(3) Neighbors' privacy, and
(4) The garden quality of the City.
O. For single-family properties south of Santa Monica Boulevard subsection 10-3-2406B of this article shall control allowable encroachments in the nine
foot (9') setback.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a passageway or access for emergency services shall extend for the length of the entire site area
from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Such passageway or access shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in width and shall be free of any obstruction,
except that a wall, fence or hedge otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter may be placed along the rear lot line and a gate may be placed
across such passageway or access behind the front yard. (Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014; amd. Ord. 16-O-2718, eff. 1-20-2017; Ord. 17-O-2723, eff.
2-10-2017; Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-2410: FRONT SETBACK FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from the front lot line or all elements of the accessory building shall be located within
fifty feet (50') of the rear lot line of the site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2411: STRUCTURE SEPARATION FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than six feet (6') to any other building on the same site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 02-
O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2412: ACCESSORY BUILDING PORCHES AND DECKS:
No accessory building shall have a porch or deck located more than three feet (3') above the finished grade. For the purposes of this section, grade shall
be defined as it is defined in title 9 of this Code.
A. Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Planning Commission may permit an accessory building located on a residential site with
an area that equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet to include a porch or deck located more than three feet (3') above finished
grade through a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995;
Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2413: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS SOUTH OF SANTA MONICA BOULEVARD:
Accessory buildings located on site areas south of Santa Monica Boulevard shall comply with the following standards:
A. Floor Area: Accessory buildings, including garages, located on site areas south of Santa Monica Boulevard shall not exceed a cumulative floor area of
five hundred (500) square feet.
B. Height: Accessory buildings located in the accessory structure area of site areas south of Santa Monica Boulevard shall not exceed a height of fourteen
feet (14').
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 617/797
C. Side Setback Encroachment: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an accessory building located on a site south of Santa Monica
Boulevard may be erected within a required side yard if:
1. The side lot line abuts an alley and no portion of the building within the side yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14'); or
2. The side lot line does not abut an alley and no portion of the building within the side yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14') or intersects a plane
commencing seven feet (7') in height, measured at the side lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior
of the site area.
D. Rear Setback Encroachment: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an accessory building located on a site south of Santa Monica
Boulevard may be erected within a required rear yard if:
1. The rear lot line abuts an alley and no portion of the building within the rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14'); or
2. The rear lot line does not abut an alley and no portion of the building within the rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14') or intersects a plane
commencing seven feet (7') in height, measured at the rear lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior
of the site area.
E. Central R-1 Permit: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, for those lots located south of Olympic Boulevard and west of Roxbury Drive,
the planning commission may modify the height limitation set forth in subsection B of this section, the limitations set forth in subsections C1 and C2 of
this section, and the limitations set forth in subsections D1 and D2 of this section by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter
provided the rear lot line of the subject lot abuts an alley and provided further that the elevation of the subject lot slopes downhill from the front (street)
lot line of the property to the rear (alley) lot line with a minimum difference in elevation of at least twenty feet (20') between the street and the alley. In
addition to the findings required by section 10-3-2453 of this chapter, the planning commission shall not issue a Central R-1 permit to allow an
accessory structure to exceed fourteen feet (14') in height unless the planning commission additionally finds that the proposed accessory structure will
not have a substantial adverse impact on adjacent properties or the public welfare. In making this determination, the planning commission may look at
such factors as the impact of the accessory structure on the scale and massing as viewed from adjacent properties, the impact of the accessory
structure on available light in neighboring yards, and the cumulative impact to adjacent properties from the proposed accessory structure in
combination with existing accessory structures in the vicinity. Under no circumstances shall the height of an accessory structure be permitted to exceed
the following:
1. Twelve feet (12') as measured from the lowest finished elevation along the perimeter of the primary structure; and
2. Twenty five feet (25') for a flat roof and thirty feet (30') for a sloped roof with a twenty two foot (22') plate height as measured from the lowest (alley
side) existing grade. (Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-3-2002; amd. Ord. 03-O-2431, eff. 11-21-2003)
10-3-2414: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS NORTH OF SANTA MONICA BOULEVARD:
Accessory buildings located on site areas north of Santa Monica Boulevard shall comply with the following standards:
A. Height: Accessory buildings located in the accessory structure area of site areas north of Santa Monica Boulevard shall not exceed a height of fourteen
feet (14'), except as authorized by a minor accommodation or a Central R-1 permit as provided in subsections E and F of this section, respectively.
However, under no circumstances shall the height of an accessory structure be permitted to exceed the maximum height that would be allowed in the
principal building area.
B. Side Setback Encroachment: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an accessory building located on a site north of Santa Monica
Boulevard may be erected within a required side yard if:
1. The side lot line abuts an alley and no portion of the building within the side yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14'); or
2. The side lot line does not abut an alley and no portion of the building within the side yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14') or intersects a plane
commencing seven feet (7') in height, measured at the side lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior
of the site area.
However, notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, an accessory building located on a site north of Santa Monica Boulevard shall maintain a
side setback of four feet (4') unless the accessory structure is located in a side yard abutting an alley.
For an accessory building located in a required side yard on a site north of Santa Monica Boulevard, the limitations set forth in subsections B1 and
B2 of this section may be modified by a minor accommodation issued in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection E of this section
provided the accessory structure complies with all of the requirements set forth in subsection G of this section or by a Central R-1 permit issued in
accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection F of this section. However, under no circumstances shall the height of an accessory structure
be permitted to exceed the maximum height that would be allowed in the principal building area.
C. Rear Setback Encroachment: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an accessory building located on a site north of Santa Monica
Boulevard may be erected within a required rear yard if:
1. The rear lot line abuts an alley and no portion of the building within the rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14'); or
2. The rear lot line does not abut an alley and no portion of the building within the rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14') or intersects a plane
commencing seven feet (7') in height, measured at the rear lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior
of the site area.
For an accessory building located in a required rear yard but outside of the required side yard on a site north of Santa Monica Boulevard, the
limitations set forth in subsections C1 and C2 of this section may be modified by a minor accommodation issued in accordance with the procedure
set forth in subsection E of this section. However, under no circumstances shall the height of an accessory structure be permitted to exceed the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 618/797
maximum height that would be allowed in the principal building area.
For an accessory building located in both a required rear yard and a required side yard on a site north of Santa Monica Boulevard, the limitations set
forth in subsections C1 and C2 of this section may be modified by a minor accommodation issued in accordance with the procedure set forth in
subsection E of this section provided the accessory structure satisfies all of the criteria set forth in subsection G of this section or by a Central R-1
permit issued in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection F of this section. However, under no circumstances shall the height of an
accessory structure be permitted to exceed the maximum height that would be allowed in the principal building area.
D. Setbacks For Single-Story, Detached Garages: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections B and C of this section, a single-story, detached garage
accessory structure located on a site north of Santa Monica Boulevard may be erected on the side and rear lot lines provided all of the following criteria
are satisfied:
1. The accessory structure is detached from all other structures on the property; and
2. The accessory structure is only used as a garage; and
3. a. The side or rear lot line abuts an alley and no portion of the building within the side or rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14'); or
b. The side or rear lot line does not abut an alley and no portion of the building within the side or rear yard exceeds a height of fourteen feet (14') or
intersects a plane commencing seven feet (7') in height, measured at the side or rear lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1) toward the interior of the site area; and
4. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for the accessory structure, the owner of the property files with the City building official
a covenant, approved by the City Attorney, for recording with the County Recorder that restricts the use of the accessory structure to garage
purposes and prohibits the addition of a second story to the accessory structure.
For a garage accessory building located in a required side or rear yard or both the required side and rear yards on a site north of Santa Monica
Boulevard, the limitations set forth in subsections D3a and D3b of this section may be modified by a minor accommodation issued in accordance with
the procedure set forth in subsection E of this section. However, under no circumstances shall the height of the garage accessory structure be
permitted to exceed: a) one-story; b) a plate height of ten feet (10') at the side or rear lot line; and c) a maximum height of fourteen feet (14').
E. Minor Accommodation: The height limitation set forth in subsection A of this section, the limitations set forth in subsections B1 and B2 of this section,
and the limitations set forth in subsections C1 and C2 of this section may be modified by a minor accommodation issued pursuant to article 36 of this
chapter provided the reviewing authority finds that the increased height will not have an adverse impact on:
1. The scale and massing of the streetscape;
2. The neighbors' access to light and air;
3. The neighbors' privacy;
4. The garden quality of the City;
5. Adjacent properties; and,
6. The public welfare.
F. Central R-1 Permit: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Planning Commission may modify the height limitation set forth in subsection
A of this section, the limitations set forth in subsections B1 and B2 of this section, and the limitations set forth in subsections C1 and C2 of this section
by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. In addition to the findings required by section 10-3-2453 of this chapter, the
Planning Commission shall not issue a Central R-1 permit to allow an accessory structure to exceed fourteen feet (14') in height unless the Planning
Commission additionally finds that the proposed accessory structure will not have a substantial adverse impact on adjacent properties or the public
welfare. In making this determination, the Planning Commission may look at such factors as the impact of the accessory structure on the scale and
massing as viewed from adjacent properties, the impact of the accessory structure on available light in neighboring yards, and the cumulative impact to
adjacent properties from the proposed accessory structure in combination with existing accessory structures in the vicinity. However, under no
circumstances shall the height of an accessory structure be permitted to exceed the maximum height that would be allowed in the principal building
area.
G. Additional Criteria: If the provisions of this section require an accessory structure to comply with this subsection, the accessory structure shall satisfy all
of the following criteria:
1. The accessory structure shall not exceed a height of twenty two feet (22');
2. The total length of the accessory structure, including the combined length of an existing structure and any proposed addition thereto, along the
closest side property line shall not exceed a length of twenty four feet (24');
3. The accessory structure is located entirely within thirty feet (30') of the rear lot line;
4. Any window located over fourteen feet (14') above grade on an elevation facing an alley or the closest adjacent side property line shall be fitted with
translucent glass and either fixed (unopenable) or awning style with a maximum opening of twenty five degrees (25°);
5. A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of Planning and Community Development as part of the application
for a minor accommodation. The landscaping plan shall include landscaping of an appropriate height and density to soften the appearance of the
accessory structure from adjacent properties. (1988 Code; amd. Ord. 04-O-2440, eff. 2-6-2004; Ord. 19-O-2774, eff. 3-8-2019)
10-3-2415: WINDOW HEIGHTS:
No building which is located on a site area south of Santa Monica Boulevard shall contain windows facing the street which are above a second story
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 619/797
unless otherwise permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239,
eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2416: GARAGE ENTRANCE RESTRICTIONS:
No portion of a driveway to a garage shall be below the natural grade within the front yard, unless such driveway would not slope below the elevation of
the adjacent public right-of-way, and, pursuant to article 36 of this chapter, a reviewing authority finds that such driveway would be compatible with the
nearby streetscape and with the character of the surrounding development.
In addition, the following garage entrance restrictions shall apply to those single-family residential site areas located in the Central Area of the city:
A. North Of Santa Monica Boulevard: With regard to those site areas located north of Santa Monica Boulevard, underground garages, garages with a
vehicular entrance width greater than twenty four feet (24'), and garages with a vehicular entrance width greater than forty percent (40%) of the lot
width, shall meet one of the following conditions:
1. The vehicular entrance to the garage shall be perpendicular to the front lot line, or
2. All elements of the garage shall be located within fifty feet (50') of the rear lot line, or
3. All elements of the garage shall be located farther than one hundred feet (100') from the front lot line.
B. South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: With regard to those site areas located south of Santa Monica Boulevard, except as provided in subsection C of this
section, if the vehicular entrance to a garage is located less than thirty eight feet (38') behind the front setback line, then the entrance shall be
perpendicular to the front lot line.
C. South Of Olympic Boulevard And West Of Roxbury Drive: With regard to those site areas located south of Olympic Boulevard and west of Roxbury
Drive, no garage shall have a vehicular entrance width greater than forty percent (40%) of the lot width or twenty four feet (24'), whichever is less.
D. Modifications: The vehicular entrance width and orientation requirements set forth in subsections A, B, and C of this section may be modified by a
Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 90-O-
2090, eff. 3-8-1990; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2417: SOUTH OF SANTA MONICA BOULEVARD; FRONT SETBACK REDUCTION FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
SITE AREAS ADJACENT TO OTHER USES:
For those site areas that are located south of Santa Monica Boulevard, if a site area is used exclusively for single-family residential purposes and that site
area is adjacent to a site area zoned for purposes other than single-family residential use, then the front setback for the single-family residential site area
shall be reduced by ten feet (10') from the front setback otherwise required by this chapter for that fifty percent (50%) of the front lot line nearest the
adjacent zone that is not a single-family residential zone.
For the purposes of this section, two (2) site areas shall be "adjacent" if the site areas are separated only by a side lot line, or if the side lot line of a singlefamily
residential site area is separated only by an alley from the side or rear lot line of a site area that is not located in a single-family residential zone.
(Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2418: DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following incentive based development standards shall apply to single-family residential
development in the Central Area of the city:
A. Rear Setback Adjustment For Corner Lots: The rear setback for a corner lot shall be reduced to twenty feet (20') for that fifty percent (50%) of the rear
lot line closest to the side street if the owner of that corner lot elects to increase the front setback otherwise required by this chapter by fifteen feet (15')
for that fifty percent (50%) of the front lot line closest to the side street.
B. Front Setback Averaging: Portions of a primary dwelling may encroach into a front yard if other portions of the dwelling are set back an equivalent
distance so that the average distance between the dwelling and the front lot line equals the required front setback. No such encroachment into the front
yard, however, shall be deeper than ten percent (10%) of the front setback.
For purposes of averaging pursuant to this subsection, the entire encroachment into the front yard shall be considered as wide as the widest portion of
the encroachment measured approximately parallel to the front lot line, and the depth of the entire encroachment shall be the distance between the
front setback line and the point of encroachment closest to the front lot line.
C. Cumulative Front Setback Encroachments: The encroachments allowed under subsection 10-3-2408F, section 10-3-2419 and subsection 10-3-2420A
of this chapter shall not, cumulatively, cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the maximum potential facade.
D. Rear Setback Adjustment For Corner Lots South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: Subject to the requirements set forth in article 24.5 of this chapter, the
planning commission may permit, through a Central R-1 permit, a reduced rear setback for an addition to an existing building located on a corner lot
provided all of the following requirements are satisfied:
1. Location: The corner lot in question is located south of Santa Monica Boulevard;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 620/797
2. Rear Lot Line: The rear lot line of the corner lot is located along an alley;
3. Corner Lot Width: The corner lot has a minimum width of fifty four feet (54');
4. Minimum Street Side Setback: A minimum five foot (5') street side setback is provided by the existing principal residential building and the proposed
addition;
5. Height Of Principal Building: The height of the existing principal residential building on the corner lot complies with the maximum building height
requirements set forth in section 10-3-2403 of this chapter;
6. Height Of Addition: The height of the addition does not exceed the height of the existing principal residential building;
7. Coverage: The existing principal residential building and the addition do not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the required rear yard area,
excluding porches and decks that are attached to the building and constructed in accordance with subsection 10-3-2409C of this chapter;
8. Rear Setback: For the first floor or up to fourteen feet (14') in height the proposed addition maintains a minimum eight foot (8') rear setback, unless
the addition contains a two (2) car garage at a minimum that is not accessed from the alley, in which case no rear setback shall be required. The
second floor or any portion of the addition over fourteen feet (14') in height shall be well modulated with stepbacks or architectural details or a
combination thereof, unless the planning commission finds that the modulation would be inconsistent with the architectural style of the primary
residential building and is not necessary to maintain privacy; and
9. Street Side Modulation Requirement: In addition to the street side setback and rear setback required by this section, the street side facade of the
proposed addition shall be well modulated with stepbacks or architectural details or a combination thereof, unless the planning commission finds that
the modulation would be inconsistent with the architectural style of the primary residential building.
E. Side Setback Adjustment For Lots North Of Santa Monica Boulevard: Subject to the requirements set forth in article 24.5 of this chapter, the planning
commission may permit, through a Central R-1 permit, a reduced side setback for a new single-family residence or an addition to an existing singlefamily
residence provided all of the following requirements are satisfied:
1. The lot in question is located north of Santa Monica Boulevard;
2. The maximum height of the proposed structure on the lot complies with the maximum building height requirements set forth in section 10-3-2403 of
this chapter;
3. The proposed structure maintains a minimum seven and one-half foot (7.5') setback from each side lot line;
4. The maximum height of the proposed structure at the side setback lines, as adjusted, is twenty four feet (24');
5. The surface area of the facade of the proposed structure is not greater than the maximum potential facade.
This subsection shall remain in effect only until such time as the city council adopts new R-1 standards and as of that date is repealed. Any Central
R-1 permit issued pursuant to this section on or before the date this subsection is repealed shall remain in effect for six (6) months from the date this
subsection is repealed and shall expire on that date unless a building permit has been issued for construction pursuant to that Central R-1 permit.
(Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 01-O-2384, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord. 02-O-2399, eff. 6-20-2002; Ord. 02-O-
2403, eff. 9-6-2002; Ord. 04-O-2441, eff. 2-6-2004; Ord. 12-O-2623, eff. 7-8-2012)
10-3-2419: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Three (3) parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family residential site area in the Central Area of the city that contains no more than four (4)
bedrooms; four (4) parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family residential site area in the Central Area of the city that contains five (5) or six (6)
bedrooms; five (5) parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family residential site area in the Central Area of the city that contains seven (7)
bedrooms; six (6) parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family residential site area in the Central Area of the city that contains eight (8)
bedrooms; and seven (7) parking spaces shall be provided for each single-family residential site area in the Central Area of the city that contains nine (9)
or more bedrooms.
A. The dimensions of each parking space shall comply with the parking standards adopted by the city council and on file in the department of building and
safety. However, if the width of a portion of an existing paved driveway is restricted by the location of an existing residence or existing porte-cochere to
a width less than that required by the parking standards, but not less than eight and one-half feet (8.5'), then, notwithstanding its inadequate width,
such portion of the driveway shall be considered to comply with the parking standards provided that such area complies with all other requirements of
the parking standards.
B. No required parking space shall be provided within a front yard or street side yard.
C. Parking areas, or portions thereof, located in any side or rear yard or exposed to view from a street shall be completely screened from the view of the
adjacent property by a fence or hedge at least six feet (6') in height and from any street by a fence or a hedge at least three feet (3') in height, except
that an entryway not to exceed ten feet (10') in width may be provided from the street. Such screening shall not encroach into the required dimensions
of the parking space. (Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014)
10-3-2420: WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES:
In addition to any requirements imposed pursuant to title 9 of this code, a building permit shall be required for any wall or fence greater than six feet (6') in
height and shall also be required for any wall or fence, regardless of its height, that is located in a front yard.
A. Thickness: No wall or fence shall exceed two feet (2') in thickness. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 621/797
B. Supporting Elements: No column, pillar, post, or other supporting element of a wall or fence shall be more than twenty four inches (24") in width.
C. Front Yards: The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the first twenty percent (20%) of the front yard, measured from the
front lot line, shall be three feet (3'). Walls and fences over eighteen inches (18") in height shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from the front
lot line and landscaping shall be provided in the area between the wall or fence and the front lot line, except for paving, including driveways and
walkways, that conforms to the requirements of section 10-3-2422 of this chapter.
The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the front yard at a distance from the front lot line of more than twenty percent
(20%) of the front setback shall be six feet (6'); provided, however, any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge which exceeds three feet (3') in height
shall be open to public view.
D. Side Yards: The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in both a side yard and a front yard shall be six feet (6');
provided, however, that any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge which exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be open to public view.
The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in a side yard, but not in a front yard, shall be seven feet (7'), except
that the maximum allowable height shall be eight feet (8') for such a wall, fence, or hedge located within five feet (5') of a rear lot line and parallel to
such rear lot line.
Furthermore, any portion of such wall, fence or hedge that exceeds three feet (3') in height and is located in a street side yard shall be open to public
view or the wall, fence or hedge shall be set back an average of at least one foot (1') and no less than six inches (6") from the street side lot line for the
purpose of providing landscaping on the street side of the wall.
E. Rear Yards: The maximum allowable height for a fence, wall or hedge located solely in a rear yard shall be eight feet (8'). (Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-
2014)
10-3-2421: GAME COURTS AND GAME COURT FENCES:
Game courts in the Central Area of the city shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. No game court or game court fence shall be located on a through lot, within a front yard, between a principal residence and a front setback line, or over
or on top of any building or structure unless the city council finds, after notice and a hearing pursuant to the provisions of article 24.5 of this chapter,
that such court or fence will not have a substantial adverse visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood, will not create an unusual noise impact,
and will not have an adverse impact on public safety.
B. Notwithstanding any other regulation set forth in this chapter, the maximum allowable height of game court fences constructed at least five feet (5') from
all side, street side and rear property lines shall be twelve feet (12') and the maximum allowable height of lighting standards for game courts located at
least five feet (5') from all side, street side and rear property lines shall be twenty two feet (22').
C. Game court fences and game court lighting standards located within five feet (5') of a side, street side, or rear property line shall comply with the height
requirements for fences set forth in section 10-3-2420 of this article, unless otherwise permitted by a Central R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 24.5
of this chapter.
D. All game court fences shall be constructed of open wire mesh or similar material, except that a game court fence may include a retaining wall that does
not exceed a maximum height of seven feet (7') provided that the cumulative height of the retaining wall and the fence does not exceed twelve feet
(12'). (Ord. 77-O-1652, eff. 6-2-1977; amd. Ord. 80-O-1771, eff. 10-16-1980; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 01-O-
2384, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2422: PAVING:
Paving within a front yard shall require a building permit and shall comply with the following restrictions:
A. Coverage South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: For those site areas located south of Santa Monica Boulevard, no more than four hundred (400) square
feet of area within a front yard shall be paved and paved areas greater than five feet (5') in width accessed by a driveway approach shall lead directly
to a carport, garage, or parking area located beyond the front setback area.
B. Coverage North Of Santa Monica Boulevard: For those site areas located north of Santa Monica Boulevard, not more than thirty three percent (33%) of
the area of a front yard shall be paved. In addition, one walkway that does not exceed five feet (5') in width shall be permitted to be paved provided that
the total area of the paved walkway does not exceed the total square footage derived by multiplying the depth of the front yard by five feet (5').
C. Circular Driveways: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, if a site area is permitted to have two (2) driveway approaches
pursuant to section 8-4-4 of this Code, and a circular driveway is constructed on such site area, the front yard may be paved in the minimum amount
necessary to construct a circular driveway not exceeding twelve feet (12') in width. In addition, paving shall be permitted to construct one walkway not
exceeding four feet (4') in width connecting such driveway to the residence, and one driveway not exceeding nine feet (9') in width connecting the
circular driveway to parking that is required by this Code and is located behind the front yard.
D. Flag Lots: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, if the front yard of a site area does not exceed thirty six feet (36') in
width, no provision of this section shall prohibit the paving of a driveway that does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width, or such additional width as
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 622/797
determined necessary by the City Engineer to provide for reasonably safe access to the site area.
E. Setbacks For Paving: No portion of a front yard within three feet (3') of any property line shall be paved, except for a driveway not exceeding the width
of its curb cut and a walkway pursuant to this section. In addition, no portion of a front yard within five feet (5') of a building shall be paved except for a
driveway and a walkway of no more than ten feet (10') in width.
F. Paving Buffer: An opaque wall or hedge not less than eighteen inches (18") nor more than three feet (3') in height shall be provided and maintained
along the front and sides of each area paved, except at a driveway approach or walkway entrance.
G. Paving Materials: All paving shall be portland cement concrete or its equivalent, applied in accordance with specifications satisfactory to, and approved
by, the Director of Building and Safety. Paving with asphaltic concrete shall not be permitted. No more than three (3) different types of pavement
materials shall be used in any front yard. Any additions to paved area shall be consistent with the existing paved areas in design, appearance, and
material used.
H. Alternate Materials And Methods: The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this section provided that any such alternate has been approved pursuant to this subsection as follows:
1. The Director of Building and Safety may approve any such alternate provided that he finds the material or method of construction advances the
purposes of this section and provides at least the equivalent of that prescribed by this section in quality, strength, effectiveness, and durability.
2. The Director of Building and Safety shall require that sufficient evidence be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding the
suitability of an alternate.
I. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a reviewing authority may authorize the replacement of legally
nonconforming pavement with an amount of paving less than or equal to the existing pavement pursuant to article 36 of this chapter if the reviewing
authority finds that such paving will be compatible with the character of the adjacent streetscape. (Ord. 1158, eff. 9-20-1962; amd. Ord. 1216, eff. 10-
21-1965; Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 75-O-1575, eff. 7-3-1975; Ord. 81-O-1787, eff. 4-2-1981; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 01-O-2384, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002; Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014; Ord. 17-O-2723, eff. 2-10-2017;
Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-2423: LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPING PLANS:
This section is intended to require design and implementation of a landscaping plan prior to occupancy of a new development in order to ensure that
landscaping is not ignored in the design and construction process. However, this section is not intended to require a specific type or standard of
landscaping.
For the purposes of this section, "landscaping" shall mean the development of the open space on a property with plantings, such as trees, bushes, shrubs,
hedges, lawns, other live ground cover, or greenery. Landscaping may include nonliving decorative treatment, such as walls, fences, curbs, groupings of
rock, or similar accent material, interspersed with plantings, but shall not include paving.
A. All unpaved portions of a front yard shall be improved and maintained with landscaping.
B. Each proposal for the construction of a single-family residence shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan that is designed with the goal of
maintaining the garden quality of the City of Beverly Hills. Prior to final inspection of a new residence, the property owner shall attest, on a form
provided by the City, that the subject site area has been planted in accordance with the landscaping plan.
The landscaping plan shall include a minimum two foot (2') wide landscaped area the length of each required side yard, except in portions of the side yard
occupied by approved accessory structures, approved elevators or elevator enclosures, a permitted swimming pool, or a driveway, including a driveway
covered by a porte-cochere, in accordance with sections 10-3-2419 and 10-3-2422 of this article. (Ord. 17-O-2723, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-2423.5: SYNTHETIC TURF IN FRONT YARDS:
Synthetic turf shall be allowed as landscaping for the purposes of this article provided that the following provisions are satisfied for synthetic turf placed in
front yards:
A. Stage D Required: Applications for the use of synthetic turf may only be approved, and permits for installation may only be issued when the City Council
has declared and implemented stage D water conservation measures. Synthetic turf that is legally installed during stage D declared periods may be
retained thereafter, even if the City Council withdraws the stage D declaration, provided the synthetic turf is maintained in accordance with all
applicable standards.
B. Permit Required: A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any synthetic turf in the front yard. Upon application for a building permit
the following shall be submitted to the Community Development Department:
1. A landscape plan that includes:
a. Dimensions and details of the landscaped area including the synthetic turf and other landscaping materials.
b. Drawings that include scaled cross sections of the proposed landscaping materials and details showing the methods of installation and attachment
of the synthetic turf as well as drainage information.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 623/797
2. Material description including manufacturer's product data, specifications and installation instructions, installer information and qualifications, and
warranty information.
3. A sample of the proposed synthetic turf material that is at least twelve inches by twelve inches (12" x 12").
4. Maintenance information for the synthetic turf.
C. Coverage: Synthetic turf located in the front yard may be used for up to seventy percent (70%) of the landscaped area but no more than forty percent
(40%) of the entire front yard area. Synthetic turf shall not be located:
1. Within the public right of way/parkway.
2. Within the dripline of any native or "heritage tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this chapter. Further, the installation of turf shall not disturb the
area within the dripline of any native or heritage tree.
3. Within eighteen inches (18") of a front lot line. The eighteen inch (18") buffer between the front lot line and synthetic turf shall be landscaped with
living plant material.
4. Within three feet (3') of a single-family residence.
5. In any area that is used for the parking or driving of motor vehicles.
D. Material: Synthetic turf in a front yard must simulate the appearance of natural live grass and shall:
1. Be of a type known as cut-pile infill with parallel long slit blades. The long slit blades shall be manufactured from polyethylene or polypropylene. The
minimum pile length shall be one and three-fourths inches (13/4") and the maximum pile length shall be two and one-half inches (21/2"). The turf shall
contain a beige or tan thatch layer. The synthetic turf blades (not including the thatch layer) shall be required to contain at least two (2) colors. The
synthetic turf shall comply with all federal and state standards related to lead and heavy metal content. Turf that is made from recycled materials is
encouraged. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting is prohibited.
2. Be constructed to maximize dimensional stability, resist damage during normal use and to minimize UV degradation. Further, the synthetic turf shall
be resistant to staining, weather, insects, rot, mildew and fungus growth, and shall be nonallergenic and nontoxic.
3. Contain an infill material of clean silica sand or zeolite material that is brushed into the synthetic turf to keep the blades upright and achieve a natural
grass look. Any replacement infill shall be silica sand or zeolite material. Rubber infill is prohibited.
4. Be affixed to a permeable triple layer primary backing with a tuft bind strength of at least eight (8) pounds. The backing shall allow water to percolate
through the synthetic turf at a drain rate of at least thirty inches (30") per hour. The synthetic turf system shall allow for the free movement and
drainage of water through the system to prevent runoff, pooling, and flooding.
5. Have a manufacturer's warranty lasting at least eight (8) years.
6. Have spacing between tufting rows (gauge) of no more than three-eighths inch (3/8") as defined by the manufacturer.
7. Have a face weight of at least sixty (60). The "face weight" is defined as the weight in ounces of the synthetic turf fibers found in one square yard of
synthetic turf as defined by the manufacturer.
8. Have tear grab strength of at least two hundred (200) pounds.
9. Pass the pill burn test for flammability (ASTM D2859).
E. Installation: Synthetic turf shall be installed pursuant to manufacturer's requirements by licensed professionals who are experienced and trained by the
manufacturer in the installation of the synthetic turf. In addition:
1. The synthetic turf shall be installed over at least three inches (3") of a compacted aggregate base that provides adequate drainage. The base
material shall be installed over subgrade that is compacted to a firm condition to ensure stability and maintain adequate drainage.
2. Seams shall not be visible and shall be fastened in a manner that ensures they are firm, tight and permanent. Seams shall be sewn and fibers shall
be brushed to provide full coverage of the fibers over the seams.
3. The synthetic turf shall be anchored over the entire coverage area and shall be installed with a nailer board or any such substitute recommended by
the manufacturer intended to conceal edges and ensure proper anchoring of turf.
4. All existing irrigation infrastructure in the synthetic turf area including piping and sprinkler heads that are no longer used must be capped or removed
and shall not be visible.
5. All reasonable efforts shall be made to protect existing trees and tree roots from damage during installation.
F. Maintenance: Synthetic turf shall be maintained in an attractive and clean condition pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of this code and shall not contain holes,
tears, stains, discoloration, seam separations, uplifted surfaces, heat degradation, or excessive wear. (Ord. 15-O-2691, eff. 11-6-2015)
10-3-2424: PERMISSIBLE TYPES OF BUILDING MATERIALS:
All structures constructed in the Central Area of the city shall comply with the following materials restrictions:
A. Roofing: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have a roof constructed
with wood shake, shingle, asphalt composition, crushed rock, or other roofing material which the director of building and safety deems equivalent.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 624/797
Reflective, glossy, polished, and/or roll formed type metal roofing shall be prohibited.
B. Siding: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have exterior siding of
brick, wood, stucco, metal, concrete, or other siding material which the director of building and safety deems equivalent. Reflective, glossy, polished,
and/or roll formed type metal siding shall be prohibited on such structures.
C. Alternate Materials: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the director of building and safety may authorize the use of materials not
otherwise authorized pursuant to this section if the director finds that:
1. The use of an otherwise prohibited material would enhance the architectural compatibility of the proposed structure with existing structures in the
neighborhood;
2. A proposed alteration or addition to an existing residential structure with the prohibited material will be a continuation of such structure's architectural
style; or
3. The use of an otherwise prohibited material is necessary to provide adequate safety or to comply with other laws or regulations applicable to the
subject structure. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 01-O-2384, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-
2002)
10-3-2425: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ON ESTATE PROPERTIES:
If the area of a residential site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or if the area of two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels
which are owned by the same person and used as one site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, accessory buildings to a
residence may be located on any part of the site if authorized by the planning commission as part of a Central R-1 permit issued in accordance with the
procedures set forth in article 24.5 of this chapter.
All accessory buildings approved pursuant to this section shall be immediately removed if the site is altered so that:
A. The area of the site on which the accessory buildings are located is reduced below twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or
B. The primary residential building is separated or removed from the site on which the accessory buildings are located so that the buildings or properties in
question no longer function as one home or estate. (1962 Code § 10-205; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 01-O-2384, eff. 11-2-2001; Ord.
02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2426: DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED:
A. Except as provided otherwise in subsection B of this section, no single-family residence in a Central R-1 zone shall be erected, constructed, altered or
remodeled unless the elevations and plans for the exterior portions and areas have been first reviewed and approved by the design review commission
or the director of community development in accordance with the provisions of article 44 of this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the design review procedures set forth in article 44 of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
1. Remodels of single-family residences in a Central R-1 zone that do not materially change the appearance of the structure as viewed from the street.
(Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004; amd. Ord. 05-O-2472, eff. 6-17-2005)
10-3-2427: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATIONS TO EXCEED HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
For any application that seeks approval to exceed the height limitations set forth in section 10-3-2403, 10-3-2413 or 10-3-2414 of this chapter, the director
of community development may, at his or her discretion, require the applicant to first install story poles to demonstrate the height, bulk and location of the
proposed project. The director is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the planning
commission, governing the installation of story poles. Any applicant subject to the requirements of this section shall install all story poles in full compliance
with such rules and regulations. (Ord. 04-O-2454, eff. 10-22-2004)
10-3-2428: MAXIMUM WIDTH AND DEPTH ESTABLISHED; PROHIBITION ON MULTIPLE-LOT DEVELOPMENTS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the following width and depth restrictions shall apply to each R-1 zone lot in the Central Area of the
city:
1. Width: The maximum width of any R-1 zone lot in the Central Area of the city shall not exceed the average width of the lots in the same block.
2. Depth: The maximum depth of any R-1 zone lot in the Central Area of the city shall not exceed the average depth of the lots in the same block.
B. In addition to the restrictions imposed by subsection A of this section, no single-family residential development in the Central Area of the city shall be
permitted to occupy more than one lot, nor shall any residential structure in the Central Area of the city be erected or enlarged across a lot line in an R-
1 zone.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city council may waive the limitations set forth in subsection A of this section by issuing a
Central R-1 permit pursuant to article 24.5 of this chapter. Additionally, the city council may waive the provisions of subsection B of this section in
connection with a remodel of an existing home that occupies more than one lot provided that the remodel does not involve an increase in the square
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 625/797
footage of the existing home. In addition to the findings required by section 10-3-2453 of this chapter, the city council shall not issue a Central R-1
permit to allow a single-family residential development on multiple lots, to allow a residential structure to be erected or enlarged across a lot line, or to
allow a lot to exceed the maximum width and depth limitations imposed by this section unless the city council makes the following additional findings:
1. The Central R-1 permit does not enlarge any single lot by more than ten percent (10%) of the average width or depth of the lots in the same block.
2. The proposed development is designed to appropriately minimize the appearance of scale and mass and enhances the garden quality of the city and
appropriately maximizes the use of required open space within the proposed architectural style;
3. The proposed development will enhance the appearance of the neighborhood;
4. The proposed development appropriately balances the applicant's reasonable expectation of development with the neighbors' reasonable
expectation of privacy; and
5. The proposed development respects the character of the existing neighborhood and prevailing site design patterns, carefully analyzing the
characteristics of the surrounding group of homes, and integrates appropriate features that will ensure harmony between old and new.
In making this determination, the city council may look at such factors as the impact of the proposed development on the scale and massing as
viewed from adjacent properties, the impact of the proposed development on available light in neighboring yards, and the cumulative impact to
adjacent properties from the proposed development in combination with existing multiple lot developments in the vicinity. (Ord. 06-O-2494, eff. 2-17-
2006)
Article 24.5. Central R-1 Permits
10-3-2450: CENTRAL R-1 PERMIT AUTHORITY:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, upon application by a property owner, in a form satisfactory to the director of community development,
the reviewing authority may issue a Central R-1 permit to establish the following standards in the Central Area of the city:
A. Garage Requirements: Establish vehicular entrance width and orientation requirements for garages in the Central Area.
B. Height Limit For Accessory Structure: Establish a height limit for an accessory structure located in a side, street side or rear yard north of Santa Monica
Boulevard. In no event, however, shall an accessory structure exceed the height limitations permitted in the principal building area.
C. Maximum Floor Area: Establish a maximum floor area exceeding the limitations of section 10-3-2402 of this chapter for all buildings located on a site
area. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be construed to permit noncompliance with height and setback requirements set forth in article 24 of
this chapter.
D. Maximum Potential Facade: Establish the cumulative coverage of the maximum potential facade permitted for architectural projections which encroach
into the front yard. Such architectural projections, however, may cover no more than two-thirds (2/3) of the maximum potential facade.
E. Placement Of Windows: Establish standards for the placement of windows which are above a second story, and face a street on property located south
of Santa Monica Boulevard.
F. Minimum Side Setback: Establish the minimum side setback, where the existing side setback is nonconforming, for additions with a height in excess of
fourteen feet (14') at a width no less than the existing side setback, provided that in no event shall the side setback for the addition be less than three
feet (3').
G. Front Yard Encroachments: Establish the maximum encroachment into a front yard for eaves and plant-on accents provided by subsections 10-3-
2408C and E of this chapter when the primary dwelling encroaches into the front yard by the maximum amount permitted by subsection 10-3-2418C of
this chapter.
H. Height Limit For Game Court Fences: Establish a height limit for game court fences located within five feet (5') of a property line. In no event, however,
shall a game court fence or lighting standard be permitted to exceed the height allowed for such structure located more than five feet (5') from a lot line.
I. Nonconforming Rear Setback Extension: Extend the existing nonconforming rear setback where the extension is not less than fifteen feet (15') from the
rear property line and either: the extension exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height; or the area of the extension exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet
or twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area, inclusive of any floor area granted pursuant to subsection 10-3-2406C of this chapter; or the height of
any porch or deck attached to a primary structure and located within the rear setback is more than three feet (3') above natural grade or higher than the
finished floor of the first story whichever is lower; pursuant to subsection 10-3-2405C of this chapter.
J. Corner Lots South Of Santa Monica Boulevard: Establish the minimum rear setback and street side setback for a principal residential building located
within the rear yard setback area of corner lot properties south of Santa Monica Boulevard, pursuant to section 10-3-2418 of this chapter.
K. Maximum Height Of Buildings North Of Santa Monica Boulevard In The Central Area Of The City: Establish a maximum height limit pursuant to section
10-3-2403 of this chapter.
Additionally, the reviewing authority shall not act under any subsection of this section unless a property owner specifically applies for review under that
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 626/797
subsection. This constraint shall not limit the reviewing authority's power to condition its action pursuant to section 10-3-2454 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-
O-2566, eff. 6-27-2009; amd. Ord. 12-O-2623, eff. 7-8-2012; Ord. 14-O-2669, eff. 12-5-2014)
10-3-2451: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
The reviewing authority for a Central R-1 permit application shall be the planning commission unless the application requested is for one or more of the
following:
A. Subsection 10-3-2450A of this chapter, regarding vehicular entrances.
B. Subsection 10-3-2450D of this chapter, regarding maximum potential facade.
C. Subsection 10-3-2450E of this chapter, regarding placement of second story windows.
D. Subsection 10-3-2450G of this chapter, regarding maximum encroachment into front yard.
The design review commission shall be the reviewing authority for the aforementioned Central R-1 permit applications unless the application
accompanies a separate application for discretionary approval from the planning commission with regard to the same project site. In that case, the
planning commission shall be the reviewing authority for the Central R-1 permit application.
In the event that a Central R-1 permit application accompanies a separate application for a discretionary approval from the city council with regard to
the same project site, the city council shall be the reviewing authority for the Central R-1 permit. (Ord. 09-O-2566, eff. 6-27-2009)
10-3-2452: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
A. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing concerning each application for a Central R-1 permit.
B. Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice
guidelines. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-2453: FINDINGS REQUIRED TO ISSUE A CENTRAL R-1 PERMIT:
The reviewing authority shall not issue a Central R-1 permit unless the reviewing authority finds that the proposed development will not have a substantial
adverse impact on:
A. The scale and massing of the streetscape,
B. Neighbors' access to light and air,
C. Neighbors' privacy, and
D. The garden quality of the city. (Ord. 89-O-2056, eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2454: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting a Central R-1 permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the findings
required for such permit. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2455: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision of the planning commission regarding a Central R-1 permit, may appeal that decision to the city
council. Such decision may be appealed in the manner as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision of the design review commission regarding a Central R-1 permit, may appeal that decision to the
planning commission. Such decision may be appealed in the manner provided in section 10-3-4417 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-2566, eff. 6-27-2009)
10-3-2456: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a Central R-1 permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 627/797
Article 25. Single-Family Residential Development Standards For The Hillside Area Of
The City
10-3-2501: APPLICABILITY:
The development standards set forth in this article shall apply to all properties zoned for single-family residential uses in the Hillside Area of the City. (Ord.
95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2502: FLOOR AREA:
The following minimum and maximum floor area restrictions shall apply to buildings in the Hillside Area of the City:
A. Minimum Restrictions: Any building that serves as the primary residential building on a site area shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand six
hundred (1,600) square feet and shall have a minimum width, at its widest point, of twenty feet (20').
B. Maximum Restrictions: The standards set forth in this subsection shall govern the maximum cumulative floor area that may be developed on any site
within the Hillside Area.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an owner of a site within the Hillside Area may develop buildings or structures on that site which
cumulatively contain up to four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet of floor area even if the application of the standards set forth in this section
would not permit that amount of development.
In addition, notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the cumulative floor area developed on any one site area, in combination with the floor
area of all basements constructed on that site, shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet unless permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued
pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter. Provided, however, that up to one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of basement garage area and up to
three hundred (300) square feet of basement mechanical area shall not be included within the calculation of the floor area of a basement for the
purposes of this paragraph.
1. For site areas which have no level pad, or a level pad of less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in area, and the average slope of the site
area is twenty percent (20%) or greater, then the maximum cumulative floor area for all buildings and structures shall be twenty percent (20%) of the
site area.
2. For those sites not governed by subsection B1 of this section, the maximum permitted cumulative floor area of all buildings and structures shall be
calculated as follows:
a. If the area of a site is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less, then the maximum permitted cumulative floor area for buildings and structures
on the site shall be forty percent (40%) of the area of the level pad plus ten percent (10%) of the area of the slope.
b. If the area of a site is between fifteen thousand one (15,001) and twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet, then the maximum permitted
cumulative floor area for buildings and structures on the site shall be thirty seven percent (37%) of the area of the level pad plus ten percent (10%)
of the area of the slope.
c. If the area of a site is between twenty five thousand one (25,001) and thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, then the maximum permitted
cumulative floor area for buildings and structures on the site shall be thirty four percent (34%) of the area of the level pad plus ten percent (10%) of
the area of the slope.
d. If the area of a site is greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, then the maximum permitted cumulative floor area for buildings and
structures on the site shall be thirty one percent (31%) of the area of the level pad plus ten percent (10%) of the area of the slope.
3. If the area of a site equals or exceeds two (2) acres, the maximum cumulative floor area may exceed the limitations set forth in subsections B1 and
B2 of this section if permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter.
C. Additional Requirements: Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision of this Code, a level pad area must contain a level square shaped area with
minimum dimensions of twenty feet (20') per side for the level pad to be used to calculate the maximum permitted cumulative floor area of buildings
and structures in the Hillside Area pursuant to subsection B of this section. "Level pad" shall have the meaning set forth in section 10-3-100 of this
chapter.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision of this Code, the maximum cumulative floor area of the portion of any buildings and structures located
off the existing level pad of any lot in the Hillside Area of the City shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet, unless a Hillside R-1 permit is issued
pursuant to subsection 10-3-2550K of this chapter. "Level pad" shall have the meaning set forth in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, and "existing level
pad" shall mean the level pad in existence on the effective date hereof (September 30, 2016).
For the purposes of this section, the maximum cumulative permitted floor area shall be calculated based upon the finished grade of the site.
Further, if a portion of a site area is to be dedicated to the City for the purposes of establishing or enlarging a street or an alley, and such dedication is
to be made in conjunction with a development approval, then, for the purposes of calculating the maximum permitted floor area for the proposed
development pursuant to this section, the site area shall include that portion of the site area that is to be dedicated to the City. However, the dedicated
area shall not be included in the calculation of floor area for subsequent development, including additions to the original development. (Ord. 18-O-2751,
eff. 4-6-2018)
10-3-2503: HEIGHT:
Except as provided in section 10-3-2522 of this article for view preservation lots, as provided in section 10-3-2516 of this article for walls and fences, and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 628/797
as provided below for uphill lots, construction over a slope, construction over fill, and small level pads, the maximum permitted height for a structure
constructed on a site area in the Hillside Area shall be twenty six feet (26'). However, a structure may exceed this height if the structure is constructed
within a height envelope that begins at twenty two feet (22') in height at the front setback line and increases toward the rear of the site at a thirty three
degree (33°) slope to a maximum height of thirty feet (30').
A. Uphill Lots: If a site area in the Hillside Area has a level pad elevation that is at least ten feet (10') higher than any adjacent portion of a street, then the
structures constructed on that site area shall be constructed within a height envelope that begins at fourteen feet (14') in height at the level pad setback
line and increases toward the center of the level pad at a slope of thirty three degrees (33°) to a height of thirty feet (30').
B. Construction Over A Slope: Notwithstanding the height limits set forth in this section, if a building extends beyond the edge of the level pad by at least
twenty feet (20'), measured horizontally to the pad, then the maximum permitted height for that portion of the building located on the pad shall be thirty
feet (30'). The maximum permitted height for a structure constructed over a slope shall be twenty two feet (22'). However, the vertical distance between
the lowest exposed point of the structure and the highest element of the structure shall not exceed fifty five feet (55').
C. Construction Over Fill: Notwithstanding any other height limit set forth in this section, the maximum permitted height for a structure constructed over fill
shall be reduced by the maximum height of any retaining wall or walls for that fill if such retaining wall or walls are located within ten feet (10') of the
structure.
D. Small Level Pads: Notwithstanding the height limits set forth above, if a site contains no level pad, or a site contains a level pad that does not exceed
seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in area, then the maximum height of that portion of a structure within forty feet (40') of the front setback line of the
site shall be twenty six feet (26'). However, a structure may exceed this height if the structure is constructed within a height envelope that begins at
twenty two feet (22') in height at the front setback line and increases toward the rear of the site at a thirty three degree (33°) slope to a maximum height
of thirty feet (30'). For that portion of a structure located more than forty feet (40') from a front setback line, the maximum height shall be twenty two feet
(22'). However, the vertical distance between the lowest exposed point of the structure and the highest element of the structure shall not exceed fifty
five feet (55'). (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2504: FRONT SETBACKS:
A. The front setback for site areas located in the Hillside Area of the city shall be the setback as established in the records for each site area maintained by
the city's community development department, unless that setback is not established in the city's records, or it is zero.
B. If the front setback for a particular site area is zero or is not established in the city's records, then the front setback distance for that site area shall be
determined as follows:
1. For developed site areas, the front setback shall be the lesser of either:
a. The distance between the front lot line and the closest element of the existing primary residence; or
b. The average of the front setbacks of the other site areas on the same side of the street in the same block.
2. For undeveloped lots, the front setback shall be the average of the front setbacks of the other site areas on the same side of the street in the same
block. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 07-O-2512, eff. 5-11-2007)
10-3-2505: REAR SETBACKS:
The rear setback for site areas located in the Hillside Area shall equal fifteen percent (15%) of the lot depth or twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater. (Ord.
92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2506: SIDE SETBACKS:
Except as provided in this section, each side setback, including street side setbacks, for buildings in the Hillside Area shall be ten feet (10') or twelve
percent (12%) of the lot width for each setback, whichever is greater.
A. Street Side Setbacks: A street side setback shall be as indicated on the "residential street setback map of the city of Beverly Hills", if such setback is
greater than the minimum setback otherwise required by this section.
If the street side setback is not shown on the "residential street setback map of the city of Beverly Hills" then the setback shall be governed by the
provisions of this section regarding side setbacks.
B. Side Setback Extension: If a legally constructed existing building does not conform to the setback requirements of this section, then the building may be
enlarged through the extension of the existing, nonconforming, side setback provided that the existing setback is not less than three feet (3') and the
enlarged portion of the building does not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height.
1. Minor Accommodation: If the existing setback is not less than three feet (3') and the extension exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height, then the
extension may be permitted by a minor accommodation permit issued pursuant to article 36 of this chapter provided that the floor area of the
extension is less than one thousand (1,000) square feet and less than twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area authorized by building permit
as of September 2, 1988, and provided that the reviewing authority finds that the extension will not have an adverse impact on: a) the scale and
massing of the streetscape, b) neighbors' access to light and air, c) neighbors' privacy, and d) the garden quality of the city.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 629/797
2. Hillside R-1 Permit: If the existing setback is not less than three feet (3'), the extension exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height, and the area of the
extension exceeds one thousand (1,000) square feet or twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area authorized by building permit as of September
2, 1988, then the extension may be permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter.
C. Structures Built Into Uphill Slopes: If a building is built into an uphill slope located between the level pad and a rear property line, then the sum of the
side setbacks for the portion of the building built into the uphill slope shall be the setbacks otherwise required by this section plus thirty percent (30%)
of the lot width. Furthermore, in no case shall any side setback be less than the setback otherwise required by this section.
D. Application Of Side Setback Requirements To Existing Legally Nonconforming Side Yards: In all cases that the side setback requirements of this
section are applied to construction on lots with existing legally nonconforming side setbacks, the largest setback required by this section shall be
applied to the side of the lot with the largest existing side yard. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 86-O-1977, eff. 10-2-1986; Ord. 89-O-2056,
eff. 4-20-1989; Ord. 90-O-2090, eff. 3-8-1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 96-O-2261, eff. 7-5-1996)
10-3-2507: PAD EDGE SETBACKS:
No portion of any building shall be constructed closer than five feet (5') to the edge of a level pad, adjacent to a slope downhill from the pad, except those
buildings that extend more than twenty feet (20') beyond the edge of the level pad, measured horizontally to the pad. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd.
Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2508: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN A FRONT YARD:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any front yard, except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this code;
B. Paving in accordance with section 10-3-2518 of this article;
C. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into such yard;
D. One covered entry porch, located at or below the first floor level, that is a maximum of four feet (4') in depth and which has no vertical supporting
elements;
E. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yard. (Ord. 85-
O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2509: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN SIDE YARDS, STREET SIDE YARDS, PAD EDGE SETBACKS, AND REAR
YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any side yard, street side yard, pad edge setback, or rear yard except the following:
A. A fence, gate or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this code;
B. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
C. Porches and decks located at or below the first floor level provided, further, that required handrails for such elements shall not extend more than forty
two inches (42") above the first floor level;
D. Gas and electric meter enclosures projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
E. One fireplace provided one of the following two (2) criteria is met:
1. The required setback equals or exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is limited to thirty inches (30") or less, and the length of
the fireplace measured parallel to the property line does not exceed ten feet (10'); or
2. The required setback is less than seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is twelve inches (12") or less, the length of the fireplace
measured parallel to the property line does not exceed six feet (6'), and the fireplace is located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the front of the
building;
F. Swimming pools provided that no mechanical equipment servicing any such pool is located within a side yard or street yard;
G. Trash storage facilities;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 630/797
H. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yards;
I. A porte-cochere; and
J. Freestanding support structures for wireless facilities, provided that no mechanical or accessory equipment servicing any such wireless facility is located
within a side yard or a street side yard.
K. Elevators and elevator enclosures, provided the following criteria are met:
1. The subject residence is not a newly constructed building. "Newly constructed building" shall mean a building that has been constructed within the
past five (5) years or remodeled more than fifty percent (50%) during the past five (5) years as described in section 10-3-4100 of this chapter.
2. The length of the encroachment measured parallel to the property line does not exceed seven feet (7'), except that a minor accommodation permit
may be issued to allow a greater length. In order to approve the minor accommodation permit, the reviewing authority must find that the
encroachment will not have an adverse impact on:
a. The scale and massing of the streetscape,
b. Neighbors' access to light and air,
c. Neighbors' privacy, and
d. The garden quality of the city.
3. The aggregate length of the encroachment of the elevator and elevator enclosure together with a fireplace encroaching into the same setback,
pursuant to subsection E of this section, does not exceed thirteen feet (13'), except pursuant to a minor accommodation permit issued pursuant to
subsection K2 of this section.
4. The encroachment is not closer than three feet (3') from the front of the building.
5. The elevator and elevator enclosure does not have any windows.
6. Noise generated by the elevator complies with city noise regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 1, article 2 of this code.
7. The elevator and enclosure is designed to be compatible with the existing residence in color, material and design.
8. The encroachment into the setback does not exceed the following, provided that a minimum setback of three feet (3') shall be maintained in all
cases:
a. Thirty inches (30"), or
b. Sixty inches (60") if a minor accommodation permit pursuant to article 36 of this chapter is issued. In order to approve the minor accommodation
permit, the reviewing authority must find that the encroachment will not have an adverse impact on:
(1) The scale and massing of the streetscape,
(2) Neighbors' access to light and air,
(3) Neighbors' privacy, and
(4) The garden quality of the city.
L. Decks located at finished first floor level, covering portions of a driveway that leads directly to subterranean parking for residences, provided, further,
that required handrails for such elements shall not extend more than forty two inches (42") above the deck floor level and that the length of the deck
shall be limited to twenty four feet (24') or the width of the opening into the subterranean parking, whichever is less, provided that a substantial
landscape buffer is provided between the deck and any adjacent property.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a passageway or access for emergency services shall extend for the length of the entire site area from
the front lot line to the rear lot line. Such passageway or access shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in width and shall be free of any obstruction, except
that a wall, fence or hedge otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter may be placed along the rear lot line and a gate may be placed across
such passageway or access behind the front yard. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 88-O-2025, eff. 6-9-1988; Ord. 90-O-2101, eff. 10-4-1990;
Ord. 93-O-2187, eff. 1-14-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005; Ord. 09-O-2563, eff. 2-22-2009; Ord. 16-O-2718, eff. 1-20-
2017)
10-3-2510: FRONT SETBACK FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from the front lot line or all elements of the accessory building shall be located within
fifty feet (50') of the rear lot line of the site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2511: SIDE SETBACK ENCROACHMENT FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings that do not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height may be constructed within a side yard provided that such buildings are set back five
feet (5') from all property lines.
Except as otherwise permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter, no accessory building may be constructed within five
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 631/797
feet (5') of a property line and accessory buildings in excess of fourteen feet (14') in height must be constructed within the principal building area and shall
be governed by the height restrictions for that area. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2512: REAR SETBACK ENCROACHMENT FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings that do not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height may be constructed within a rear yard provided that such buildings are set back five
feet (5') from all property lines.
Except as otherwise permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter, no accessory building may be constructed within five
feet (5') of a property line and accessory buildings in excess of fourteen feet (14') in height must be constructed within the principal building area and shall
be governed by the height restrictions for that area. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2513: STRUCTURE SEPARATION FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than six feet (6') to any other building on the same site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2513.5: ACCESSORY BUILDING PORCHES AND DECKS:
No accessory building shall have a porch or deck located more than three feet (3') above the finished grade. For the purposes of this section, grade shall
be defined as it is defined in title 9 of this code.
A. Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the planning commission may permit an accessory building located on a residential site with
an area that equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet to include a porch or deck located more than three feet (3') above finished
grade through a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2514: GARAGE ENTRANCE RESTRICTIONS:
If the vehicular entrance to a garage is greater than twenty four feet (24') in width, then the vehicular entrance to the garage shall be either: a)
perpendicular to the street from which it has access, b) within the rear fifty feet (50') of the site, or c) at least one hundred feet (100') from the front lot line.
(Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2515: GARAGE AND OTHER PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
No less than four (4) parking spaces shall be provided for each primary residence located within the Hillside Area unless the primary residence has a floor
area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. If the primary residence has a floor area of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet, then only three
(3) parking spaces shall be required.
A. At least two (2) of the parking spaces required by this section shall be covered by a permanent structure.
B. The dimensions of each parking space shall comply with the parking standards adopted by the city council and on file in the department of building and
safety. However, if the width of a portion of an existing paved driveway is restricted by the location of an existing residence, or if the width of a portion of
a paved driveway is restricted by the construction of a porte cochere, to a width less than that required by the parking standards, but not less than eight
feet (8'), then, notwithstanding its inadequate width, such portion of the driveway shall be considered to comply with the parking standards provided
that such area complies with all other requirements of the parking standards.
C. No required parking space shall be provided within a front yard. Furthermore, any additional parking areas that are not required by this code shall be set
back a minimum of five feet (5') from any front lot line or street side lot line. Such five foot (5') setback area shall be landscaped.
D. Parking areas, or portions thereof, located in any side or rear yard or exposed to view from a street shall be completely screened from the view of the
adjacent property by a fence or hedge at least six feet (6') in height and from any street by a fence or a hedge at least three feet (3') in height, except
that an entryway not to exceed ten feet (10') in width may be provided from the street, such screening shall not encroach into the required dimensions
of the parking space. (1962 Code § 10-746; amd. Ord. 1256, eff. 11-1-1966; Ord. 1261, eff. 2-16-1967; Ord. 69-O-1364, eff. 12-4-1969; Ord. 72-O-
1435, eff. 3-16-1972; Ord. 76-O-1620, eff. 10-7-1976; Ord. 82-O-1866, eff. 11-4-1982; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992;
Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2516: WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES:
In addition to any requirements imposed pursuant to title 9 of this Code, a building permit shall be required for any wall or fence greater than six feet (6') in
height and shall also be required for any wall or fence, regardless of its height, that is located in a front yard.
A. Thickness: No wall or fence shall exceed two feet (2') in thickness. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property.
B. Supporting Elements: No column, pillar, post, or other supporting element of a wall or fence shall be more than twenty four inches (24") in width.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 632/797
C. Front And Street Side Yards: No wall or fence shall be located within three feet (3') of a front lot line or street side lot line.
Walls or fences located more than three feet (3') from a front lot line or street side lot line, but less than or equal to ten feet (10') from a front lot line or
street side lot line shall be no more than three feet (3') in height.
Walls or fences located more than ten feet (10') from a front lot line or street side lot line, but within a front yard or street side yard, shall be no more
than six feet (6') in height. Furthermore, any portion of such walls or fences that exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be open to public view.
1. Hillside R-1 Permit: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection C, a reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to permit a wall of no
more than six feet (6') in height to encroach into a front yard or street side yard without otherwise complying with the requirements of this subsection
C.
2. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection C, a reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation permit pursuant
to article 36 of this chapter to allow a wall or fence of up to six feet (6') in height to be located between three feet (3') and ten feet (10') from a front lot
line or street side lot line, provided that the wall or fence is open to public view and provided that the reviewing authority finds that the wall or fence
will not have a substantial adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape or the garden quality of the City.
D. Areas Other Than Front And Street Side Yards: The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located outside of all front and
street side yards shall be seven feet (7'), as measured per the definition of "height of wall, fence, or hedge" located in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
Further, under no circumstance shall the height of the wall, fence, or hedge, measured on the side farther from a property line exceed twelve feet (12').
1. Hillside R-1 Permit: A reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to permit a wall, fence, or hedge to exceed twelve feet (12'), measured on
the side farther from a property line; however, under no circumstances shall the wall, fence, or hedge measure more than seven feet (7') on the side
closest to the property line.
E. Series Of Walls: If a series of walls, or portions of a wall, are constructed on the same property so that a perpendicular section cut through a wall would
intersect more than one wall segment and would intersect a total height of seven feet (7') or more, then a minimum ten foot (10') landscaped area must
be provided between the wall segments. Such landscaping shall consist of climbing vines or alternative vegetation that will substantially screen the
walls. Furthermore, the cumulative height of a series of walls shall not exceed twelve feet (12') within any fifty foot (50') perpendicular section cut
through the wall segments.
1. Hillside R-1 Permit: A reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow a series of walls to deviate from the requirements outlined in this
subsection E. (Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-2018)
10-3-2517: GAME COURTS AND GAME COURT FENCES:
Game courts in the Hillside Area of the City shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. No game court or game court fence shall be located on a through lot, within a front yard, between a principal residence and a front setback line, or over
or on top of any building or structure unless the City Council finds, after notice and a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in article 25.5 of this
chapter, that such court or fence will not have a substantial adverse visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood, will not create an unusual noise
impact, and will not have an adverse impact on the public safety.
B. Game courts shall be constructed on a level pad.
C. Notwithstanding any other regulation set forth in this chapter, the maximum allowable height of game court fences constructed in the principal building
area shall be twelve feet (12').
D. Notwithstanding any other regulation set forth in this chapter, the maximum allowable height of game court lighting standards constructed in the
principal building area shall be twenty two feet (22').
E. Game court fences and game court lighting standards located within a side or rear yard shall comply with the height requirements for fences set forth in
section 10-3-2516 of this article unless otherwise permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter.
F. All game court fences shall be constructed of open wire mesh or similar material, except that a game court fence may include a retaining wall that does
not exceed a maximum height of seven feet (7') provided that the cumulative height of the retaining wall and the fence does not exceed twelve feet
(12')
G. The maximum permitted height of a game court fence or game court lighting standard constructed over fill shall be reduced by the maximum height of
any retaining wall or walls for that fill if such wall or walls are located within ten feet (10') of the fence or standard.
H. No paved game court surface shall be located within five feet (5') of a property line unless otherwise permitted by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant
to article 25.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 77-O-1652, eff. 6-2-1977; amd. Ord. 80-O-1771, eff. 10-16-1980; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 94-O-2202,
eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2518: PAVING:
All paved areas and other impervious surfaces, including game court surfaces, shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from any property line.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 633/797
However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the paving of that portion of a driveway or walkway within five feet (5') of the intersection of the driveway or
walkway and the public right-of-way.
In addition, paving within a front yard shall require a building permit and shall comply with the following restrictions:
A. Coverage Of Paving: Not more than thirty three percent (33%) of the area of a front yard shall be paved. In addition, one walkway that does not exceed
five feet (5') in width shall be permitted to be paved provided that the total area of the paved walkway does not exceed the total square footage derived
by multiplying the depth of the front yard by five feet (5').
B. Circular Driveways: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if a site area is permitted to have two (2) driveway approaches
pursuant to section 8-4-4 of this Code, and a circular driveway is constructed on such site area, the front yard may be paved in the minimum amount
necessary to construct a circular driveway not exceeding twelve feet (12') in width. In addition, paving shall be permitted to construct one walkway not
exceeding four feet (4') in width connecting such driveway to the residence, and one driveway not exceeding nine feet (9') in width connecting the
circular driveway to parking that is required by this Code and if located behind the front yard.
C. Building Setbacks For Paving: No portion of a front yard within five feet (5') of a building shall be paved, except for a driveway, and a walkway of no
more than ten feet (10') in width.
D. Flag Lots: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, if the front yard of a site area does not exceed thirty six feet (36') in
width, no provision of this section shall prohibit the paving of a driveway that does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width, or such additional width as
determined necessary by the City Engineer to provide for reasonably safe access to the site area.
E. Paving Buffer: An opaque wall or hedge not less than two feet (2') nor more than three feet (3') in height shall be provided and maintained along the
front and sides of each area paved, except at a driveway approach or walkway entrance.
F. Paving Materials: All paving shall be Portland cement concrete or its equivalent, applied in accordance with specifications satisfactory to, and approved
by, the Director of Building and Safety. Paving with asphaltic concrete shall not be permitted. No more than three (3) different types of pavement
materials shall be used in any front yard. Any additions to paved areas shall be consistent with the existing paved areas in design, appearance, and
material used.
G. Alternate Materials And Methods: The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this section provided that any such alternate has been approved pursuant to this subsection as follows:
1. The Director of Building and Safety may approve any such alternate provided that the Director finds that the material or method of construction
advances the purposes of this section and provides at least the equivalent of that prescribed by this section in quality, strength, effectiveness, and
durability.
2. The Director of Building and Safety shall require that sufficient evidence be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding the
suitability of an alternate.
H. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a reviewing authority may authorize the replacement of legally
nonconforming pavement with an amount of paving less than or equal to the existing pavement pursuant to article 36 of this chapter if the reviewing
authority finds that such paving will be compatible with the character of the adjacent streetscape. (Ord. 1158, eff. 9-20-1962; amd. Ord. 1216, eff. 10-
21-1965; Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 75-O-1575, eff. 7-3-1975; Ord. 81-O-1787, eff. 4-2-1981; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 92-O-
2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-2519: LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPING PLANS:
A. Setbacks: All required front yards, side yards, and rear yards shall be landscaped with plant materials capable of covering the landscaped areas within
two (2) years of planting.
B. Slopes: All cut or fill slopes shall be planted with plant materials which are intended to protect the slope against erosion and to cover the slope within
two (2) years of planting. All cut or fill slopes shall be irrigated by automatic sprinkler or drip irrigation systems.
C. Water Conservation: In order to promote water conservation, the City of Beverly Hills encourages the use of plant materials shown on the list of
recommended plant materials for slopes and yard areas. This list is maintained by the Department of Planning and Community Development. (Ord. 92-
O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2519.5: SYNTHETIC TURF IN FRONT YARDS:
Synthetic turf shall be allowed as landscaping for the purposes of this article provided that the following provisions are satisfied for synthetic turf in front
yards:
A. Stage D Required: Applications for the use of synthetic turf may only be approved, and permits for installation may only be issued when the City Council
has declared and implemented stage D water conservation measures. Synthetic turf that is legally installed during stage D declared periods may be
retained thereafter, even if the City Council withdraws the stage D declaration, provided the synthetic turf is maintained in accordance with all
applicable standards.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 634/797
B. Permit Required: A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any synthetic turf in the front yard of a residentially zoned property. Upon
application for a building permit the following shall be submitted to the Community Development Department:
1. A landscape plan that includes:
a. Dimensions and details of the landscaped area including the synthetic turf and other landscaping materials.
b. Drawings that include scaled cross sections of the proposed landscaping materials and details showing the methods of installation and attachment
of the synthetic turf as well as drainage information.
2. Material description including manufacturer's product data, specifications and installation instructions, installer information and qualifications, and
warranty information.
3. A sample of the proposed synthetic turf material that is at least twelve inches by twelve inches (12" x 12").
4. Maintenance information for the synthetic turf.
C. Coverage: Synthetic turf located in the front yard may be used for up to seventy percent (70%) of the landscaped area but no more than forty percent
(40%) of the entire front yard area. Synthetic turf shall not be located:
1. Within the public right-of-way/parkway.
2. Within the dripline of any native or "heritage tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this chapter. Further, the installation of turf shall not disturb the
area within the dripline of any native or heritage tree.
3. Within eighteen inches (18") of a front lot line. The eighteen inch (18") buffer between the front lot line and synthetic turf shall be landscaped with
living plant material.
4. Within three feet (3') of a single-family residence.
5. In any area that is used for the parking or driving of motor vehicles.
D. Material: Synthetic turf in a front yard must simulate the appearance of natural live grass and shall:
1. Be of a type known as cut-pile infill with parallel long slit blades. The long slit blades shall be manufactured from polyethylene or polypropylene. The
minimum pile length shall be one and three-fourths inches (13/4") and the maximum pile length shall be two and one-half inches (21/2"). The turf shall
contain a beige or tan thatch layer. The synthetic turf blades (not including the thatch layer) shall be required to contain at least two (2) colors. The
synthetic turf shall comply with all Federal and State standards related to lead and heavy metal content. Turf that is made from recycled materials is
encouraged. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting is prohibited.
2. Be constructed to maximize dimensional stability, resist damage during normal use and to minimize UV degradation. Further, the synthetic turf shall
be resistant to staining, weather, insects, rot, mildew and fungus growth, and shall be nonallergenic and nontoxic.
3. Contain an infill material of clean silica sand or zeolite material that is brushed into the synthetic turf to keep the blades upright and achieve a natural
grass look. Any replacement infill shall be silica sand or zeolite material. Rubber infill is prohibited.
4. Be affixed to a permeable triple layer primary backing with a tuft bind strength of at least eight (8) pounds. The backing shall allow water to percolate
through the synthetic turf at a drain rate of at least thirty inches (30") per hour. The synthetic turf system shall allow for the free movement and
drainage of water through the system to prevent runoff, pooling, and flooding.
5. Have a manufacturer's warranty lasting at least eight (8) years.
6. Have spacing between tufting rows (gauge) of no more than three-eighths inch (3/8") as defined by the manufacturer.
7. Have a face weight of at least sixty (60). The "face weight" is defined as the weight in ounces of the synthetic turf fibers found in one square yard of
synthetic turf as defined by the manufacturer.
8. Have tear grab strength of at least two hundred (200) pounds.
9. Pass the pill burn test for flammability (ASTM D2859).
E. Installation: Synthetic turf shall be installed pursuant to manufacturer's requirements by licensed professionals who are experienced and trained by the
manufacturer in the installation of the synthetic turf. In addition:
1. The synthetic turf shall be installed over at least three inches (3") of a compacted aggregate base that provides adequate drainage. The base
material shall be installed over subgrade that is compacted to a firm condition to ensure stability and maintain adequate drainage.
2. Seams shall not be visible and shall be fastened in a manner that ensures they are firm, tight and permanent. Seams shall be sewn and fibers shall
be brushed to provide full coverage of the fibers over the seams.
3. The synthetic turf shall be anchored over the entire coverage area and shall be installed with a nailer board or any such substitute recommended by
the manufacturer intended to conceal edges and ensure proper anchoring of turf.
4. All existing irrigation infrastructure in the synthetic turf area including piping and sprinkler heads that are no longer used must be capped or removed
and shall not be visible.
5. All reasonable efforts shall be made to protect existing trees and tree roots from damage during installation.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 635/797
F. Maintenance: Synthetic turf shall be maintained in an attractive and clean condition pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of this Code and shall not contain
holes, tears, stains, discoloration, seam separations, uplifted surfaces, heat degradation, or excessive wear. (Ord. 15-O-2691, eff. 11-6-2015)
10-3-2520: PERMISSIBLE TYPES OF BUILDING MATERIALS:
All structures constructed in the Hillside Area of the City shall comply with the following materials restrictions:
A. Roofing: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have a roof constructed
with wood shake, shingle, asphalt composition, crushed rock, or other roofing material which the Director of Building and Safety deems equivalent.
Reflective, glossy, polished, and/or roll formed type metal roofing shall be prohibited.
B. Siding: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have exterior siding of
brick, wood, stucco, metal, concrete, or other siding material which the Director of Building and Safety deems equivalent. Reflective, glossy, polished,
and/or roll formed type metal siding shall be prohibited on such structures.
C. Alternate Materials: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Director of Building and Safety may authorize the use of materials not
otherwise authorized pursuant to this section if the Director finds that:
1. The use of an otherwise prohibited material would enhance the architectural compatibility of the proposed structure with existing structures in the
neighborhood;
2. A proposed alteration or addition to an existing residential structure with the prohibited material will be continuation of such structure's architectural
style; or
3. The use of an otherwise prohibited material is necessary to provide adequate safety or to comply with other laws or regulations applicable to the
subject structure. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2521: LANDFORM ALTERATION:
Within any five (5) year period, the total cubic yards that may be cut and filled on any site in the Hillside Area, including excavation for basements, shall be
calculated as follows:
C = 1,000 + 1 (A/10)
For the purpose of this formula:
C = The total cubic yards of grading work (cut and fill combined) that can be performed on a site within a five-year period
A = Total site area in square feet
The following is an example of the application of this formula to a site that is thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in area:
C = 1,000 + 1 (30,000/10)
C = 1,000 + 1 (3,000)
C = 1,000 + 3,000
C = 4,000 cubic yards of cut and fill (combined) permitted.
However, within any five (5) year period, no more than three thousand (3,000) cubic yards of earth material may be imported or exported from a site in the
Hillside Area.
Notwithstanding any other ordinance or provision of this Code, including, but not limited to, this section, within any five (5) year period: No more than one
thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic yards of earth material may be imported or exported from a site in the Hillside Area that is immediately adjacent to a
street that is less than twenty four feet (24') wide, unless a Hillside R-1 permit is issued pursuant to subsection 10-3-2550A of this chapter.
For the purposes of calculating earthwork quantities, all calculations shall be based on in-ground earth volumes, regardless of compaction or expansion
percentage. Further, all earthwork calculations shall include but not be limited to basement excavations, retaining walls, site grading, foundation work, and
excavations for piling work.
The limitations set forth in this section may be modified by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-
2018)
10-3-2521.1: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LANDFORM ALTERATION, EXPANSIONS OF LEVEL PAD AREAS OF LOTS
AND DEVELOPMENT OFF THE LEVEL PAD OF LOTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-2018)
10-3-2522: VIEW PRESERVATION:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 636/797
A. Except as authorized by a Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 25.5 of this chapter, and notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2503 of
this chapter concerning building heights, no structure in the Hillside Area shall be constructed to a height in excess of fourteen feet (14') if such
construction in excess of fourteen feet (14') would substantially disrupt a view of the Los Angeles area basin from the level pad which contains the
primary residential building on a property within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property, and such view would not have been substantially
disrupted by development of a fourteen foot (14') structure. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection D of the definition of "height of building",
section 10-3-100 of this chapter, for purposes of this section, measurement of the height of the building or structure to be constructed at any point shall
mean the vertical distance between that point and the point below it on a plane defined by ground level as it existed on September 4, 1992, at all points
along the building or structure perimeter.
B. For the purposes of this section, a view "from the level pad which contains the primary residential building" shall mean a view from a point six feet (6')
above the finished grade of the pad. If no primary residential building has been constructed on a property within three hundred feet (300') of the subject
property, then a "view from a level pad which contains the primary residential building" shall mean the view from a point six feet (6') above the finished
grade of the pad upon which, in the judgment of the Director of Planning, the primary residential building is most likely to be constructed.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, for purposes of this section, if a driveway is located adjacent to a perimeter wall of a
building, and the driveway leads to a subterranean garage, then the plane described in subsection A of this section that is defined by the September 4,
1992, ground level at all points along the building perimeter shall, for that portion of the building located adjacent to the driveway, be defined instead by
the points along the building perimeter at the elevation of the highest point of the driveway. However, if the high point of the driveway exceeds the
highest point of the September 4, 1992, ground level along the building perimeter, then the high point of the driveway shall not be used to define the
plane and the plane shall be defined by the natural ground level along the building perimeter excluding that portion of the perimeter located adjacent to
the driveway.
Also, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, for purposes of this section, if a lightwell is located adjacent to a building, then the
plane defined by the September 4, 1992, ground level at all points along the building perimeter shall, for that portion of the perimeter located adjacent to
the lightwell, be defined instead by the September 4, 1992, grade at all points along the perimeter of the lightwell. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd.
Ord. 94-O-2228, eff. 1-13-1995; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 99-O-2339, eff. 12-31-1999)
10-3-2523: CONSTRUCTION PARKING AND HAULING RESTRICTIONS:
No construction related parking shall be permitted on a public street except as otherwise approved by the Director of Building and Safety and the City
Engineer.
All hauling related to construction in the Hillside Area shall conform to a hauling plan approved by the City Engineer. Hauling within the Hillside Area shall
be limited to the hours established by the City Engineer, but in no case shall hauling occur before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after the hour of
four o'clock (4:00) P.M. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2524: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to all other requirements, all applications for a grading or building permit within the Hillside Area shall contain the following materials:
A. A topographic survey map prepared by a licensed surveyor showing existing contours with a maximum interval of ten feet (10').
B. A landscape plan showing existing trees, shrubs, and ground cover.
C. A proposed plot plan showing the location of all structures and showing existing and proposed contours with a maximum interval of ten feet (10'). The
plan shall also contain total quantities of cut and fill as measured in cubic yards.
D. A proposed landscaping plan which shows the name, size and location of the plant materials proposed. The plan shall indicate the irrigation system to
be utilized.
E. Cross sections of all buildings to be constructed.
F. Building elevations of all buildings to be constructed.
G. A vicinity map showing structures and pad elevations within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
H. A report prepared by a licensed geotechnical engineer describing the existing geologic, seismic, drainage, and soils conditions at the subject property.
I. A construction schedule, construction parking plan and hauling plan to be used for importing and exporting material. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992;
amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2525: APPLICATION REVIEW FEE:
The City Council shall establish, by resolution, a fee for reviewing applications submitted pursuant to section 10-3-2524 of this article. This fee shall be in
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 637/797
addition to all building permit and other required fees and shall include the amount necessary to reimburse the City for the cost of hiring a licensed
landscape architect or other professional to review submitted plans. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2526: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ON ESTATE PROPERTIES:
If the area of a residential site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or if the area of two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels
which are owned by the same person and used as one site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, accessory buildings to a
residence may be located on any part of the site if authorized by the Planning Commission as part of a Hillside R-1 permit issued in accordance with the
procedures set forth in article 25.5 of this chapter.
All accessory buildings approved pursuant to this section shall be immediately removed if the site is altered so that:
A. The area of the site on which the accessory buildings are located is reduced below twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or
B. The primary residential building is separated or removed from the site on which the accessory buildings are located so that the buildings or properties in
question no longer function as one home or estate. (1962 Code § 10-205; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 02-O-2403, eff. 9-6-2002)
10-3-2527: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATIONS TO EXCEED HEIGHT LIMITATIONS AND FOR APPLICATIONS
SUBJECT TO VIEW PRESERVATION REGULATIONS:
For any application subject to the provisions of section 10-3-2522 of this article or for any application that seeks approval to exceed the height limitations
set forth in section 10-3-2503, 10-3-2511 or 10-3-2512 of this article, the applicant shall first install story poles to demonstrate the height, bulk and location
of the proposed project. The Director is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the
Planning Commission, governing the installation of story poles. Any applicant subject to the requirements of this section shall install all story poles in full
compliance with such rules and regulations. (Ord. 04-O-2454, eff. 10-22-2004)
Article 25.5. Hillside R-1 Permit
10-3-2550: HILLSIDE R-1 PERMIT:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the Director of Planning and Community
Development, the reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to establish the following standards in accordance with the following criteria in the
Hillside Area of the City:
A. Import And Export Of Material: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that: 1) allows the import or export of material from a site to
exceed the standards set forth in section 10-3-2521 of this chapter, and 2) establishes the total amount of material that may be imported or exported
from a site in the Hillside Area, if the reviewing authority finds that the import or export will not create a substantial adverse impact on the surrounding
neighborhood. As part of this determination, the reviewing authority shall consider the street widths and street configuration in the neighborhood. The
reviewing authority shall also consider haul routes, scheduling, the total number of construction-related vehicle trips associated with the project as a
whole, phasing and safety precautions proposed, and any other factors that may impact the public's health, safety or welfare in the Hillside R-1 permit
application.
B. Cut And Fill: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that establishes the total amount of material that may be cut from a slope and/or
filled on a site in the Hillside Area in excess of that permitted pursuant to section 10-3-2521 of this chapter if the reviewing authority finds that: 1) due to
the topography or soil conditions of the subject property, the landform alteration requirements of section 10-3-2521 of this chapter create a hardship for
the applicant and the grading proposed will not result in a substantial adverse change to the character of the existing landforms, or 2) the landform
alteration itself will benefit the character of the neighborhood or neighboring properties and such benefit will outweigh any adverse impacts that may
result from such alteration. For the purposes of this subsection, a property owner's inability to develop a residence of comparable size or floor area
ratio to surrounding residences shall not be considered a hardship.
C. Game Courts: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that allows a paved game court surface within five feet (5') of a property line if the
reviewing authority finds that due to landscaping on the property and the location of development on adjacent sites: 1) the game court will not have a
substantial adverse impact on the visual character of the area as viewed from streets and neighboring properties, and 2) the game court will not have a
substantial adverse impact on the privacy and quiet enjoyment of neighboring properties.
D. Game Court Fences And Lighting Standards: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to establish the height of a game court fence or
game court lighting standard in a required side yard or rear yard in excess of the height allowed pursuant to section 10-3-2517 of this chapter, if the
reviewing authority finds that the game court fence or lighting standard will not have a substantial adverse impact on: 1) access to light and air by
neighboring properties, or 2) the visual character of the area as viewed from streets and neighboring properties. However, in no case shall the
reviewing authority allow any game court fence to exceed twelve feet (12') in height nor shall the reviewing authority allow any lighting standard to
exceed twenty two feet (22') in height.
E. Floor Area: The reviewing authority shall issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow the total of the cumulative floor area developed on a site, in combination
with the floor area of all basements on that site as measured pursuant to subsection 10-3-2502B of this chapter, to exceed fifteen thousand (15,000)
square feet if the floor area ratio formula set forth in subsection 10-3-2502B of this chapter would so permit and if the reviewing authority finds that the
development will not have a substantial adverse impact on the scale, integrity, or character of the area or on the privacy of neighboring properties.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any existing structures that are legally nonconforming with respect to subsection 10-3-2502B of this chapter shall not be
precluded from applying for the subject Hillside R-1 permit provided that the nonconformity is not increased and the structure retains its legally
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 638/797
nonconforming status in accordance with section 10-3-4100 of this chapter. The reviewing authority may require the applicant to submit such
information and reports as the reviewing authority deems appropriate to determine the nature and extent of impacts on the scale, integrity and
character of the area and on the privacy of neighboring properties.
F. Large Site Floor Area: For those sites that are at least two (2) acres in area, the reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that establishes a
maximum permitted cumulative floor area for all buildings and structures on a site in excess of that which would be allowed pursuant to section 10-3-
2502 of this chapter, if the reviewing authority finds that development of that floor area will not create a substantial adverse impact on the visual
character of the area as viewed from the streets and neighboring properties.
G. View Preservation: For those sites restricted by section 10-3-2522 of this chapter regarding view preservation, the reviewing authority may issue a
Hillside R-1 permit that establishes a maximum building height in excess of fourteen feet (14'), and/or establishes minimum setbacks, if the reviewing
authority finds that the development under the approved standards would not substantially disrupt a view of the Los Angeles area basin from the level
pad which contains the primary residential building on properties within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject property and, that the provision
of a view corridor would not create a substantial adverse impact on the visual character of the area as viewed from the streets and neighboring
properties. However, in no case shall the reviewing authority establish a building height that is greater than would otherwise be allowed if the site were
not governed by the provisions of section 10-3-2522 of this chapter. For the purposes of this subsection, a view "from the level pad which contains the
primary residential building" shall be defined as that term is defined in section 10-3-2522 of this chapter.
H. Accessory Structures: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit: 1) to allow an accessory structure of up to fourteen feet (14') in height to
be located within five feet (5') of a property line; 2) to allow an accessory structure located in a yard area to exceed fourteen feet (14') in height if the
second story meets the side setback required for the primary building on the site; or 3) to allow an accessory structure located in a yard to exceed
fourteen feet (14') in height if the structure is located on a site area that equals or exceeds forty thousand (40,000) square feet in area; if the reviewing
authority finds that the structure will not have a substantial adverse impact on the scale or character of the area, on the privacy of neighboring
properties, on the neighbors' access to light and air, or on the streetscape. However, no more than one accessory structure that exceeds fourteen feet
(14') in height shall be permitted in the side or rear yard areas.
I. Extension Of Side Setback: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow an extension of an existing nonconforming side setback that
exceeds fourteen feet (14') in height provided that the existing setback is no less than three feet (3') and the reviewing authority finds that the extension
will not have a substantial adverse impact on: 1) the scale and massing of the streetscape, 2) neighbors' access to light and air, 3) neighbors' privacy,
and 4) the garden quality of the City.
J. Wall Height In Front Or Street Side Yard: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow a wall of no more than six feet (6') in height to
encroach into a front yard or street side yard without otherwise complying with the requirements of subsection 10-3-2516C of this chapter if the
reviewing authority finds that the wall will not have a substantial adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape or the garden quality of
the City.
K. Expansion Off The Existing Level Pad: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of
cumulative floor area to be located off the level pad if it finds that the development will not have a substantial adverse impact on the scale, integrity, or
visual character of the surrounding area, or on the privacy of neighboring properties, and the reviewing authority may require the applicant to submit
such information and reports as the reviewing authority deems appropriate to determine the nature and extent of the impacts on the scale, integrity, and
visual character of the surrounding area and on the privacy of neighboring properties.
L. Total Maximum Height Of Wall, Fence, Or Hedge: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that allows the height of a wall, fence, or
hedge, as measured on the side farthest from the closest property line to exceed the standards set forth in section 10-3-2516 of this chapter, if the
reviewing authority finds that: 1) the deviation from the standards will not have a substantial adverse impact on the character, scale, or integrity of the
area as viewed from streets and surrounding properties, and 2) the deviation will not have a substantial adverse impact on neighbor's access to light
and air, neighbor's privacy, or the garden quality of the City, and 3) the deviation is necessary to allow for appropriate development on the subject site.
M. Series Of Walls: The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit that allows a series of walls to deviate from the standards set forth in section
10-3-2516 of this chapter that limit the number and height of series of retaining walls if the reviewing authority finds that: 1) the deviation from the
standards will not have a substantial adverse impact on the character, scale, or integrity of the area as viewed from streets and surrounding properties,
and 2) the deviation will not have a substantial adverse impact on neighbor's access to light and air, neighbor's privacy, or the garden quality of the City,
3) the deviation is necessary to allow for appropriate development on the subject site, and 4) there is no less than three feet (3') of landscaped area
provided between two (2) walls in a series.
For the purposes of this section, a "substantial adverse impact" shall mean an adverse impact that is material and readily perceptible.
Except as explicitly provided in this section, no Hillside R-1 permit shall be construed as a waiver of any requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff.
7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 86-O-1977, eff. 10-2-1986; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 94-O-2228, eff. 1-13-1995; Ord. 95-
O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 95-O-2242, eff. 8-5-1995; Ord. 16-O-2708, eff. 9-30-2016; Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-2018; Ord. 19-O-2778, eff. 5-3-2019)
10-3-2550.1: TEMPORARY R-1 PERMIT FOR PIPELINE PROJECTS:
A. The reviewing authority may issue a Hillside R-1 permit to allow Hillside projects that have submitted a substantially complete application for building
permit between January 11, 2018, and the effective date of ordinance 18-O-2751 that are not otherwise exempt from the regulations contained in
ordinance 18-O-2751, to build in compliance with the zoning standards that existed immediately before ordinance 18-O-2751 took effect, provided that
in order to approve a Hillside R-1 permit pursuant to this section, the reviewing authority must find as follows:
1. The project is consistent with the Zoning Code as it existed the day prior to the effective date of ordinance 18-O-2751;
2. The project will not have a substantial adverse impact on the visual character of the area as viewed from streets and neighboring properties;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 639/797
3. The project will not have a substantial adverse impact on: the scale, integrity, or character of the area; the privacy of neighboring properties;
neighbor's access to light and air; or on the streetscape; and,
4. The project will not have a substantial adverse impact on the garden quality of the City.
B. The reviewing authority may consider haul routes, scheduling, the total number of construction-related vehicle trips associated with the project as a
whole, phasing and safety precautions proposed, and any other factors that may impact the public's health, safety or welfare in the Hillside R-1 permit
application. This section shall no longer be applicable once all pending pipeline projects have been processed. Further, the provisions in this section
establishing the temporary R-1 permit process for projects currently under review shall sunset two (2) years after the effective date of ordinance 18-O-
2751. All other provisions of ordinance 18-O-2751 shall remain in effect.
C. Projects eligible for this temporary R-1 permit are Hillside Area projects for which substantially complete applications for a building permit were
submitted for building plan check between January 11, 2018 and the effective date of ordinance 18-O-2751 where the scope of work includes:
1. A new single family home; or
2. Increasing the cumulative floor area on site by more than fifty percent (50%) beyond what previously existed on the site; or
3. Landform alteration that exceeds the amended threshold set forth in ordinance 18-O-2751. (Ord. 18-O-2751, eff. 4-6-2018)
10-3-2551: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
The reviewing authority for a Hillside R-1 permit application shall be the Planning Commission unless the application accompanies a separate application
for a discretionary approval from the City Council with regard to the same site area. In that case, the City Council shall be the reviewing authority for the
Hillside R-1 permit application. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2552: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
A. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing concerning each application for a Hillside R-1 permit.
B. Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice
guidelines. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-2553: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting a Hillside R-1 permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions exist deems necessary or proper to satisfy the findings
required for such permit. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2554: APPEALS:
Any decision of the Planning Commission made pursuant to this article may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2555: PERMIT EXPIRATION:
A Hillside R-1 permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire after a period of three (3) years from the date of approval unless the applicant has begun
the physical construction of the buildings or structures authorized by the permit. In addition, a Hillside R-1 permit shall expire with regard to an accessory
structure if the accessory structure is permitted at the same time as a primary residence and the physical construction of the accessory structure does not
begin within one year after final inspection of the primary residence.
The reviewing authority may grant one extension to the life of the Hillside R-1 permit for a period of up to two (2) years. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2556: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a Hillside R-1 permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
Article 26. Single-Family Residential Development Standards For Trousdale Estates
10-3-2601: APPLICABILITY:
The development standards set forth in this article shall apply to all properties in Trousdale Estates. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2602: FLOOR AREA:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 640/797
The following minimum and maximum floor area restrictions shall apply to buildings in the Trousdale Estates:
A. Minimum Restrictions: Any building that serves as the primary residential building on a site area shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand six
hundred (1,600) square feet and shall have a minimum width, at its widest point, of twenty feet (20').
B. Maximum Restrictions: The cumulative floor area of all buildings located on a single site area in Trousdale Estates shall not exceed one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet plus forty percent (40%) of the site area on which those buildings are built.
Further, if a portion of a site area is to be dedicated to the city for the purposes of establishing or enlarging a street or an alley, and such dedication is to
be made in conjunction with a development approval, then, for the purposes of calculating the maximum permitted floor area for the proposed
development pursuant to this section, the site area shall include that portion of the site area that is to be dedicated to the city. However, the dedicated
area shall not be included in the calculation of floor area for subsequent development, including additions to the original development. (Ord. 89-O-2056,
eff. 4-20-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2603: CONSTRUCTION RESTRICTED TO LEVEL PAD:
No portion of any building or structure in Trousdale Estates shall extend beyond the level pad, except fences and hedges as permitted by section 10-3-
2616 of this chapter which are "open to public view" as defined in article 1 of this chapter.
A. Exceptions: The following exceptions shall apply to the provisions of this section:
1. This section shall not be applied to any undeveloped site which does not have a level pad and is not subject to a valid subdivision or parcel map that
shows construction of a level pad.
2. Construction may extend beyond the level pad for any city project.
3. Portions of structures which extend beyond the level pad and which were legally constructed prior to October 15, 1987, may be rebuilt or remodeled.
However, no addition to such structures shall be permitted in any area other than the level pad. Nor shall any increase in the height or change in
footprint of such structures be permitted in any area other than the level pad. (Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2604: TROUSDALE ESTATES GRADING:
For site areas located in Trousdale Estates, no grading which requires a grading permit shall be performed in any area which has a slope that exceeds
one vertical foot for each five (5) horizontal feet.
In addition, no lot in Trousdale Estates shall be regraded to increase the height of a level pad above the existing elevation. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985;
amd. Ord. 87-O-2004, eff. 10-15-1987; Ord. 91-O-2114, eff. 4-19-1991; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 93-O-2187, eff. 1-14-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239,
eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2605: HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES:
The maximum height of any structure in Trousdale Estates shall be fourteen feet (14').
However, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 10-3-203C of this chapter, if a building lawfully exceeded fourteen feet (14') in height on October
15, 1987, then an addition to that building may exceed fourteen feet (14') in height if permitted by a Trousdale R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 26.5 of
this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, structures in Trousdale Estates which lawfully exceeded fourteen feet (14') in height on October 15,
1987, may be rebuilt or remodeled but shall not exceed the height or envelope of the building as it existed on October 15, 1987, unless permitted by a
Trousdale R-1 permit issued pursuant to subsection 10-3-2650B of this chapter. (Ord. 10-O-2583, eff. 7-4-2010)
10-3-2606: FRONT AND STREET SIDE SETBACKS:
The front and street side setbacks for site areas located in Trousdale Estates shall be fifteen feet (15'). (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2607: REAR SETBACKS:
The rear setback for site areas located in Trousdale Estates shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992;
Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2608: SIDE SETBACKS:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, and except as otherwise provided in section 10-3-2606 of this chapter for street side setbacks, the side
setback for site areas located in Trousdale Estates shall be five feet (5').
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 641/797
A. Exception: For those buildings located on site areas that consist of two (2) or more lots as subdivided on July 3, 1984, the side setback shall be twenty
feet (20').
B. Additional Setback Required: In addition to any other side setback required, if the width of a site area exceeds one hundred feet (100'), then the side
setback shall be increased by ten percent (10%) of the width in excess of one hundred feet (100').
C. Side Setback Prolongation: If a legally constructed existing building does not conform to the setback requirements of this section, the building may be
enlarged through the prolongation of the existing, nonconforming, side setback provided that the existing setback is not less than three feet (3') and the
enlarged portion of the building does not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height.
1. Trousdale R-1 Permit: If a building lawfully exceeded fourteen feet (14') in height on October 15, 1987, then a side setback prolongation authorized
by this subsection C may exceed fourteen feet (14') in height if permitted by a Trousdale R-1 permit issued pursuant to article 26.5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 86-O-1977, eff. 10-2-1986; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2609: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN A FRONT YARD:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any front yard except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this article;
B. Paving in accordance with section 10-3-2618 of this chapter;
C. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting not more than eighteen inches (18") into such yard;
D. One covered entry porch located at or below the first floor that is a maximum of four feet (4') in depth and which has no vertical supporting elements;
and
E. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yard. (Ord. 85-
O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2610: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS IN SIDE YARDS, STREET SIDE YARDS, AND REAR YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any side yard, street side yard or rear yard except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this code;
B. Roof eaves not exceeding a maximum vertical dimension of twelve inches (12") and projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
C. Porches and decks located at or below the first floor level provided, further, that required handrails for such elements shall not extend more than forty
two inches (42") above the first floor level;
D. Gas and electric meter enclosures projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yards;
E. One fireplace provided one of the following two (2) criteria is met:
1. The required setback equals or exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is limited to thirty inches (30") or less, and the length of
the fireplace measured parallel to the property line does not exceed ten feet (10'); or
2. The required setback is less than seven and one-half feet (71/2'), the encroachment is twelve inches (12") or less, the length of the fireplace
measured parallel to the property line does not exceed six feet (6'), and the fireplace is located a minimum of ten feet (10') from the front of the
building;
F. Swimming pools provided that no mechanical equipment servicing any such pool is located within a side yard or street side yard;
G. Trash storage facilities;
H. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, projecting no more than six inches (6") into such yards;
I. A porte-cochere; and
J. Freestanding support structures for wireless facilities, provided that no mechanical or accessory equipment servicing any such wireless facility is located
within a side yard or a street side yard.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 642/797
K. Elevators and elevator enclosures, provided the following criteria are met:
1. The subject residence is not a newly constructed building. "Newly constructed building" shall mean a building that has been constructed within the
past five (5) years or remodeled more than fifty percent (50%) during the past five (5) years as described in section 10-3-4100 of this chapter.
2. The length of the encroachment measured parallel to the property line does not exceed seven feet (7'), except that a minor accommodation permit
may be issued for a greater length. In order to approve the minor accommodation permit, the reviewing authority must find that the encroachment will
not have an adverse impact on:
a. The scale and massing of the streetscape,
b. Neighbors' access to light and air,
c. Neighbors' privacy, and
d. The garden quality of the city.
3. The aggregate length of the encroachment of the elevator and elevator enclosure together with a fireplace encroaching into the same setback,
pursuant to subsection E of this section, does not exceed thirteen feet (13'), except pursuant to a minor accommodation permit issued pursuant to
subsection K2 of this section.
4. The encroachment is not closer than three feet (3') from the front of the building.
5. The elevator and elevator enclosure does not have any windows.
6. Noise generated by the elevator complies with city noise regulations set forth in title 5, chapter 1, article 2 of this code.
7. The elevator and enclosure is designed to be compatible with the existing residence in color, material and design.
8. The encroachment into the setback does not exceed the following, provided that a minimum setback of three feet (3') shall be maintained in all
cases:
a. Thirty inches (30"), or
b. Sixty inches (60") if a minor accommodation permit pursuant to article 36 of this chapter is issued. In order to approve the minor accommodation
permit, the reviewing authority must find that the encroachment will not have an adverse impact on:
(1) The scale and massing of the streetscape,
(2) Neighbors' access to light and air,
(3) Neighbors' privacy, and
(4) The garden quality of the city.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a passageway or access for emergency services shall extend for the length of the entire site
area from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Such passageway or access shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in width and shall be free of any
obstruction, except that a wall, fence or hedge otherwise permitted by the provisions of this article may be placed along the rear lot line and a
gate may be placed across such passageway or access behind the front yard. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 90-O-2101, eff. 10-4-
1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005; Ord. 09-O-2563, eff. 2-22-2009)
10-3-2611: FRONT SETBACK FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from the front lot line or all elements of the accessory building shall be located within
fifty feet (50') of the rear lot line of the site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2612: SIDE SETBACK ENCROACHMENT FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings may be constructed within a side yard provided that no portion of any such building within a side yard intersects a plane commencing
seven feet (7') in height, measured at the side lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior of the site area.
(Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 90-O-2101, eff. 10-4-1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2613: REAR SETBACK ENCROACHMENT FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings may be constructed within a rear yard provided that no portion of any such building within a rear yard intersects a plane commencing
seven feet (7') in height, measured at the rear lot line, and extending at a slope of two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) toward the interior of the site area.
(Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 90-O-2101, eff. 10-4-1990; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2614: STRUCTURE SEPARATION FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings shall be located no closer than six feet (6') to any other building on the same site area. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2615: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 643/797
Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each residential site area in Trousdale Estates with no more than four (4) bedrooms. Three (3) parking
spaces shall be provided for each residential site area in Trousdale Estates with five (5) bedrooms, and four (4) parking spaces shall be provided for each
residential site area in Trousdale Estates with six (6) or more bedrooms.
A. The dimensions of each parking space shall comply with the parking standards adopted by the city council and on file in the department of planning and
community development. However, if the width of a portion of an existing paved driveway is restricted by the location of an existing residence, or if the
width of a portion of a paved driveway is restricted by the construction of a porte-cochere, to a width less than that required by the parking standards,
but not less than eight feet (8'), then, notwithstanding its inadequate width, such portion of the driveway shall be considered to comply with the parking
standards provided that such area complies with all other requirements of the parking standards.
B. No required parking space shall be provided within a front yard or street side yard.
C. Parking areas, or portions thereof, located in any side or rear yard or exposed to view from a street shall be completely screened from the view of the
adjacent property by a fence or hedge at least six feet (6') in height and from any street by a fence or a hedge at least three feet (3') in height, except
that an entryway not to exceed ten feet (10') in width may be provided from the street. Such screening shall not encroach into the required dimensions
of the parking space. (1962 Code § 10-746; amd. Ord. 66-O-1256, eff. 11-1-1966; Ord. 67-O-1261, eff. 2-16-1967; Ord. 69-O-1364, eff. 12-4-1969;
Ord. 72-O-1435, eff. 3-16-1972; Ord. 76-O-1620, eff. 10-7-1976; Ord. 82-O-1866, eff. 11-4-1982; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff.
7-7-1995)
10-3-2616: WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES:
In addition to any requirements imposed pursuant to title 9 of this code, a building permit shall be required for any wall or fence greater than six feet (6') in
height and shall also be required for any wall or fence, regardless of its height, that is located in a front yard.
A. Thickness: No wall or fence shall exceed two feet (2') in thickness. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property.
B. Supporting Elements: No column, pillar, post, or other supporting element of a wall or fence shall be more than twenty four inches (24") in width.
C. Front Yards: The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the first twenty percent (20%) of the front yard, measured from the
front lot line shall be three feet (3').
The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the front yard at a distance from the front lot line of more than twenty percent
(20%) of the front setback shall be six feet (6'); provided, however, any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge that exceeds three feet (3') in height shall
be open to public view.
D. Side Yards: The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in both a side yard and a front yard shall be six feet (6');
provided, however, that any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge that exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be open to public view.
The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in a side yard, but not in a front yard, shall be seven feet (7'), except
that the maximum allowable height shall be eight feet (8') for such a wall, fence, or hedge located within five feet (5') of a rear lot line and parallel to
such rear lot line.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, in no event shall a hedge exceed the maximum height permitted pursuant to subsection F of this
section.
E. Rear Yards: The maximum allowable height for a fence, wall or hedge located in a rear yard shall be eight feet (8').
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, in no event shall a hedge exceed the maximum height permitted pursuant to subsection F of this
section.
F. Height Limit For Fences And Hedges Meeting Certain Criteria:
1. Fences: New fences on a slope of a downslope property shall not in any event extend above a point thirty six inches (36") above the finished grade
of the level pad on the adjacent upslope property in any area where the fence is located in a line of sight from the upslope property to the Los
Angeles area basin. The fence shall be "open to public view", as defined in article 1 of this chapter. Notwithstanding sections 10-3-2759 and 10-3-
2603 of this chapter, any existing fence subject to this subsection F that was constructed in accordance with applicable ordinances and regulations at
the time of construction shall be deemed a nonconforming structure, and may be maintained in its existing configuration unless more than fifty
percent (50%) of the area of the fence measured from the outer perimeter of the fence without deductions for open spaces in the fencing, is replaced
or reconstructed in any five (5) year period. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the fence is replaced or reconstructed, then the
replacement structure shall be treated as new for the purposes of this subsection and shall be constructed so that the entire structure conforms with
the development standards of this subsection.
2. Hedges: Except as permitted by an agreement between adjacent downslope and upslope neighbors, hedges planted outside of the front yard
setback on a slope between adjacent downslope and upslope properties where the upslope property faces the Los Angeles area basin shall not
extend above the higher of:
a. The finished grade of the level pad on the upslope property; or
b. Fourteen feet (14') from the level pad of the downslope property.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 644/797
For purposes of this subsection F, downslope and upslope properties separated by a public street shall be deemed to be adjacent.
If the city determines that two (2) or more plants have become a hedge and violated the provisions of this section on three (3) separate occasions
within a two (2) year period, then the plants shall be removed by the foliage owner.
3. Definitions: As used in this subsection F:
HEDGE: Growth of vegetation taller than twelve inches (12"), consisting of two (2) or more individual plants, including, without limitation, trees, that
are cultivated or maintained in such a manner so that the horizontal distance between the nearest points of two (2) plants is less than eight feet (8').
LOCATED IN A LINE OF SIGHT FROM THE UPSLOPE PROPERTY TO THE LOS ANGELES AREA BASIN: The plane established by the fence or
hedge, either at the height of the fence or hedge or if extended upward, would intersect a sightline from the upslope property to the Los Angeles area
basin. (Ord. 11-O-2611, eff. 9-16-2011; amd. Ord. 13-O-2640, eff. 5-3-2013)
10-3-2617: GAME COURTS AND GAME COURT FENCES:
Game courts in Trousdale Estates shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. No game court or game court fence shall be located on a through lot, within a front yard, between a principal residence and a front setback line, or over
or on top of any building or structure unless the city council finds, after notice and a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in article 26.5 of this
chapter, that such court or fence will not have a substantial adverse visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood, will not create an unusual noise
impact, and will not have an adverse impact on public safety.
B. Notwithstanding any other regulation set forth in this chapter, the maximum allowable height of game court fences constructed more than five feet (5')
from a side, street side or rear property line shall be twelve feet (12') and the maximum allowable height of lighting standards for game courts located
more than five feet (5') from a side, street side, or rear property line shall be twenty two feet (22').
C. Game court fences and game court lighting standards located within five feet (5') of a side, street side, or rear property line shall comply with the height
requirements for fences set forth in section 10-3-2616 of this article unless otherwise permitted by a Trousdale R-1 permit issued pursuant to article
26.5 of this chapter.
D. All game court fences shall be constructed of open wire mesh or similar material, except that a game court fence may include a retaining wall that does
not exceed a maximum height of seven feet (7') provided that the cumulative height of the retaining wall and the fence does not exceed twelve feet
(12'). (Ord. 77-O-1652, eff. 6-2-1977; amd. Ord. 80-O-1771, eff. 10-16-1980; Ord. 92-O-2147, eff. 9-4-1992; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2618: PAVING:
Paving within a front yard shall require a building permit and shall comply with the following restrictions:
A. Paving: Not more than thirty three percent (33%) of the front yard area shall be paved on any site area. In addition, one walkway that does not exceed
five feet (5') in width shall be permitted to be paved provided that the total area of the paved walkway does not exceed the total square footage derived
by multiplying the depth of the front yard by five feet (5').
B. Circular Driveways: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, if a site area is permitted to have two (2) driveway approaches
pursuant to section 8-4-4 of this Code, and a circular driveway is constructed on such site area, the front yard may be paved in the minimum amount
necessary to construct a circular driveway not exceeding twelve feet (12') in width. In addition, paving shall be permitted to construct one walkway not
exceeding four feet (4') in width connecting such driveway to the residence, and one driveway not exceeding nine feet (9') in width connecting the
circular driveway to parking that is required by this Code and is located behind the front yard.
C. Setbacks For Paving: No portion of a front yard within three feet (3') of any property line shall be paved, except for a driveway not exceeding the width
of its curb cut. In addition, no portion of a front yard within five feet (5') of a building shall be paved, except for a driveway, and a walkway of no more
than ten feet (10') in width.
D. Flag Lots: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, if the front yard of a site area does not exceed thirty six feet (36') in
width, no provision of this section shall prohibit the paving of a driveway that does not exceed twelve feet (12') in width, or such additional width as
determined necessary by the City Engineer to provide for reasonably safe access to the site area.
E. Paving Buffer: An opaque wall or hedge not less than two feet (2') nor more than three feet (3') in height shall be provided and maintained along the
front and sides of each area paved, except at a driveway approach or walkway entrance.
F. Paving Materials: All paving shall be Portland cement concrete or its equivalent, applied in accordance with specifications satisfactory to, and approved
by, the Director of Building and Safety. Paving with asphaltic concrete shall not be permitted. No more than three (3) different types of pavement
materials shall be used in any front yard. Any additions to paved areas shall be consistent with the existing paved areas in design, appearance, and
material used.
G. Alternate Materials And Methods: The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this section provided that any such alternates been approved pursuant to this subsection as follows:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 645/797
1. The Director of Building and Safety may approve any such alternate provided that he finds the material or method of construction advances the
purposes of this section and provides at least the equivalent of that prescribed by this section in quality, strength, effectiveness, and durability.
2. The Director of Building and Safety shall require that sufficient evidence be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding the
suitability of an alternate.
H. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a reviewing authority may authorize the replacement of legally
nonconforming pavement with an amount of paving less than or equal to the existing pavement pursuant to article 36 of this chapter if the reviewing
authority finds that such paving will be compatible with the character of the adjacent streetscape. (Ord. 1158, eff. 9-20-1962; amd. Ord. 1216, eff. 10-
21-1965; Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 75-O-1757, eff. 7-3-1975; Ord. 81-O-1787, eff. 4-2-1981; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-2619: LANDSCAPING AND LANDSCAPING PLANS:
All unpaved portions of a front yard shall be improved and maintained with landscaping. For the purposes of this section, "landscaping" shall mean the
development of the open space on a property with plantings, such as trees, bushes, shrubs, hedges, lawns, other live ground cover, or greenery.
Landscaping may include nonliving decorative treatment, such as walls, fences, curbs, groupings of rock, or similar accent material, interspersed with
plantings, but shall not include paving.
Each proposal for the construction of a single-family residence shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan designed with the goal of maintaining the
garden quality of the city of Beverly Hills and, prior to occupancy of a new residence, the subject site area shall be planted in accordance with the
landscaping plan.
This section is intended to require design and implementation of a landscaping plan prior to occupancy of a new development in order to ensure that
landscaping is not ignored in the design and construction process. However, this section is not intended to require a specific type or standard of
landscaping. (Ord. 1158, eff. 9-20-1962; amd. Ord. 1216, eff. 10-21-1965; Ord. 73-O-1493; eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 75-O-1575, eff. 7-3-1975; Ord. 81-O-1787,
eff. 4-2-1981; Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2619.5: SYNTHETIC TURF IN FRONT YARDS:
Synthetic turf shall be allowed as landscaping for the purposes of this article provided that the following provisions are satisfied for synthetic turf in front
yards:
A. Stage D Required: Applications for the use of synthetic turf may only be approved, and permits for installation may only be issued when the city council
has declared and implemented stage D water conservation measures. Synthetic turf that is legally installed during stage D declared periods may be
retained thereafter, even if the city council withdraws the stage D declaration, provided the synthetic turf is maintained in accordance with all applicable
standards.
B. Permit Required: A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any synthetic turf in the front yard of a residentially zoned property. Upon
application for a building permit the following shall be submitted to the community development department:
1. A landscape plan that includes:
a. Dimensions and details of the landscaped area including the synthetic turf and other landscaping materials.
b. Drawings that include scaled cross sections of the proposed landscaping materials and details showing the methods of installation and attachment
of the synthetic turf as well as drainage information.
2. Material description including manufacturer's product data, specifications and installation instructions, installer information and qualifications, and
warranty information.
3. A sample of the proposed synthetic turf material that is at least twelve inches by twelve inches (12" x 12").
4. Maintenance information for the synthetic turf.
C. Coverage: Synthetic turf located in the front yard may be used for up to seventy percent (70%) of the landscaped area but no more than forty percent
(40%) of the entire front yard area. Synthetic turf shall not be located:
1. Within the public right of way/parkway.
2. Within the dripline of any native or "heritage tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this chapter. Further, the installation of turf shall not disturb the
area within the dripline of any native or heritage tree.
3. Within eighteen inches (18") of a front lot line. The eighteen inch (18") buffer between the front lot line and synthetic turf shall be landscaped with
living plant material.
4. Within three feet (3') of a single-family residence.
5. In any area that is used for the parking or driving of motor vehicles.
D. Material: Synthetic turf in a front yard must simulate the appearance of natural live grass and shall:
1. Be of a type known as cut-pile infill with parallel long slit blades. The long slit blades shall be manufactured from polyethylene or polypropylene. The
minimum pile length shall be one and three-fourths inches (13/4") and the maximum pile length shall be two and one-half inches (21/2"). The turf shall
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 646/797
contain a beige or tan thatch layer. The synthetic turf blades (not including the thatch layer) shall be required to contain at least two (2) colors. The
synthetic turf shall comply with all federal and state standards related to lead and heavy metal content. Turf that is made from recycled materials is
encouraged. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting is prohibited.
2. Be constructed to maximize dimensional stability, resist damage during normal use and to minimize UV degradation. Further, the synthetic turf shall
be resistant to staining, weather, insects, rot, mildew and fungus growth, and shall be nonallergenic and nontoxic.
3. Contain an infill material of clean silica sand or zeolite material that is brushed into the synthetic turf to keep the blades upright and achieve a natural
grass look. Any replacement infill shall be silica sand or zeolite material. Rubber infill is prohibited.
4. Be affixed to a permeable triple layer primary backing with a tuft bind strength of at least eight (8) pounds. The backing shall allow water to percolate
through the synthetic turf at a drain rate of at least thirty inches (30") per hour. The synthetic turf system shall allow for the free movement and
drainage of water through the system to prevent runoff, pooling, and flooding.
5. Have a manufacturer's warranty lasting at least eight (8) years.
6. Have spacing between tufting rows (gauge) of no more than three-eighths inch (3/8") as defined by the manufacturer.
7. Have a face weight of at least sixty (60). The "face weight" is defined as the weight in ounces of the synthetic turf fibers found in one square yard of
synthetic turf as defined by the manufacturer.
8. Have tear grab strength of at least two hundred (200) pounds.
9. Pass the pill burn test for flammability (ASTM D2859).
E. Installation: Synthetic turf shall be installed pursuant to manufacturer's requirements by licensed professionals who are experienced and trained by the
manufacturer in the installation of the synthetic turf. In addition:
1. The synthetic turf shall be installed over at least three inches (3") of a compacted aggregate base that provides adequate drainage. The base
material shall be installed over subgrade that is compacted to a firm condition to ensure stability and maintain adequate drainage.
2. Seams shall not be visible and shall be fastened in a manner that ensures they are firm, tight and permanent. Seams shall be sewn and fibers shall
be brushed to provide full coverage of the fibers over the seams.
3. The synthetic turf shall be anchored over the entire coverage area and shall be installed with a nailer board or any such substitute recommended by
the manufacturer intended to conceal edges and ensure proper anchoring of turf.
4. All existing irrigation infrastructure in the synthetic turf area including piping and sprinkler heads that are no longer used must be capped or removed
and shall not be visible.
5. All reasonable efforts shall be made to protect existing trees and tree roots from damage during installation.
F. Maintenance: Synthetic turf shall be maintained in an attractive and clean condition pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of this code and shall not contain holes,
tears, stains, discoloration, seam separations, uplifted surfaces, heat degradation, or excessive wear. (Ord. 15-O-2691, eff. 11-6-2015)
10-3-2620: PERMISSIBLE TYPES OF BUILDING MATERIALS:
All structures constructed in Trousdale Estates shall comply with the following materials restrictions:
A. Roofing: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have a roof constructed
with wood shake, shingle, asphalt composition, crushed rock, or other roofing material which the director of building and safety deems equivalent.
Reflective, glossy, polished, and/or roll formed type metal roofing shall be prohibited.
B. Siding: Except as otherwise prohibited by law, every structure used as a residence in any single-family residential zone shall have exterior siding of
brick, wood, stucco, metal, concrete, or other siding material which the director of building and safety deems equivalent. Reflective, glossy, polished,
and/or roll formed type metal siding shall be prohibited on such structures.
C. Alternate Materials: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Director of Building and Safety may authorize the use of materials not
otherwise authorized pursuant to this section if the Director finds that:
1. The use of an otherwise prohibited material would enhance the architectural compatibility of the proposed structure with existing structures in the
neighborhood;
2. A proposed alteration or addition to an existing residential structure with the prohibited material will be a continuation of such structure's architectural
style; or
3. The use of an otherwise prohibited material is necessary to provide adequate safety or to comply with other laws or regulations applicable to the
subject structure. (Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2621: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ON ESTATE PROPERTIES:
A. If the area of a residential site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or if the area of two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels
which are owned by the same person and used as one site equals or exceeds twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, accessory buildings to a
residence may be located on any part of the existing level pad of a site if authorized by the Planning Commission as part of a Trousdale R-1 permit
issued in accordance with the procedures set forth in article 26.5 of this chapter as follow:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 647/797
The Planning Commission may issue the Trousdale R-1 permit if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed development will not have a
substantial adverse impact on:
1. The scale and massing of the streetscape or the visual character of the surrounding area;
2. Neighbors' access to light and air;
3. Neighbors' privacy;
4. The view or line of sight of one or more neighboring homes; or
5. The garden quality of the City.
B. All accessory buildings approved pursuant to this section shall be immediately removed if the site is altered so that:
1. The area of the site on which the accessory buildings are located is reduced below twenty four thousand (24,000) square feet, or
2. The primary residential building is separated or removed from the site on which the accessory buildings are located so that the buildings or
properties in question no longer function as one home or estate. (Ord. 19-O-2785, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-2622: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATIONS TO EXCEED HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
For any application that seeks approval to exceed the height limitations set forth in section 10-3-2605 of this article, the applicant shall first install story
poles to demonstrate the height, bulk and location of the proposed project. The Director is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and
regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the Planning Commission, governing the installation of story poles. Any applicant subject to the
requirements of this section shall install all story poles in full compliance with such rules and regulations. (Ord. 04-O-2454, eff. 10-22-2004)
Article 26.5. Trousdale R-1 Permit
10-3-2650: TROUSDALE R-1 PERMIT:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the Director of Community Development,
the reviewing authority may issue a Trousdale R-1 permit to establish the following standards in accordance with the following criteria in Trousdale
Estates:
A. Height Of Additions: The reviewing authority may issue a Trousdale R-1 permit that allows an addition to a building, including a side setback
prolongation, to exceed fourteen feet (14') in height if the building lawfully exceeded fourteen feet (14') in height on October 15, 1987, the addition will
not exceed the height of the building, the addition will not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the existing floor area, and the reviewing authority finds that:
1) the addition will not materially impair the view or line of sight of neighboring homes, 2) the addition will not materially change the scale, character or
integrity of the area, and 3) the addition will not adversely affect the utility and value of neighboring properties or the general welfare of the
neighborhood.
B. Estates Larger Than Five Acres: A single-family residence in Trousdale Estates that is located on a site in existence on April 22, 2010, that is larger
than five (5) acres and contains a level building pad of at least one and one-half (1.5) acres, which residence lawfully exceeded fourteen feet (14') in
height on October 15, 1987, may be rebuilt or remodeled up to the maximum height of the single-family residence that existed on such site as of
October 15, 1987, without otherwise conforming to the envelope of such single-family residence.
In reviewing a request for a R-1 permit under this subsection B, the reviewing authority may approve the request if it finds the newly constructed singlefamily
residence: 1) will not exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the existing floor area of the single-family residence as it existed on October
15, 1987; 2) will not materially impair the view or line of sight of one or more neighboring homes; 3) will not materially change the scale, character or
integrity of the area; and 4) will not adversely affect the utility of neighboring properties or the general welfare of the neighborhood.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the cumulative floor area of accessory structures located on a site for which a Trousdale R-1 permit
has been issued pursuant to this subsection B shall, at all times, be limited in floor area so as not to exceed a maximum of ten percent (10%) of the
floor area of the primary residential structure.
C. Game Court Fences And Lighting Standards: The reviewing authority may issue a Trousdale R-1 permit to establish the height of a game court fence or
game court lighting standard within five feet (5') of a property line in excess of the height allowed pursuant to subsection 10-3-2617C of this chapter if
the reviewing authority finds that the game court fence or lighting standard will not have a substantial adverse impact on: 1) access to light and air by
neighboring properties, or 2) the visual character of the area as viewed from streets and neighboring properties. However, in no case shall the
reviewing authority allow any game court fence to exceed twelve feet (12') in height nor shall the reviewing authority allow any lighting standard to
exceed twenty two feet (22') in height.
For the purposes of this section, a "substantial adverse impact" shall mean an adverse impact that is material and readily perceptible.
Except as explicitly provided in this section, no Trousdale R-1 permit shall be construed as a waiver of any requirement of this chapter. (Ord. 10-O-
2583, eff. 7-4-2010)
10-3-2651: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
The reviewing authority for a Trousdale R-1 permit application shall be the Planning Commission unless the application accompanies a separate
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 648/797
application for a discretionary approval from the City Council with regard to the same site area. In that case, the City Council shall be the reviewing
authority for the Trousdale R-1 permit application. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2652: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
A. The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing concerning each application for a Trousdale R-1 permit.
B. Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice
guidelines. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-2653: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting a Trousdale R-1 permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the
findings required for such permit. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2654: APPEALS:
Any decision of the Planning Commission made pursuant to this article may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to the provisions set forth in title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2655: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a Trousdale R-1 permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
Article 27. Other Use And Building Restrictions
10-3-2701: BUSINESSES RESTRICTED TO CERTAIN ZONES:
No person shall establish or conduct any business outside of zones C-3 and M-2, except as provided in this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to establish or conduct any business in zones R-1, R-1.5, and R-4 which business is not in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and any other
law in effect regulating the establishing and conducting of any such business. (1962 Code § 10-702)
10-3-2702: BUSINESSES ON VACANT LOTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or conduct any business activity upon a vacant lot within the city of Beverly Hills except in compliance with
the provisions of title 4, chapter 2, article 16 of this code and in compliance with any other law regulating the establishing and conducting of any such
businesses. (1962 Code § 10-703; amd. Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
10-3-2702.1: BUSINESSES OUTSIDE OF PERMANENT BUILDINGS:
All businesses and business activity shall be conducted within a permanent building and shall be fully enclosed by walls and a roof unless such business
or activity is specifically permitted in compliance with the provisions of title 4, chapter 2, article 16 or 19 of this code, or any other law pursuant to which
such business or activity is specifically permitted to be conducted outdoors. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
10-3-2703: ENTERTAINMENT OUTSIDE THE BUSINESS TRIANGLE:
A. Definitions: For purposes of this section, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings:
BUSINESS TRIANGLE: That area of the city of Beverly Hills bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard to the south, the centerline of Santa
Monica Boulevard (south roadway) to the north and west, and the centerline of the alley between Cañon Drive and Crescent Drive to the east.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT: Any entertainment, other than live musical accompaniment to dining, provided by live performers, including patrons, at any
establishment.
LIVE MUSICAL ACCOMPANIMENT TO DINING: A musical performance in a restaurant by no more than two (2) performers, including patrons, that
does not include any dancing, singing, or spoken words. For purposes of these regulations a disc jockey is considered a performer, as is any other
person whose performance is comprised of selecting or manipulating prerecorded selections of music.
NIGHTCLUB TYPE ACTIVITY: Any bar, nightclub, discotheque, cocktail lounge, restaurant or other establishment which includes beverage service,
whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, and dancing by patrons or others and/or other live entertainment, whether such activities are the principal business
use or incidental to a principal use, as the term "use" is defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
RESTAURANT: Any establishment, including an establishment located inside a hotel or other use, that has as its primary activity the preparation and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 649/797
provision or service of food and beverages to its customers and that charges its customers, either directly or indirectly, for such commodities and
service.
B. Live Musical Accompaniment To Dining; Regulations And Restrictions: Except as expressly provided for in subsections D and E of this section, live
musical accompaniment to dining is the only form of live entertainment permitted in any area of the city outside the business triangle, subject to the
following standards and restrictions:
1. Food Service Available: The live musical accompaniment to dining is permissible only during those times when food and beverage service is
available to restaurant patrons;
2. Day And Time:
a. On Mondays through Thursdays, no live musical accompaniment to dining is permitted before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.;
b. On Sundays and holidays, no live musical accompaniment to dining is permitted before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
c. On Friday mornings no live musical accompaniment to dining is permitted before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.;
d. On Saturday mornings, no live musical accompaniment to dining is permitted before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.;
e. On Friday and Saturday evenings, live musical accompaniment to dining is permitted until one hour after the last patron is permitted to be received
by the restaurant, but in no case later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
3. Separation From Dining Area: Live musical accompaniment to dining may not be offered in a bar area, lounge or other area of the restaurant if that
area is separated entirely from any other area of the restaurant by any floor to ceiling wall or is separated from any other area of the restaurant by
any floor to ceiling wall and a door or divide that is capable of being closed;
4. Staging: Areas where musicians perform may not be located on any raised platform, stage or other mechanism designed to enhance the visibility of
the musicians to restaurant patrons and may not have any special lighting other than ambient restaurant lighting and lighting specifically focused
upon and designed to illuminate any sheet music the musicians might use;
5. Number Of Performers: Any live musical accompaniment to dining permitted by this section is limited to a maximum of two (2) persons performing on
the premises of the restaurant at any given time;
6. Types Of Performance: Any live musical accompaniment to dining shall not include any dancing, singing or spoken word performances, by the
performers, the patrons or any other persons;
7. Noise Level: All live musical accompaniment to dining shall take place inside the structure where the restaurant business is located and shall not
occur in any outdoor area, including, without limitation, any outdoor area where outdoor dining is permitted. No speakers or other sound transmission
equipment are permitted in any area outside the restaurant that permits live musical accompaniment to dining. The premises within which any
restaurant that permits live musical accompaniment to dining is located shall contain sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise generated
inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on adjacent property, public rights of way or within any separate units within the same building
where the restaurant is located. There shall be no open doors or windows permitted at any restaurant that permits live musical accompaniment to
dining. All live musical accompaniment to dining shall be performed at sound levels within the restaurant that permit persons within the restaurant to
converse without straining to speak or be heard;
8. Charges Or Fees: No cover charge, admission fee, surcharge, or any other fee exacted as a condition of entering or exiting the restaurant, or in
connection with the provision of any permissible form of entertainment, may be imposed in restaurants where there is live musical accompaniment to
dining.
C. Prerecorded Music; Regulations And Restrictions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, prerecorded music may be played inside an
establishment outside the business triangle during any hours the establishment is lawfully operating, provided the volume levels conform to the noise
level standards set forth in subsection B7 of this section.
D. Live Entertainment; Regulations And Restrictions: Excluding nonconforming nightclub type activities regulated pursuant to subsection E of this section,
any form of live entertainment, including, without limitation, nightclub type activities, other than live musical accompaniment to dining regulated
pursuant to subsections A and B of this section, is expressly prohibited outside the business triangle, except inside hotels operating pursuant to a
conditional use permit issued pursuant to article 38 of this chapter that expressly authorizes and regulates such activity, or inside any fixed seat theater
that does not permit food or drink consumption in the seating area and that has no tables in the seating area. "Nonconforming nightclub type activities",
as defined in subsection E of this section, may continue to operate outside the business triangle subject to the provisions set forth in that subsection.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, hotels located in any R-4 zone shall not contain any live entertainment, including, without limitation,
any nightclub type activities. Restaurants and private dining rooms located in hotels in the R-4 zone and operating in conformity with section 10-3-1207
of this chapter may provide live musical accompaniment to dining, subject to all of the regulations and restrictions set forth in subsection B of this
section.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, nightclub type activities may be conditionally permitted in the C-5 zone pursuant to a conditional use
permit issued pursuant to article 38 of this chapter.
E. Nonconforming Nightclub Type Activities; Regulations And Restrictions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, nightclub type activities
outside the business triangle lawfully in existence on July 1, 1979, that also were lawfully in existence on November 1, 1998, shall be permitted to
operate or continue as a nonconforming nightclub type activity subject to the following provisions:
1. A nonconforming nightclub type activity which constitutes the principal use of the premises or which is a use or activity incidental to a restaurant as
the principal use is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use, subject to all the privileges, rights restrictions, and obligations associated therewith.
2. A nonconforming nightclub type activity, other than one described in subsection E1 of this section, may be expanded, modified, or relocated within a
building containing the existing conforming principal use to which the nightclub type use has been incidental provided there is first obtained the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 650/797
approval, or conditional approval, of the council.
F. Violations And Administrative Remedies: In addition to any and all other remedies permitted by law, any establishment outside the business triangle
otherwise authorized to have live musical accompaniment to dining under this section shall be prohibited from allowing any live musical
accompaniment to dining or playing any prerecorded music if three (3) or more violations of subsection B or C of this section occur at such
establishment within any twelve (12) month period. If three (3) or more such violations occur, the city shall provide notice to the owner or operator of the
establishment, as shown on the business license of the establishment, that live and prerecorded music shall thereafter be prohibited at the
establishment. Within ten (10) days of such notice, the owner or operator may file a written request with the city clerk for a noticed hearing before a
hearing officer designated by the city manager. The sole purpose of such hearing shall be to determine whether three (3) or more violations of
subsection B or C of this section have occurred at the establishment within a twelve (12) month period. If the hearing officer determines that three (3) or
more such violations have occurred at the establishment, then the hearing officer shall provide a written notice of the decision to the owner or operator.
The notice shall also inform the owner or operator that no further live or prerecorded music shall be permitted at the establishment. The prohibition
against playing music shall continue as long as the establishment operates under the same name or is owned or operated by any of the same persons
or entities, either directly or indirectly. Any decision of a hearing officer under this subsection shall be appealable to the city council pursuant to title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this code. However, notwithstanding section 1-4-104 of this code, the decision of the hearing officer shall not be stayed pending a
final decision by the city council. (1962 Code § 10-704; amd. Ord. 73-O-1464, eff. 4-5-1973; Ord. 79-O-1744, eff. 9-27-1979; Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-
1994; Ord. 98-O-2295, eff. 5-1-1998; Ord. 98-O-2318, eff. 1-1-1999)
10-3-2704: MOTION PICTURE PLANT DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "motion picture plant" is hereby defined as a place where motion pictures are regularly made or where succession of
photographs upon motion picture film are regularly taken, whether or not such film is there developed, printed, or reproduced, or a place equipped for
making or taking such motion pictures or photographs, or which is equipped with the appliances and machinery necessary and proper for the
development, printing, or manufacture of motion picture film. (1962 Code § 10-705)
10-3-2705: MOTION PICTURE PLANTS RESTRICTED:
No building, structure, or improvement shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in the city which is designed, arranged, or intended
to be used or occupied for the purpose of a motion picture plant or which is designed, arranged, or intended to be used for any trade, industry, or use
which is noxious or offensive to the sense of human beings by reason of the omission of odors, dust, smoke, gas, or noise, or by reason of attracting
vermin or flies, and no such trade, industry, or use shall be permitted in the city. (1962 Code § 10-706)
10-3-2706: MOTION PICTURE PLANTS; ANIMATED CARTOONS PERMITTED:
A motion picture plant designed and used exclusively for the taking of animated cartoons shall be permitted in zone C-3 if the provisions of this chapter
regulating manufacturing plants in such zone and the provisions of any other law or resolution providing police or building regulations are complied with.
(1962 Code § 10-707)
10-3-2707: BILLBOARDS AND SIGNBOARDS TO CONFORM WITH SPECIFIC REGULATIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit billboards or signboards within the city provided the billboards or signboards are constructed, erected,
and used as otherwise provided by the laws and resolutions of the city. (1962 Code § 10-709)
10-3-2708: MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM:
Nothing is this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the construction, erection, repair, alteration, enlargement, and/or removal of water wells, reservoirs,
tanks, pipelines, and all other structures necessary therefor which are used, designed, arranged, or intended to be used by the city for or in connection
with the discovery, pumping, storing, and/or distribution of water in the city or in surrounding territory. (1962 Code § 10-710)
10-3-2709 through 10-3-2713.5: (Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997)
10-3-2714: OIL, GAS, WATER, AND MINERALS:
The development, mining, or extraction of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances, or water, or minerals of any character shall be permitted only in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 5 of this title. (1962 Code §§ 10-716, 10-717; amd. Ord. 1253, eff. 12-1-1966; Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967)
10-3-2715: SECURITY GRILLES:
Security grilles in any commercial structure shall be prohibited on the exterior of such structure. Security grilles shall include, but not be limited to, any type
of stationary, fold up, pivoting, rotating, or roll up metal lattice work or mesh or crossed bar grates used to prevent passage through a door or window
opening. (1962 Code § 10-718; amd. Ord. 1253, eff. 12-1-1966; Ord. 86-O-1983, eff. 12-4-1986)
10-3-2716: SECURITY GRILLES; ARCHITECTURAL APPROVAL AND PERMITS REQUIRED:
Prior to the installation of any security grille in the interior of a commercial structure, where such security grille is visible from a public street or alley, such
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 651/797
security grille shall require approval by the architectural commission, pursuant to article 30 of this chapter, and a permit issued by the building and safety
division. (1962 Code § 10-719; amd. Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967; Ord. 86-O-1983, eff. 12-4-1986)
10-3-2717: REMOVAL OF NONCONFORMING SECURITY GRILLES:
Any existing security grille which is nonconforming with section 10-3-2715 of this article shall be removed or brought into conformance not later than
December 4, 1989. (1962 Code § 10-720; amd. Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967; Ord. 86-O-1983, eff. 12-4-1986)
10-3-2718: WATER DEVELOPMENT; CONNECTING WITH CITY WATER SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967)
10-3-2719: BUILDING PERMITS TO COMPLY WITH ZONE RESTRICTIONS:
The director of building and planning shall not issue any building permit for the erection, construction, alteration, or enlargement of any building, structure,
or improvement in any of the zones hereby established contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-722)
10-3-2720: OUTBUILDINGS; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
No permit for the construction of a private garage, stable, or other similar structure or for any outbuilding upon any lot or subdivision of land in zones R-1,
R-1.5, and R-4 shall be issued unless and until there is a residential building on such lot or a permit is simultaneously issued for the residence to be
erected upon such lot or subdivision of land to which such garage, stable or similar structure or outbuilding is appurtenant. (1962 Code § 10-723)
10-3-2721: OUTBUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION WITH PRINCIPAL BUILDING:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any outbuilding on any lot except simultaneously with or after the construction of the principal building thereon
except as otherwise set forth in this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-724)
10-3-2722: OUTBUILDINGS; EXCEPTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2723: OUTBUILDINGS; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO CONSTRUCT PRINCIPAL BUILDING:
In the case of the issuance of a building permit for an outbuilding simultaneously with a permit for a principal building, the permit shall be held to be invalid
unless the principal building to which the outbuilding is, or intended to be, appurtenant is erected and constructed. Failure to erect or construct the principal
building shall be sufficient cause to revoke the permit for construction of the outbuilding. The outbuilding shall thereafter be removed upon receipt of an
order from the building inspector calling for such removal. (1962 Code § 10-726)
10-3-2724: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED:
No land shall be used or occupied, and no building structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the city building official stating the use of the building. (1962 Code § 10-727)
10-3-2725: HEIGHT LIMITS OF BUILDINGS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2726: HEIGHT LIMITS OF BUILDINGS IN COMMERCIAL ZONES:
A. Commercial Zones: No building, structure, or improvement, or any part thereof, erected, constructed, or maintained in a commercial zone shall exceed
forty five feet (45') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter, or three (3) stories, whichever is less.
B. Application Of Provisions To Existing Buildings: Nothing contained in this section shall apply to existing buildings in their present size and height to
make them unlawful, but the provisions and limitations of this section shall apply to any alteration or addition to existing and future buildings.
C. Application Of Provisions To Existing Variances: Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to waive any condition, covenant, or restriction in
variances heretofore granted. (1962 Code § 10-735; amd. Ord. 1179, eff. 1-2-1964; Ord. 1202, eff. 5-20-1965; Ord. 1260, eff. 1-19-1967; Ord. 67-O-
1279, eff. 8-10-1967; Ord. 69-O-1339, eff. 3-20-1969; Ord. 69-O-1341, eff. 5-15-1969; Ord. 75-O-1566, eff. 4-17-1975; Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2727: PARKING; COMPUTATION OF SPACES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 652/797
For the purposes of this chapter, accessible automobile parking spaces shall be computed in accordance with the minimum parking standards, prepared
by the planning division and approved by the council, which may be changed from time to time by the council and which shall be kept available for
inspection by the public in the planning division. In the event several provisions relative to parking requirements may be applicable to a proposed use of
property, the requirement designating the greater number of spaces shall be applicable. (1962 Code § 10-740; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord.
82-O-1865, eff. 11-4-1982)
10-3-2728: PARKING; MAINTENANCE OF REQUIRED SPACES:
No person shall fail to maintain the parking facilities required to be provided by this chapter, or by any applicable provision of prior laws, or by any variance
or use permit heretofore or hereafter granted by the council or the planning commission.
For the purposes of this section, "maintain" shall mean and include open, accessible, and available to the occupants, clients, or visitors of the building or
use during the hours such building or use is normally occupied. This meaning shall not be construed to prohibit security devices as may be required by this
code. (1962 Code § 10-741; amd. Ord. 78-O-1710, eff. 11-3-1978)
10-3-2729: PARKING; BUILDING PERMITS:
No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has presented satisfactory evidence to the planning official that the parking and loading facilities
required by the provisions of this chapter will be provided and maintained. Such evidence shall include, but not be limited to, detailed plans and
specifications of the proposed off street parking and loading facilities. Such plans and specifications shall show conformance to the requirements of this
code and to the minimum parking standards. (1962 Code § 10-742; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973)
10-3-2730: PARKING; REQUIREMENTS:
A. At the time of the erection of a structure or the establishment of a use, there shall be provided and thereafter maintained off street parking facilities to
accommodate the motor vehicles used by the occupants, customers, clientele, and employees of such structure or use as provided in this article. Such
off street parking spaces shall be used exclusively for off street parking purposes. For any structure or use enlarged or increased in capacity, additional
parking facilities shall be required only for such enlargement or increase. However, any interior alteration or interior enlargement of an existing structure
or use, other than a dwelling, shall not require additional parking to be provided if the alteration or enlargement does not increase the total parking
requirement for all uses in the structure by more than two (2) spaces above the amount of parking required for the entire structure on May 22, 1970.
B. The aggregate amount of required parking space for each type of use shall be not less than the following:
1. Hotels 1 space per rentable room or unit
2. Theaters, auditoriums,
and public assembly
areas with fixed seats,
including, but not limited
to, churches and schools
above the elementary
level
1 space per 4 seats
3. Elementary schools
and childcare uses other
than family daycare
homes
1 space per classroom
4. Public assembly areas
without fixed seats
1 space per 28 square feet of such area
5. Eating and bar facilities
in which the total dining
and bar area located on
the site of the facility is
less than 1,000 square
feet
1 space per 350 square feet of floor area
Type Of Use Required Spaces
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 653/797
6. Eating and bar facilities
located on the north side
of Santa Monica
Boulevard (south
roadway), between
Cañon Drive and Wilshire
Boulevard if the total
dining and bar area of the
facility does not exceed
1,000 square feet and the
total dining and bar area
at the site does not
exceed 2,000 square feet
1 space per 350 square feet of floor area
7. Open air dining on
public property
No additional parking required
8. Open air dining on
private property
Parking shall be provided as required for indoor dining pursuant to this section except that the planning commission
may establish parking requirements for open air dining areas that are different than those set forth in this section if the
planning commission determines that the open air dining area will generate a need for parking different than the
amount of parking required by this section or the planning commission determines that parking demand will be met by
means other than those means specified in this section
9. Eating and bar facilities
not governed by
subsections B5 through
B7 of this section
1 space per 45 square feet of dining and bar floor area for the first 9,000 square feet of such area and 1 space per 65
square feet of dining and bar floor area in excess of 9,000 square feet. However, 25 percent of the spaces required to
be provided for a building or structure by subsections B1 and B10 of this section may also be applied toward the
requirements of this subsection
10. Commercial uses not
otherwise specified in this
section
1 space per 350 square feet of floor area
11. Medical offices as
defined in section 10-3-
100 of this chapter,
including all areas
devoted to administrative
or reception purposes
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area; provided buildings constructed before December 6, 1989, that received
building permits before December 16, 2005, to restripe parking areas to increase the number of parking spaces and
permit additional medical floor area in the building, shall maintain on site free validated valet parking for all medical
patrons and maintain posted signage in the parking garage and in or adjacent to all medical offices indicating the
availability of free validated valet parking for medical office patrons as required by the zoning code at the time such
projects were permitted. Any building area converted to medical use on or after December 16, 2005, which relies on a
valid restripe permit shall also comply with the above requirements
12. Manufacturing uses 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area
13. Warehouse uses 1 space per 1,500 square feet of floor area
14. Exercise club 1 space per 100 square feet of floor area
15. Private training
centers
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Provided, however, that if a private training center of more than 2,000 square
feet of floor area is located in a building which has at least 1 parking space per 350 square feet of floor area, then the
planning commission, as part of the issuance of a conditional use permit, may reduce the amount of required parking
for a private training center to an amount no less than 1 parking space per 350 square feet of floor area. The planning
commission shall not, however, approve any reduction in the required parking unless the planning commission
determines that such reduction will not unreasonably burden the parking supply of the building
16. Medical laboratories
as defined under section
10-3-100 of this chapter
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area. Buildings constructed on or after July 1, 1999, may provide parking for
medical laboratory uses at a ratio that is less than 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area upon the granting of a
minor accommodation pursuant to the minor accommodation requirements set forth in this subsection and provided the
parking ratio for the building is at least 1 space per 350 square feet of floor area. Buildings constructed before July 1,
1999, which have an existing parking ratio that satisfies the city's parking requirements in effect on February 21, 1961,
may satisfy the 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area requirement for any new medical laboratory use by any
combination of tandem and compact spaces and restriping provided an on site parking attendant is present at all times
during which access to the site is permitted. Any building constructed before July 1, 1999, which has an existing
parking ratio that satisfies the city's parking requirements in effect on February 21, 1961, but cannot satisfy the 1 space
per 200 square feet of floor area requirement as provided by this subsection may convert commercial space to medical
laboratory space upon the granting of a minor accommodation pursuant to the minor accommodation requirements set
forth in this subsection
Type Of Use Required Spaces
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 654/797
a. Minor
Accommodation:
Where specified reduced parking for medical laboratory uses may be authorized under this subsection through the
granting of a minor accommodation, the director of planning and community development may, pursuant to the
provisions of article 36 of this chapter, permit such reduced parking provided the director of planning and community
development finds that the number of parking spaces in the building has been maximized to the extent feasible and
that the proposed reduction in parking will not have a significant adverse effect on traffic and parking in the area due to
any of the following:
(1) The size or configuration of the building or portion thereof housing the proposed medical laboratory;
(2) The number and size of the loading areas on the site;
(3) The nature and number of deliveries for the proposed medical laboratory;
(4) The proximity of the proposed medical laboratory to schools and parks;
(5) The proximity of the proposed medical laboratory to neighboring residential areas;
(6) The existing concentration of other commercial operations in the vicinity of the proposed medical laboratory;
(7) The hours of the operation for the proposed medical laboratory
b. General Prohibition: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this subsection B16, under no circumstances shall a building located within
100 feet of a public school or active park be permitted to provide parking at a ratio of less than 1 regular stall size
space per 200 square feet of floor area
C. For uses not mentioned, except a use requiring a special use permit, the requirement for off street parking for a use which is so mentioned and to which
such use is similar shall apply but shall be not less than one parking space per five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. For uses requiring a special
use permit, the requirements for off street parking shall be specified in connection with any special use permit which may be granted.
D. For mixed uses, that is a combination of the uses specified by this section, the total requirements for off street parking shall be the sum of the
requirements for the various uses.
E. The determination of the type of use and the requirements for each use, or combination thereof, shall be an administrative function of the planning
official, subject to the provisions of this section.
F. The planning commission may hold a public hearing, noticed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines to
authorize the joint use of parking facilities under the following conditions:
1. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily a daytime use may be used to satisfy the parking facilities
required by this article for a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use.
2. A covenant as described in section 10-3-2734 of this chapter shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder, which covenant may include such
reasonable conditions as the planning commission may impose. (1962 Code § 10-743; amd. Ord. 1195, eff. 3-4-1965; Ord. 1256, eff. 11-1-1966; Ord.
1261, eff. 2-16-1967; Ord. 69-O-1371, eff. 1-15-1970; Ord. 70-O-1385, eff. 5-22-1970; Ord. 73-O-1473, eff. 7-19-1973; Ord. 73-O-1483, eff. 9-6-
1973; Ord. 76-O-1601, eff. 4-15-1976; Ord. 84-O-1935, eff. 10-11-1984; Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984; Ord. 89-O-2072, eff. 10-19-1989; Ord. 89-O-
2082, eff. 12-7-1989; Ord. 92-O-2146, eff. 8-14-1992; Ord. 92-O-2149, eff. 9-11-1992; Ord. 93-O-2184, eff. 12- 3-1993; Ord. 94-O-2205, eff. 8-5-
1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 95-O-2247, eff. 11-10-1995; Ord. 96-O-2264, eff. 8-16-1996; Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 99-O-
2333, eff. 10-15-1999; Ord. 05-O-2489, eff. 12-16-2005; Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011; Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011; Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-
2014)
10-3-2730.1: PARKING; REQUIREMENTS FOR STORAGE OF NEW AUTOMOBILES:
A. Permits Required: As a condition precedent to the temporary storage of new automobiles in an off street parking facility required by the provisions of
section 10-3-2730 of this chapter, a permit shall be obtained from the building and safety division by the owner of such facility, or his authorized agent,
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Term Of Permits: Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not exceed a period of three (3) months after the date of its issuance.
C. Renewal: If the renewal of any permit issued under this section is desired, the permittee shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration date of the
existing permit, submit an application for renewal and furnish therewith all the information required under this section for a new permit.
D. Transfer Of Permit: Permits issued under this section shall not be transferable.
E. Issuing Authority: The issuing authority shall be the city building official.
F. Applications; Form: The application form shall contain the following information:
1. The name and business address of the applicant;
Type Of Use Required Spaces
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 655/797
2. The address of the off street parking facility within which it is desired to temporarily store new automobiles;
3. The number of off street parking spaces desired to be utilized for the temporary storage of new automobiles; and
4. Information showing that the requested spaces will not be required for normal use during the period of the permit applied for.
G. Investigation Fee: The filing of any original or renewal application referred to in this section shall be accompanied by a payment to the city of the sum of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) as an investigation fee.
H. Requirements And Conditions: The permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be subject to the following requirements and
conditions:
1. The new vehicles for which temporary storage is requested shall belong to a firm doing business in the city;
2. Any permit issued may be cancelled on seven (7) days' notice upon a finding by the city building official that the spaces are required for normal use;
3. Off street parking spaces used for temporary storage of new automobiles shall comply with all occupancy requirements of this code; and
4. Reasonable conditions may be imposed by the city building official in issuing the permit in order to protect the city and ensure that the intent of the
off street parking requirements is carried out. (Ord. 1247, eff. 8-18-1966)
10-3-2730.2: PARKING LOTS AND OTHER MOTOR VEHICLE USE AREAS; SPECIFICATIONS:
Areas in which motor vehicles or trailers are stored, parked, displayed, or worked upon, other than in one-family residential zones, shall in all respects be
improved and maintained in accordance with the following minimum specifications:
A. Setbacks And Landscaping: Each such area shall maintain a setback of ten feet (10') from Wilshire Boulevard or five feet (5') from any other street. The
area between the setback line and the public sidewalk or curb and a minimum of two percent (2%) of the internal area shall be developed in
landscaping, including a water sprinkling system, as approved by the architectural commission.
B. Protective Devices: Each such area shall have erected and maintained between the setback and use areas an opaque wall or opaque hedge not less
than four feet (4') nor more than six feet (6') in height, except that for areas where motor vehicles are displayed for sales purposes only, such wall or
hedge need not exceed three feet (3') in height. Notwithstanding the above requirement, where such area is located on or adjacent to a residential
zone, the wall height and material requirements of section 10-3-1953 of this chapter shall apply, however, such wall shall be three feet (3') high where
located within the required front setback in any residential zone. When no hedge or wall is required along a property line of an area, an approved
device shall be installed and maintained as a safeguard to abutting property and public rights of way. No wall or hedge required to be erected and
maintained by the provisions of this subsection shall be constructed on either side of a driveway entrance opening onto a street or alley, which wall or
hedge would impair a clear and unobstructed cross view of pedestrians on the sidewalk, alley, or lot by motorists about to leave or enter the lot.
C. Surfacing: Each such area shall be paved with asphaltic concrete not less than two inches (2") in thickness or Portland cement concrete not less than
four inches (4") in thickness. Each such area shall be graded so as to provide adequate drainage.
D. Lighting: When such area is lighted, the lighting shall be so arranged as to be directed onto the parking area and to reflect away from the residential
property.
E. Permits: Before any work is performed on such areas, all necessary permits shall be obtained from the city. Such permits shall include building,
electrical, plumbing, sign, and curb cut permits and any applications for any other inspections or approvals which may be necessary in the development
of the area.
F. Maintenance: Each such area, including landscaping and setbacks, shall be maintained in a good, clean condition, with grass and shrubbery properly
trimmed and signs, walls, and structures properly painted. Periodic inspections to secure compliance shall be made by the building official.
G. Parking Spaces: The number of automobile parking spaces being maintained in connection with an existing building or structure on September 19,
1968, may be reduced, notwithstanding the requirements of section 10-3-2735 of this article, if such reduction results from the required compliance with
the provisions of this section.
H. Existing Areas: Each such area lawfully existing and being maintained on November 3, 1967, containing space for more than five (5) automobiles, shall
be regarded as nonconforming and shall be removed or rearranged so as to eliminate any conflict with the provisions of this section and to fully comply
with all of the requirements of this section on or before October 1, 1970.
I. Approved Alternatives: Subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any
material, planting, or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this section provided any such alternate has been approved by the building
official.
The building official may approve any such alternate provided he finds the material, planting, method, or work offered is for the purpose intended and at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this section in quality, strength, effectiveness, and durability.
The building official may require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding its use.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 656/797
J. Setback Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the setback for each parking area lawfully existing on November 3,
1967, may be modified by the architectural commission upon a finding that the imposition of any such setback, or a portion thereof, would result in a
substantial diminution of parking space.
Any applicant or any interested party aggrieved by a decision of the architectural commission made pursuant to the provisions of this subsection may
appeal to the council in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3011 of this chapter.
K. Minor Accommodation: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, a reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation
pursuant to article 36 of this chapter to allow a wall of up to ten feet (10') in height where parking lots and other motor vehicle use areas are adjacent to
residentially zoned property, provided that the reviewing authority finds that the wall will not have a substantial adverse impact upon traffic safety, the
scale and massing of the streetscape or garden quality of the city.
A reviewing authority may also issue a minor accommodation to allow for any wall material other than masonry, provided the reviewing authority finds
that the choice of alternate wall material will not have a substantial adverse impact on the privacy, security or residential quality of the adjacent
residential property. (Ord. 67-O-1285, eff. 11-2-1967; amd. Ord. 68-O-1320, eff. 9-19-1968; Ord. 69-O-1349, eff. 7-1-1969; Ord. 69-O-1357, eff. 10-16-
1969, retroactive to 10-1-1969; Ord. 69-O-1367, eff. 1-1-1970; Ord. 71-O-1418, eff. 8-5-1971; Ord. 76-O-1615, eff. 8-19-1976; Ord. 88-O-2037, eff. 9-8-
1988; Ord. 98-O-2293, eff. 4-17-1998)
10-3-2730.3: PARKING FOR AUCTION HOUSES AND ART GALLERIES:
After an art gallery or auction house has lawfully occupied a retail location in the city of Beverly Hills for at least thirty (30) days, then the gallery or auction
house owner may hold auctions at that location without providing the parking required for a public assembly use if the following requirements are satisfied:
A. No more than fifteen (15) auctions shall be conducted within a one year period. For the purposes of this section, if an auction is conducted on more than
two (2) calendar days, then, after the second day, each day on which the auction is conducted shall be considered a separate auction;
B. In lieu of the restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section, auction houses and art galleries located within the business triangle shall not conduct
more than fifteen (15) auctions within a one year period at which fifty (50) or more attendees are present at any one time. For the purposes of this
section, if an auction is conducted on more than two (2) calendar days, then, after the second day, each day on which the auction is conducted shall be
considered a separate auction.
C. Free parking shall be provided to all persons who attend the auction;
D. If parking is provided at an off site location, the gallery or auction house owner shall post signage satisfactory to the director of transportation that
directs vehicle drivers to the appropriate parking facility. Additionally, all invitations to the auction and all announcements or advertisements for the
auction shall include the location of the off site parking and directions to the parking; and
E. At the discretion of the director of transportation, valet parking or shuttle service shall be provided free of charge to persons attending the auction if the
director of transportation determines that valet parking or shuttle service is advisable to discourage auction patrons from parking on surrounding streets
or circulating through such streets.
F. The auction shall be conducted by a state licensed auctioneer.
G. A parking and circulation plan satisfactory to the director of transportation shall be implemented if either the auction or the parking for the auction will be
provided within one hundred seventy feet (170') of a residential zone. The plan may include, among other elements, provision of a parking attendant.
(Ord. 96-O-2264, eff. 8-16-1996; amd. Ord. 01-O-2387, eff. 12-21-2001)
10-3-2730.4: ALTERNATIVE PARKING FACILITY:
An "alternative parking facility", as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, may be used to meet the parking requirements of section 10-3-2730 of this
chapter provided the alternative parking facility and the use(s) for which it provides required parking do not include medical uses and are located in a
commercial zone on property with a site area not exceeding sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet, and subject to the following:
A. Conditional Use Permit Required: A conditional use permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of article 38 of this chapter, shall be obtained prior to any
alternative parking facility commencing provision of required parking spaces for any use.
B. Standards: All alternative parking facilities authorized by a conditional use permit shall comply with the following standards:
1. Except for required ingress and egress, all alternative parking facilities shall be fully enclosed and below grade. Alternative parking facilities and
portions of buildings that contain alternative parking facilities shall be subject to architectural review;
2. Staging and queuing of vehicles shall occur on private property within a reasonable distance from the alternative parking facility and shall not impede
travel and access within the public right of way;
3. The alternative parking facility shall be operated by one or more parking attendants, as determined through the conditional use permit process, at all
times during the hours of operation, so that it is valet operated to service the use needs of the commercial facility for which it provides required
parking;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 657/797
4. The design of the alternative parking facility shall meet all applicable California building codes, as approved by the community development
department;
5. An alternative parking facility shall comply with all applicable development standards, including those set forth in article 16.5 of this chapter, and
excluding the city's minimum parking standards if modifications to those standards are approved as part of the conditional use permit;
a. The reviewing authority may condition an alternative parking facility to modify standards relating to minimum parking stall size, minimum drive aisle
width, and drive aisle parking spaces, provided the applicant demonstrates that the facility will accommodate a range of vehicle types and will not
have an adverse impact on the efficiency of the parking operation or the safety of people or property.
C. Information Required For Application: Application submittals for an alternative parking facility conditional use permit shall include information that the
director of community development deems to be necessary to determine whether the alternative parking facility can adequately meet the parking needs
of the proposed development and determine that no substantial negative impacts will result from the facility. At a minimum, the following shall be
provided as part of the conditional use permit application:
1. Site Plan: Submittal of a site plan prepared by a design professional indicating all structures; the alternative parking facility location; number of
required parking stalls; site ingress and egress; proposed queuing location; and the identification of adjacent land uses;
2. Operations Plan: Submittal of an alternative parking facility operations plan describing the broadest range of operating hours allowed for the
commercial use(s) to be served by the alternative parking facility; the number of parking attendants and working hours; methods for automobile
storage and retrieval during and outside of regular business hours; vehicle drop off and pick up location(s) for customers; vehicle circulation path;
location of staging area for vehicles waiting to enter the alternative parking facility. The operations plan shall also describe, with regard to the
mechanical parking lifts and automobile elevators: maintenance schedules and additional parts inventory requirements to maintain optimal
operations;
3. Technical Studies: Submittal of technical studies demonstrating that the proposed design and operation of the alternative parking facility will not be
detrimental to surrounding uses and properties with regard to noise, visual impacts, area parking and circulation, and existing on site improvements;
4. Disabled Access Parking: Submittal of evidence that the parking provided will comply with all applicable disabled access requirements;
5. Backup Power: Prior to issuance of building permits, the applicant shall provide documentation that the alternative parking facility will be equipped
with backup generators with sufficient capacity to allow operation of the parking system in the case of electrical failure. In an alternative parking
facility with multiple automobile elevators, mechanical lifts, or both, each elevator and lift shall be individually operable such that mechanical failure of
one would not prevent use of the others.
D. Findings: In addition to the findings outlined in article 38 of this chapter, a conditional use permit shall only be issued if the planning commission finds
that:
1. The proposed location of the alternative parking facility will not be detrimental to adjacent property or to the public welfare;
2. Due to circumstances such as lot size, lot shape, lot location, or other existing conditions of the site, the applicant has demonstrated that an
alternative parking facility is a reasonable method of providing code required parking;
3. The use of an alternative parking facility enhances the design of the proposed project and does not result in a substantial adverse impact to the
character of the surrounding area;
4. The proposed alternative parking facility and operation thereof will not create any material adverse traffic or parking impacts, traffic safety hazards,
pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or pedestrian safety hazards.
E. Conditions Of Approval: The reviewing authority may impose any conditions that are necessary to address any potential adverse impacts resulting from
the constriction and use of an alternative parking facility to provide required parking, including, but not limited to:
1. Inspection Report: A maintenance inspection report and usage report for any alternative parking facility, prepared at the sole expense of the
applicant, shall be submitted at any time upon request from the community development department and no less than every six (6) months for review
by the city.
2. Service Contract: The owner of the alternative parking facility shall at all times maintain one of more contracts with an entity or entities that provides
maintenance and twenty four (24) hour emergency service for all the aspects of the alternative parking facility, including, but not limited to, any
automobile elevators and, mechanical parking lifts installed in the alternative parking facility.
3. Employee Parking Shall Not Be Allowed On The Site: A property on which an alternative parking facility is permitted shall provide free paid parking
for all employees at an off site and off street parking facility. Verification of off site location shall be provided to the director of community development
and shall be updated whenever employee parking demand changes. This provision shall not apply to covenanted parking spaces for employee use
when the property on which an alternative parking facility is located includes parking required to be provided on the site pursuant to the provisions of
a covenant.
4. Valet Drop Off: If valet drop off locations associated with a property utilizing an alternative parking facility are proposed on city streets, excluding
alleys, there shall be valet drop off space to accommodate a minimum of three (3) vehicles.
5. Provision Of Luxury Service Or Product: A conditional use permit for an alternative parking facility must be for a use providing a luxury service or
product, such as, but not limited to, a restaurant whose chef or operator has operated or is operating a Michelin star rated restaurant, or a luxury
brand retail establishment, as determined by the city council in its discretion.
6. Review: If granted a parking reduction pursuant to subsection B5 of this section, the project's parking shall be reviewed by either the city council or
planning commission after six (6) months and one year of commencement of the use. If the reviewing body determines the reduced parking is
insufficient, the applicant shall be required to make arrangements to provide sufficient parking either through the in lieu parking program, if available,
providing additional covenanted parking spaces, or other means, as directed by the reviewing body.
F. Pilot Program: The conditional use permit for an alternative parking facility authorized by this section is a pilot program. The city council or planning
commission may take action pursuant to this section on up to two (2) applications. Unless the city council extends this section this section shall be
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 658/797
repealed after one year of operational experience with each of the two (2) projects. (Ord. 16-O-2712, eff. 12-22-2016)
10-3-2731: PARKING; RECONSTRUCTION AND CHANGES OF USE:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997)
10-3-2732: PARKING; EXISTING STRUCTURES:
Off street parking facilities which are being maintained on January 1, 1967, on the same regularly subdivided lot with, and in connection with the use of,
any existing structure shall be maintained so long as such structure remains, unless equivalent facilities are provided on the same lot or covenanted in
accordance with the provisions of sections 10-3-2733 and 10-3-2734 of this chapter. Nothing contained in this section shall require the maintenance of
more parking facilities than would be required on January 1, 1967, for a new structure identical to such existing structure. Nothing contained in this section
shall affect or limit the requirements of section 10-3-2728 or 10-3-2735 of this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-745; amd. Ord. 1261, eff. 2-16-1967)
10-3-2733: PARKING IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES; LOCATION AND SHIELDING OF FACILITIES:
Except as provided in this section, in all nonresidential zones, required parking shall be provided on site. However, the director of community development
may, pursuant to the provisions of article 36 of this chapter, approve a minor accommodation permit for up to ten (10) spaces to be located off site within
seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the use site if the director finds that the proposal would not have a significant, adverse effect on traffic and parking in the
area. The planning commission may grant a conditional use permit authorizing off site parking in excess of ten (10) spaces within seven hundred fifty feet
(750') of the use site.
Additionally, except for required entrances and exits, all parking structures in nonresidential zones shall be constructed so as to shield the automobiles
from horizontal view in all directions and so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of this code and shall be enclosed with solid walls when
such parking structures are adjacent to a residentially zoned property or separated from such a property solely by a street or alley. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff.
12-16-2011)
10-3-2734: PARKING; COVENANTS:
When parking is to be provided off the regularly subdivided lot on which the structure, or some portion thereof, is located, the owner or lessee of record of
the development site shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the planning official that he owns or has available sufficient property to provide the minimum off
street parking required by the provisions of section 10-3-2730 of this chapter. Whether parking is to be provided on property owned by the applicant or is in
another ownership, there shall have been recorded in the office of the county recorder, prior to the issuance of any building permit, a covenant executed by
the owners of such property for the benefit of the city, in a form approved by the city attorney, to the effect that the owners will continue to maintain such
parking space so long as such structure or improvement exists. Such covenant shall also recite that the title to and right to use the lots upon which the
parking space is to be provided will be subservient to the title to the premises upon which the structure is to be erected and shall warrant that such lots are
not and will not be made subject to any other covenant or contract for such use without the prior written consent of the city. In the event the owners of such
structure should thereafter provide parking space equal in area within the same distance and under the same conditions as to ownership upon another lot
than the premises made subservient in a prior such covenant, the city will, upon a written application therefor, accompanied by the filing of a similar
covenant, release such original subservient premises from such prior covenant, and the owners shall furnish at their own expense such title reports or
other evidence as the city may require to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. (1962 Code § 10-747)
10-3-2735: PARKING; MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
Off street automobile parking spaces required by this article shall be maintained so long as the structure or use for which they are provided exists unless
an equivalent substitute number of such spaces is provided and thereafter maintained conforming to the requirements of section 10-3-203 or 10-3-2730 of
this chapter. In no event shall parking facilities which are provided or maintained for a structure or use be considered as providing any of the required
space for any other structure or use. (1962 Code § 10-748; amd. Ord. 01-O-2367, eff. 3-8-2001)
10-3-2736: PARKING; FAILURE TO MAINTAIN:
In the event off street parking facilities required to be provided under this code, or any prior provision thereof, in connection with any structure or use are at
any time not maintained for automobile parking purposes to the extent required, the city building official shall revoke and cancel the certificate of
occupancy theretofore issued for such structure after holding a hearing upon at least ten (10) days' written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the
hearing having been mailed to the owner or other person occupying the same as shown on the records of the city clerk or the division of building and
planning; provided, however, if it appears that the failure to maintain such required parking was reasonably beyond the control of the person required to
maintain the same, no certificate of occupancy shall be revoked until such person shall have had at least ninety (90) days to reestablish the minimum
required parking. In the event any certificate of occupancy is revoked, the premises covered thereby shall not be occupied or used for any purpose until a
new certificate of occupancy has been issued. (1962 Code § 10-749)
10-3-2736.5: PARKING; USE FOR CIVIL DEFENSE STORAGE:
Off street parking facilities required to be provided and maintained under this code may be used for the storage of civil defense supplies to the extent and
in the manner approved in writing by each of the following: the director of civil defense, or his designee, the chief of the fire department, or his designee,
the city attorney, or his designee, the city building official, or his designee, and the public works administrator, or his designee. Upon the cessation of such
storage use, such facilities shall immediately revert to parking uses as otherwise required by this code, and any such written approval shall so provide.
Such written approval, setting forth a description of the property and the name of the record owner, shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 1174, eff. 6-20-1963)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 659/797
10-3-2737: PARKING; RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Nothing contained in sections 10-3-2727 through 10-3-2739 of this article shall be deemed or construed to allow the use of property situated in a
residential zone for any commercial or parking purpose, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use property in a residential zone for parking purposes
except in connection with, or as an accessory use to, the use of such property for residential purposes or other permitted uses. (1962 Code § 10-750)
10-3-2738: PARKING; FRONT YARD SETBACKS:
Required off street parking spaces may not be located between the front property line and the setback line established by this chapter. (1962 Code § 10-
751)
10-3-2739: GUEST PARKING; MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
Every multiple-family residential development, other than housing for the elderly and handicapped as defined under article 12.5 of this chapter and
congregate housing for the elderly and disabled as defined under article 12.8 of this chapter, shall have one permanent guest parking space for each four
(4) dwelling units, or any fraction thereof. Guest parking spaces shall not be reserved for exclusive use by residents of the development. Twenty five
percent (25%) of such spaces may be compact. Additionally, tandem parking or a maximum of fifty percent (50%) compact spaces may be approved
pursuant to discretionary review of the project. All such parking shall comply with the applicable regulations set forth in the minimum parking standards
adopted pursuant to section 10-3-2727 of this article. All such parking shall also be readily accessible by visitors to the development and designated in a
manner that gives notice to visitors of the availability of such parking. The manner of access, designation, and location of guest parking spaces shall be
subject to the approval of the director of transportation and engineering. (Ord. 89-O-2082, eff. 12-7-1989; amd. Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-2740: LOADING SPACE; DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions and technical specifications shall govern the interpretation of sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744 of this article:
LOADING SPACE: An accessible off street space or berth on the same site as the building it serves, or within that building, for the exclusive use of the
commercial loading or unloading of goods or materials from vehicles. "Accessible", for the purposes of this definition, shall mean clear vehicular access to
the loading space unobstructed at all times except when the loading space is in use for loading or unloading.
MINIMUM LOADING SPACE STANDARDS: Any loading space required by sections 10-3-2740 through 10-3-2744 of this article shall be of sufficient size
and shall provide adequate maneuvering area to accommodate, depending on the type of loading space required, a van, truck or semitractor trailer and
shall, at a minimum, have the dimensions and provide the maneuvering distances set forth in the following table:
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LOADING SPACES
Van Truck Semi
Size Length 25' 35' 50'
Width 10' 12' 12'
Overhead 8' 10' 16'
Maneuverability Turning radius 25' 40' 50'
Back up/3- point turns 30' 45' 70'
Pull through length 50' 70' 100'
(1962 Code § 10-760; amd. Ord. 74-O-1501, eff. 2-1-1974; Ord. 96-O-2263, eff. 7-19-1996; Ord. 05-O-2488, eff. 12-8-2005)
10-3-2741: LOADING SPACE; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Minimum Loading Space Requirement For Principally Permitted Land Uses: Each land use shall have a minimum associated "loading space" as
defined in this article. When different uses are combined on a shared site, the largest loading space among the various uses on the site shall prevail as
the minimum loading space for the site. Loading facilities shall be provided for all commercial buildings in accordance with the following requirements:
TABLE 10-3-2741.1
LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE
Any use - otherwise, as noted Van
Land Use Category
Minimum Loading
Space Required
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 660/797
Entertainment/public assembly
Cinema or theater
Conservatory
Dancing academy
Exercise club
Library
Parking garage
Van
Food service
Cabaret within the business triangle
Cafe
Lunchroom/full service restaurant
Truck
Personal service/office
Office, including medical
Photography gallery
Private training center <2,000 square feet
Studio
Van
Retail shop
Dressmaking or millinery store
Shop - retail <2,000 square feet
Tailor
Van
Wholesale/retail store
Carpenter shop
Dry cleaning plant, hand laundry
Paint, paperhanger, or decorating store
Plumbing shop
Roofing or plastering store or office
Shop - wholesale
Store - retail or wholesale
Upholsterer
Warehouse
Truck
B. Minimum Loading Space Requirement For Conditionally Permitted Land Uses: For any use that requires a conditional use permit, the minimum loading
space requirement shall be established by the reviewing authority as a condition of approval of the use. As part of the conditional use permit
application, each applicant shall submit a traffic circulation and loading study that fully analyzes the performance of the loading facilities for any
proposed use.
C. Minimum Loading Facilities: Each commercial building in the city shall provide minimum loading facilities based on broad comparative land use types
(table 10-3-2741.2) and building size ranges, that include one or more uses.
TABLE 10-3-2741.2
MINIMUM LOADING FACILITIES
Building Size (Square Feet)
Land Use
Under
7,500
7,501
To
15,000
15,001 To 30,000 30,001
To
50,000
More Than 50,000
Any
unspecified
use
Van Truck 2 Truck 3 Truck 3 Truck +
Entertainment/
public
assembly
Van Van For all buildings that contain a mix of uses, loading requirements will be established by the reviewing authority as
part of the discretionary review process. As a general rule, loading needs will reflect the minimum standards
noted in sections 10-3-2740 and 10-3-2741 of this article, as adjusted to meet one or more of the individual land
uses as deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.
Food service Truck
Truck
+ van
Personal
service/
office
Van Truck
Retail shop Van Truck
Wholesale/
retail store
Truck
Truck
+ van
D. Planning Commission Discretion: Nothing in this section shall limit the planning commission from modifying the size of any loading space required by
this article or imposing additional loading space requirements as a condition of approval of any discretionary permit. (1962 Code § 10-761; amd. Ord.
Land Use Category
Minimum Loading
Space Required
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 661/797
74-O-1501, eff. 2-1-1974; Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976; Ord. 96-O-2263, eff. 7-19-1996; Ord. 05-O-2488, eff. 12-8-2005)
10-3-2742: LOADING SPACE; FUNCTIONALITY; LOCATION:
A. Functional Aspects Of Required Loading Spaces: Notwithstanding the minimum standards set forth in sections 10-3-2740 and 10-3-2741 of this article,
a project applicant shall establish by evidence satisfactory to the reviewing authority that any loading space proposed to satisfy the requirements of this
article will function in a manner adequate to accommodate the loading vehicles expected to serve the project.
B. Location Of Loading Spaces: Where the site or structure abuts an alley, access to loading spaces shall be from the alley. Alley accessed loading spaces
shall be parallel to the alley unless the project applicant establishes one of the following:
1. Site constraints preclude construction of a parallel loading space or spaces; or
2. The alternative loading space configuration proposed by the project applicant meets the functional requirements of this article.
Loading spaces shall be directly accessible for the distribution of goods within the structure or use. For multi-story structures such access shall be
direct to an elevator or stairway serving all stories. In order to meet the functional requirements of this article, loading spaces shall have a minimum
maneuvering area as specified in section 10-3-2740 of this article. Said maneuvering area shall be contiguous to the end of the loading space and
may include the width of the alley or street. (1962 Code § 10-762; amd. Ord. 74-O-1501, eff. 2-1-1974; Ord. 05-O-2488, eff. 12-8-2005)
10-3-2743: LOADING SPACE; MAINTENANCE:
Loading spaces required or being maintained in connection with any existing structure on March 22, 1961, shall thereafter be maintained so long as such
structure remains unless an equivalent number of such spaces is provided conforming to the requirements of section 10-3-203 of this chapter or section
10-3-2741 of this article. Nothing contained in this section shall require the maintenance of more loading spaces than would be required for a new
structure. (1962 Code § 10-763; amd. Ord. 01-O-2367, eff. 3-8-2001)
10-3-2744: MECHANICAL LOADING FACILITIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, loading facilities for those two (2) lots east of Peck Drive which front on Wilshire Boulevard and those
three (3) lots west of Peck Drive which front on Wilshire Boulevard may be located aboveground or belowground and may be accessed through the use of
mechanical lifts if such loading facilities meet the following requirements:
A. All loading facilities shall be located on the above referenced lots and/or on adjacent lots located in an R-4 or R-4-P zone and being used for parking
purposes. However, if such facilities are located in an R-4 or R-4-P zone, then the facilities shall be located at least fifty feet (50') away from any
residential use.
B. All loading operations within an R-4 or R-4-P zone shall be permitted only within fully enclosed facilities.
C. All structures housing loading operations or access to loading facilities shall be designed to be compatible with nearby uses to the satisfaction of the
planning commission, if planning commission review is otherwise required, and shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
development to the satisfaction of the architectural commission.
D. All mechanical equipment and operations shall be designed and screened to minimize noise impacts on nearby properties to the satisfaction of the
director of planning and community development.
E. If underground loading operations accessed by a mechanical lift are proposed as part of a planned development application or a development plan
review application, then a loading operations plan shall be submitted in conjunction with that application. The loading operations plan shall, at a
minimum, address the following issues:
1. Small deliveries and couriers;
2. Operation of doors, lifts and contingencies for mechanical failures of same;
3. Operational issues including frequency of deliveries, hours of deliveries, mode of deliveries, including the size of vehicles, types of goods delivered,
access to all stories of the building, and trash collection; and
4. Noise levels from the mechanical equipment measured at the property line adjacent to a residential use in the R-4 zone.
F. Lift platforms shall have the following minimum dimensions:
1. Twenty five foot (25') length;
2. Twelve foot (12') width;
3. Fourteen foot (14') height clearance; and
4. Twenty five foot (25') contiguous maneuvering area. (Ord. 92-O-2145, eff. 8-7-1992)
10-3-2745: DENSITY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 662/797
Except as may be expressly provided in this chapter, the maximum floor area ratio on any site area shall not exceed 2.0. For the purposes of this section,
"site area" shall include only those portions of the site which are in a nonresidential zone, including the C-5 zone. (Ord. 1179, eff. 1-2-1964; amd. Ord.
1197, eff. 3-18-1965; Ord. 1260, eff. 1-19-1967; Ord. 67-O-1279, eff. 8-10-1967; Ord. 69-O-1339, eff. 3-20-1969; Ord. 69-O-1341, eff. 5-15-1969; Ord. 73-
O-1463, eff. 3-22-1973; Ord. 75-O-1566, eff. 4-17-1975; Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994)
10-3-2746: GAME COURTS; PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2747: HEIGHT LIMITS OF BUILDINGS SINGLE-FAMILY (ONE-FAMILY) RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
(Rep. by Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985)
10-3-2748: LIMITED INTENSITY COMMERCIAL USES ON OLYMPIC BOULEVARD:
If the maximum floor area ratio on any site area located in any commercial zone having frontage on Olympic Boulevard is eight-tenths (0.8) or less, the
following criteria shall apply:
A. Notwithstanding section 10-3-2741 of this article, one "loading space", as defined in section 10-3-2740 of this article, shall be required for the first
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area. Two (2) such loading spaces shall be required for structures having up to forty thousand
(40,000) square feet of gross floor area. One additional such loading space shall be required for each 100,000 square feet, or portion thereof, in excess
of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
B. All other provisions of this code shall be met. (Ord. 82-O-1849, eff. 4-15-1982; amd. Ord. 86-O-1985, eff. 1-1-1987; Ord. 98-O-2300, eff. 6-19-1998)
10-3-2749: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY (ONE-FAMILY) RESIDENCES:
(Rep. by Ord. 85-O-1953, eff. 7-4-1985)
10-3-2750: MOBILE HOMES:
A. Use Criteria: A mobile home may be used as a residence in any single-family (one-family) residential zone if it meets all of the following requirements:
1. The mobile home complies with all development standards applicable to single-family (one-family) residences, including, but not limited to, setbacks,
paving, height, materials, width, parking, and accessory structures:
2. The mobile home is manufactured and certified under the national mobile home construction and safety standards act of 1974;
3. The mobile home is installed and structurally fixed to an approved permanent foundation and in accordance with installation instructions provided by
the manufacturer. The exterior wall covering shall extend to the ground or to the top of the foundation; provided, however, any exposed portion of the
foundation shall be treated so as to provide a finished appearance with material such as stucco, veneered brick, decorative block, or other finish
approved by the building official;
4. Plans, including plot, elevations, exterior materials, photographs, and other documents and specifications needed to assure compliance with city and
state codes, shall be submitted at the time of the application for the permits required by this code;
5. In addition to any other permits required by this code, the following permits shall be obtained:
a. A building permit for the foundation system and any attached accessory structure not included in the mobile home at the factory, such as a porch
or steps;
b. A plumbing permit for the connection of gas, water, and sewer to the mobile home; and
c. An electrical permit for the connection of electrical power to the mobile home; and
6. Vehicle license plates, certificates of ownership, and certificates of registration shall be surrendered to the building and safety division for forwarding
to the appropriate state agencies.
B. Prohibition: Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a mobile home to be used as a residence in any multiple-family (one-family) residential
zone such that there is more than one structure used as a residence on such lot.
C. Mobile Home Defined: For the purposes of this section, "mobile home" shall mean a "mobile home" as defined in section 18211 of the Health and
Safety Code of the state. (Ord. 82-O-1852, eff. 6-17-1982)
10-3-2751: RUBBISH STORAGE AND HANDLING FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 92-O-2141, eff. 6-5-1992)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 663/797
10-3-2752: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS:
A. Requirements: Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted only upon compliance with this subsection or upon approval pursuant to subsection D or E of
this section. The director of building and safety shall issue a building permit for any satellite dish antenna that conforms to the following standards and
criteria:
1. In residential zones, the antenna may not exceed a diameter of ten feet (10');
2. In single-family residential zones, no more than one antenna may be located on a site area;
3. In multiple-family residential zones, no more than one antenna may be located on any site area with less than ten (10) units, and no more than two
(2) antennas may be located on any site area with ten (10) or more units;
4. In residential zones, the antenna shall not be installed in the front yard of the site area. Furthermore, in single-family residential zones, no antenna
with a diameter that exceeds eighteen inches (18") shall be installed within thirty feet (30') of the front setback line;
5. In residential zones, the antenna shall not be installed in the site area's required side yard setbacks;
6. In residential zones, the maximum height of a roof mounted antenna and any antenna that overhangs a roof shall be twelve feet (12') above the
adjacent roof surface. The maximum height for all other antennas shall be twelve feet (12'). In multi-family residential zones, if an antenna is
mounted on a roof or overhangs a roof, then the antenna shall not intersect or otherwise project above a plane extending from the perimeter of the
roof upward and toward the interior of the building at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal;
7. The antenna shall be a neutral color. For the purposes of this subsection A7, black and gray shall be considered to be neutral colors. Furthermore,
the director of building and safety may determine that any color is neutral within the meaning of this subsection if such color blends with the
surrounding dominant color, such color helps camouflage the satellite dish antenna, and such color is neither bright, reflective nor metallic;
8. The antenna shall be screened from view from the public streets or located on the site area in a manner to eliminate visibility from the public streets.
Screening materials may consist of items such as walls, fences, buildings, mature plant materials, or earth berms. Notwithstanding the requirements
of this subsection A8, screening shall not be required if such screening would block the incoming reception signals from the dish antenna;
9. No advertising in any form shall be permitted on any part of an antenna, except for a six inch (6") square displaying the manufacturer's or
distributor's company name. The six inch (6") square area may not be on the concave side, nor on the upper fifty percent (50%) of the convex side;
10. In nonresidential zones, the antenna may not exceed a diameter of sixteen and one-half feet (161/2');
11. In nonresidential zones, the maximum height of the antenna as measured from grade, or if the antenna is not ground mounted, as measured from
that portion of the antenna closest to grade, shall be fifteen feet (15'). If an antenna is mounted on a building and exceeds the height of the roof, then
the antenna height shall not intersect or otherwise project above a plane projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward and toward the interior of
the building at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the horizontal.
B. Application Requirements: The application for a building permit or satellite dish approval pursuant to this section shall include a dimensioned site plan
depicting the proposed location, and the manufacturer's installation requirements and product specifications. The city building official may require any
additional information that would assist in determining visual intrusion and structural safety.
C. Architectural Review: In all zones except single-family residential (R-1) zones, the architectural commission shall review any proposed satellite dish
antenna to determine: whether the proposed color of the dish will blend with the dominant surrounding color or would otherwise be unobtrusive;
whether the dish can be installed in a location which would minimize visual intrusion while maintaining practical operation; and whether the dish can be
screened so that it is concealed from view from public streets.
If the proposed satellite dish antenna requires review under subsection D2 of this section, then such review shall be completed before architectural
review is conducted pursuant to this subsection.
D. Proposed Antennas That Do Not Meet Requirements:
1. If a person desires to install in a single-family residential zone a satellite dish antenna that does not meet the applicable requirements contained in
subsection A of this section, then that person may apply to the city for permission to install such antenna. The application shall be made and
considered pursuant to the procedures set forth in article 24.5 of this chapter. The reviewing authority shall consider the following factors for the
purpose of determining whether to approve the satellite dish antenna: a) whether the antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the scale
and massing of the streetscape, b) whether the antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the neighbors' access to light and air or the
neighbors' privacy, c) whether the antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the garden quality of the city, and d) whether the variation from
the requirements of subsection A of this section is necessary to provide the applicant with reasonable satellite signal reception. Application fees shall
be established by resolution of the city council.
2. If a person desires to install in a multi-family or nonresidential zone a satellite dish antenna that does not meet the applicable requirements contained
in subsection A of this section, or if a person desires to install more than one antenna in such a zone, then that person may apply to the city for
permission to install such antenna. The application shall be made and considered pursuant to article 36 of this chapter. The reviewing authority shall
consider the following factors for the purpose of determining whether to approve the satellite dish antenna: a) whether the antenna will have a
substantial adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape, b) whether the antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the
neighbors' access to light and air or the neighbors' privacy, c) whether the antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the garden quality of the
city, and d) whether the variation from the requirements of subsection A of this section is necessary to provide the applicant with reasonable satellite
signal reception. Application fees shall be established by resolution of the city council.
E. Existing Satellite Dish Antenna: Any satellite dish antenna for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this section but
which does not conform to this section shall, within three (3) years of the effective date of this section, be removed or brought into conformance with
this section. During the interim period, said nonconforming satellite dish antenna shall be maintained in good repair and in a neat and clean condition.
No structural alteration shall be made thereto, unless to preserve the safety of said antenna, or to bring the antenna into compliance with this section.
Any owner of a nonconforming antenna located in any single-family residential zone may apply for review and approval by the single-family
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 664/797
development review committee. Any owner of a nonconforming antenna located in any zone other than a single-family residential zone may apply for
review and approval by the city planning official. (Ord. 90-O-2090, eff. 3-8-1990; amd. Ord. 91-O-2114, eff. 4-19-1991; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995;
Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997)
10-3-2753: OUTDOOR VENDING:
No person shall engage in the business of selling of goods from an outdoor cart except pursuant to a permit lawfully issued under the provisions of title 4,
chapter 2, article 19 of this code. (Ord. 94-O-2220, eff. 12-23-1994)
10-3-2754: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall restrict the installation of public utility distribution facilities in a public right
of way, nor shall a conditional use permit be required for such facilities located in a public right of way. In addition, the following regulations shall apply to
the installation of public utilities on private property:
A. Residential And School Properties: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall restrict the installation of public
utility facilities on a residentially zoned site area or on site areas zoned for school uses, nor shall a conditional use permit be required for such facilities,
provided that such facilities are used solely for the distribution of the utility and provided that such facilities are no more extensive than necessary to
provide the public utility service to that site area. Furthermore, the public utility distribution facility shall serve no more than one site area unless
alternate locations in the public right of way are unavailable.
B. Commercial Properties: Except for the provisions of this chapter requiring architectural review, nothing in this chapter shall restrict the installation of
public utility facilities on a commercially zoned site area, nor shall a conditional use permit be required for such facilities provided that such facilities are
not the primary use of the property and such facilities are used solely for the distribution of the utility. (Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; amd. Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2755: ROBERTSON BOULEVARD AND THIRD STREET SETBACKS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, alter, or enlarge, or cause to be
erected, constructed, established, altered, or enlarged, any building, structure or improvement within ten feet (10') of the property line along either side of
that public street known and designated as Robertson Boulevard or within five feet (5') of the property line along either side of Third Street, except as
otherwise provided for that portion of Third Street located in the C-5 or public service zone. (1962 Code § 10-504; amd. Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994;
Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2756: RESTROOMS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, maintain, alter, or enlarge a building designed or used primarily for the purpose of
restrooms within twenty five feet (25') of the property line along any public street or road, or within twenty feet (20') of zones R-1, R-1.5, and R-4. Any such
building shall be screened in such a manner that it cannot be seen from any adjoining residential zone property or from any street if the property fronting
on such street and adjoining the lot upon which is situated the building is within either zones R-1, R-1.5, or R-4. (1962 Code § 10-508; amd. Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2757: ENTRANCES; TRACT 4988, LOTS 411, 412, AND 413:
In addition to any and all other provisions of this chapter, in Tract 4988 no outbuilding shall be placed in front of any principal building on the Hamilton
Drive front of Lots 411, 412, and 413.
The main and principal entrance of principal buildings on Lots 411, 412, and 413 of Tract 4988 shall be from Hamilton Drive, and such principal entrance
shall front on Hamilton Drive. (1962 Code § 10-528; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2758: ENTRANCES; CERTAIN LOTS IN TRACT 7710:
The main and principal entrance of principal buildings on Lots 106, 107, 108, 109, 174, 175, 176, 177, 242, 243, 244, 310, 311, 312, 395, 396, 397, 398,
471, 472, 473, 474, 539, 540, 541, 542, 607, 608, 609, and 610 of Tract 7710 shall front on Olympic Boulevard. (1962 Code § 10-529; amd. Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2759: NONCONFORMING WALLS, FENCES, AND HEDGES:
Any wall or fence constructed or any hedge planted or maintained in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and subject to
abatement in accordance with law. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-2760: MEDICAL OFFICES; OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS PROHIBITED:
Except as otherwise provided in section 10-3-1604.5 of this chapter, medical offices shall not provide overnight accommodations. (Ord. 87-O-2013, eff. 1-
14-1988; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 665/797
Article 27.7. Adult Entertainment Businesses
10-3-2770: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to prevent community wide adverse secondary effects that can be brought about by the unregulated operation of adult
entertainment businesses. These adverse secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values; increased vacancy rates in
residential and commercial areas; increased criminal activity; increased litter, noise, and vandalism; and interference with the enjoyment of residential
property in the vicinity of such businesses. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998)
10-3-2771: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: "Adult entertainment business" shall mean any of the following:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct one or more still or motion
picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the
exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers for sale, rent, or viewing
either adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise or both.
Adult Cabaret: An establishment that serves food or beverages and that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of
conduct presents live performances that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or feature any seminude person.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to show
films, computer generated images, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an
emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
Adult Theater: An establishment that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct presents live performances that
are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or feature any seminude person.
Modeling Studio: An establishment that provides, for any form of consideration, seminude figure models or figure models who expose specified
anatomical areas for the purpose of observation, sketching, photography, painting, sculpting or other depiction by persons paying such consideration.
This definition shall not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education.
Any business that, for any form of consideration, as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services
or entertainment characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MATERIAL: Any audiotape, book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, videotape
recording, or other visual representation, characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT MERCHANDISE: Adult entertainment implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos; auto sucks; vibrators;
edible underwear; benwa balls; inflatable orifices; anatomical balloons with orifices; simulated vaginas and similar adult entertainment devices that are
designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.
ADULT HOTEL/MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that either:
A. 1. Provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videos, slides or other photographic or electronic
reproductions that are characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas; and
2. Advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising
including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television.
B. Rents, leases or lets any single guestroom for less than any ten (10) hour period.
C. Rents, leases or lets any single guestroom more than twice in any twenty four (24) hour period.
D. Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent a guestroom for a time period less than ten (10) hours.
BUSINESS TRIANGLE AREA: All those parcels included in that area north of Wilshire Boulevard, west of the first alley west of North Crescent Drive, and
south of Santa Monica Boulevard (South Roadway), including all those parcels having frontage on the north side of the South Roadway of Santa Monica
Boulevard, from North Crescent Drive to Wilshire Boulevard but excluding those parcels having frontage on the north side of Wilshire Boulevard.
CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase.
DIRECTOR: The director of planning and community development of the city of Beverly Hills or the designee thereof.
HEARING OFFICER: The city manager of the city of Beverly Hills, or the designee thereof.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 666/797
OWNER: A. The sole proprietor of an adult entertainment business;
B. Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult entertainment business;
C. The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation that owns and operates an adult entertainment business; and
D. The person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the zone clearance holder for an adult entertainment business owned and operated by
the corporation.
PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool or athletic field within the city that is under the control, operation or management of the city or any other public
entity.
REGULAR AND SUBSTANTIAL COURSE OF CONDUCT: Any of the following conditions exist:
A. At least thirty percent (30%) of the stock-in-trade is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided,
however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises.
B. At least thirty percent (30%) of the total display area is devoted to adult entertainment material, adult entertainment merchandise, or both; provided,
however, that this criteria shall not apply to mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises.
C. The business presents or offers to present, on any four (4) or more separate days within any thirty (30) day period, live entertainment that is
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or features any seminude person.
D. The business presents or offers to present, on any four (4) or more separate days within any thirty (30) day period, nonlive entertainment that is
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas.
E. At least thirty percent (30%) of the gross receipts of the business are derived from the sale, trade, rental, display or presentation of services,
products, materials or entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical
areas.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A structure that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
SCHOOL: A. Any child or day care facility; and
B. Any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in the courses of study required by the California Education Code
and maintained pursuant to standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school,
middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution
of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing completely and opaquely covers the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and nipple of the female breast, but
does not completely and opaquely cover the female breast below the top of the areola.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business, agency or person that, for any form of consideration, provides a place where three (3) or more persons, not
all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified
anatomical areas.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and nipple of the female breast;
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;
C. Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection A or B of this definition.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Shall mean the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
B. Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
D. Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with, any of the other activities described in subsections A through C of this definition. (Ord. 98-O-
2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-19-1999; Ord. 01-O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001; Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002; Ord. 02-O-2396, eff. 4-
26-2002; Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 667/797
10-3-2772: ZONE CLEARANCE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment business unless the owner of such business first obtains
from the director a zone clearance for such business. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998)
10-3-2773: ZONE CLEARANCE APPLICATION:
A. Applications for a zone clearance shall be submitted on a form provided by the director and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
an amount established by resolution of the city council for zone clearance applications, which amount shall be set forth in the city's official fee
schedule. The application shall be signed by the applicant and either the record owner of the property or the lessor of the premises (if the business
premises are leased to the applicant business) where the adult entertainment business is to be conducted.
B. If the director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and,
upon request of the applicant, shall return the application. As a convenience to the applicant, upon request of the applicant, the director shall grant the
applicant an extension of time of ten (10) calendar days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying the requested
permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. Unless the applicant requests an extension of time
pursuant to this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve the director of the duty to make a decision within the time limits set
forth in section 10-3-2774 of this article. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 1-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 1-19-1999; Ord. 01-
O-2386, eff. 12-9-2001)
10-3-2774: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF ZONE CLEARANCE:
The director shall, within thirty (30) city business days of the filing of an application, approve and issue a zone clearance if a complete application has been
submitted and the requirements of this article have been met; otherwise the zone clearance shall be denied. Notice of the approval or denial of the zone
clearance shall be given to the applicant in writing by first class mail, postage prepaid, deposited in the course of transmission with the United States
postal service within three (3) city business days of the date of such decision. If the application is denied, the director shall attach to the notice a statement
of the reasons for the denial. The times set forth in this section shall not be extended except upon the written consent of the applicant. Any interested
person may appeal the decision of the director to the hearing officer in accordance with this article. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319,
eff. 1-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 1-19-1999)
10-3-2775: LOCATION CRITERIA:
A. An adult entertainment business may be located in the business triangle, provided such business complies with all of the following requirements:
1. The adult entertainment business is not within three hundred feet (300') of any other adult entertainment business located within or outside of the
city.
2. The adult entertainment business is not within three hundred feet (300') of any residential use located within or outside of the city.
3. The adult entertainment business is not within three hundred feet (300') of any park, religious institution or school located within or outside of the city.
4. The adult entertainment business is not located on the same block as any other adult entertainment business.
5. The adult entertainment business does not occupy street frontage in excess of thirty five feet (35').
B. The distances set forth in subsections A1 through A3 of this section shall be measured as a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from
the property line of the property containing the adult entertainment business to the property line of the property so used at the time of submission of the
permit application.
C. No adult entertainment business may be located within the city except as provided in this section. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 02-O-
2391, eff. 3-8-2002)
10-3-2776: ZONE CLEARANCE NONTRANSFERABLE:
A. No person shall operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of a zone clearance at any place other than the address of the adult
entertainment business stated in the application for the zone clearance.
B. No zone clearance issued pursuant to this article shall be transferrable.
C. Any attempt to transfer a zone clearance is hereby declared invalid and the zone clearance shall automatically become void effective the date of such
attempted transfer. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998)
10-3-2777: NUMBER OF BUSINESSES:
(Rep. by Ord. 02-O-2402, eff. 6-20-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 668/797
10-3-2778: REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE:
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult entertainment businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other applicable provisions of this code or other law. Notwithstanding the preceding, neither a conditional use permit for a
nightclub use nor a permit for public dancing shall be required for an adult entertainment business. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2386,
eff. 12-9-2001)
10-3-2779: APPEALS:
A. Any interested person may appeal the director's issuance or denial of issuance of a zone clearance to the hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
B. A written appeal petition, and a nonrefundable appeal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, must be filed with the city clerk within ten
(10) calendar days after the decision of the director; provided, however, that if the ten (10) days expires on a date that city hall is not open for business,
then the appeal period shall be extended to the next city business day. Failure to file a timely appeal petition, together with the nonrefundable appeal
fee, deprives the hearing officer of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
C. The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the director's decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances
that the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the director's decision.
D. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and take the matter under submission for decision no later than thirty (30) city business days following the
timely filing of an appeal, unless the applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) consent in writing to an extension. At least ten (10) calendar
days prior to such hearing, written notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) by U.S. mail with a proof
of service attached.
E. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the hearing officer. All parties involved shall have a right to: 1) offer
testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; 2) be represented by counsel; and 3) confront and cross examine witnesses.
Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.
F. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, in any hearing under this article the burden is on the city to prove that the determination of the director
that is being appealed is reasonable and not an abuse of discretion.
G. The hearing officer shall, within ten (10) city business days from the submission of the matter for decision, render a written decision supported by
findings. No later than three (3) city business days after the hearing officer's decision, notice of the decision and a copy thereof shall be mailed by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: "You are hereby notified that the time
within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6."
H. The applicant and appellant (if different than the applicant) may seek judicial review of the hearing officer's decision in accordance with section 1-5-302
of this code. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998; amd. Ord. 99-O-2319, eff. 2-5-1999; Ord. 99-O-2321, eff. 2-19-1999; Ord. 99-O-2337, eff. 11-19-1999)
10-3-2780: EXISTING ADULT BUSINESSES:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the provisions of this article shall be applicable to all adult entertainment businesses described
herein whether such businesses were established before or after the effective date of this article.
B. Any adult entertainment business legally in business prior to the effective date of this article shall have six (6) months to comply with the terms of this
article. (Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998)
Article 28. Multiple-Family Residential Development Standards
10-3-2800: APPLICABILITY:
Except as specifically provided in articles 12.5 and 12.8 of this chapter to accommodate housing for seniors and disabled persons, the development
standards set forth in this article shall apply to all properties zoned R-4, R-4X1, and R-4X2. In addition, where specifically noted, the development
standards shall apply to R-3 properties. Nothing required by this article shall be construed to supersede the requirements set forth in chapter 2, article 7 of
this title regarding the conversion of the form of ownership of an existing rental apartment building that has been determined by the planning commission
to be a "character contributing building" in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this title to a common interest development within the meaning and
definitions of that article. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-3-2801: DENSITY:
The following provisions shall govern the number of units that may be constructed on a site area:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 669/797
A. Within One Hundred Seventy Feet Of A Single-Family Lot: If a site area zoned for multiple-family residential uses is located less than one hundred
seventy feet (170') from the closest property zoned for single-family residential uses, then the following density standards shall apply:
1. Lots That Do Not Exceed Sixty Feet In Width: If the site area does not exceed sixty feet (60') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for
each one thousand seven hundred (1,700) square feet of site area.
2. Lots Between Sixty And One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area is greater than sixty feet (60') in width, but does not exceed one hundred
twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for each one thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) square feet of site area.
3. Lots That Exceed One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area exceeds one hundred twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may
be constructed for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of site area.
B. Streets Less Than Thirty Four Feet Wide: If a site area zoned for multiple-family residential use is not governed by subsection A of this section and is
located on a street that is less than thirty four feet (34') in width, then the following density standards shall apply:
1. Lots That Do Not Exceed Sixty Feet In Width: If the site area does not exceed sixty feet (60') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for
each one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of site area.
2. Lots Between Sixty And One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area exceeds sixty feet (60') in width, but does not exceed one hundred
twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for each one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of site area.
3. Lots That Exceed One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area exceeds one hundred twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may
be constructed for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of site area.
C. All Others: If a site area zoned for multiple-family residential uses is located at least one hundred seventy feet (170') from the closest property zoned for
single family residential uses and the site area is located on a street that is at least thirty four feet (34') in width, then the following density standards
shall apply:
1. Lots That Do Not Exceed Sixty Feet In Width: If the site area does not exceed sixty feet (60') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for
each one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet of site area.
2. Lots Between Sixty And One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area exceeds sixty feet (60') in width, but does not exceed one hundred
twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may be constructed for each one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet of site area.
3. Lots That Exceed One Hundred Twenty Feet In Width: If the site area exceeds one hundred twenty feet (120') in width, then one dwelling unit may
be constructed for each nine hundred (900) square feet of site area.
D. Calculation Of Density:
1. An additional dwelling unit may be permitted on a site area if, after assigning the appropriate amount of square footage to each dwelling unit, the
remaining square footage of the site area exceeds seventy five percent (75%) of the minimum required square footage per dwelling unit.
2. One additional dwelling unit may be permitted in a multiple-family residential building, and such additional unit shall not be subject to the density
limitations of this section, provided that the additional unit is an efficiency unit and that the multiple-family residential building complies with all other
development standards of this article. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 00-O-2351, eff. 10-20-2000)
10-3-2802: MINIMUM FLOOR AREA FOR DWELLING UNITS:
The following minimum floor area requirements shall apply to dwelling units within a multiple-family residential development:
A. Efficiency Unit: An efficiency unit shall have a minimum floor area of six hundred (600) square feet.
B. One Bedroom: A one bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand (1,000) square feet.
C. Two Bedrooms: A two (2) bedroom dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand three hundred (1,300) square feet.
D. Three Or More Bedrooms: A dwelling unit with three (3) or more bedrooms shall have a minimum floor area of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet.
E. Dwelling Unit Defined: Every room with a separate entrance from the street or from a common area of a building, which room is capable of being used
as a bedroom, shall be deemed to be a separate dwelling unit if such room has its own bathroom or an adjoining bathroom.
F. Outdoor Living Space: One-half (1/2) of the square footage of outdoor living space required by section 10-3-2803 of this chapter may be counted as part
of the floor area of a dwelling unit if such outdoor living space does not project into any required yard, is contiguous to the dwelling unit, and is
designated for the exclusive use of the dwelling unit. However, the outdoor living space shall not be counted as more than ten percent (10%) of the
required minimum floor area of the dwelling unit. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 00-O-2351, eff. 10-20-
2000)
10-3-2803: OUTDOOR LIVING SPACE REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 670/797
Each site area in an R-3, R-4, R-4X1, or R-4X2 zone shall contain at least two hundred (200) square feet of usable outdoor living space for each dwelling
unit. Furthermore, the front yard of the site may not be counted toward this requirement to provide outdoor living space.
The outdoor living space shall comply with the following conditions:
A. Private outdoor living space contiguous to a dwelling unit shall be provided on or above the ground level and shall be screened from view from ground
level. Each dimension, including the length, width and depth of such space, shall be at least six feet (6').
B. Common outdoor living space developed for the use and recreation of all residents of the site area shall be provided on or above the ground level. Each
dimension, including the length, width and depth of such space, shall be at least fifteen feet (15').
C. Outdoor living space that projects into a required yard above the ground level shall not satisfy the requirements of this section.
D. No portion of any parking space, driveway, pedestrian accessway, or utility area, such as a pool equipment area or trash area, shall constitute outdoor
living space.
E. All required outdoor living space shall be developed and maintained in a neat and orderly manner and shall be safe, adequately surfaced, and
accessible to the occupants of the dwelling units served by the space. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2804: HEIGHT LIMITS OF BUILDINGS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
No building or structure located on a site that is less than or equal to sixty feet (60') in width shall exceed three (3) stories or thirty three feet (33') in height.
In addition, no building or structure shall exceed the relevant height limitation imposed by districts A through C as identified on the height district maps
adopted by the city council and on file in the office of the city clerk and in the department of planning and community development.
A. Height Limits Of Districts: The following height limitation districts are hereby established in the multiple-family residential zones of the city:
1. Height district A: Structures shall not exceed three (3) stories nor thirty three feet (33') in height.
2. Height district B: Structures shall not exceed four (4) stories nor forty five feet (45') in height.
3. Height district C: Structures shall not exceed five (5) stories nor fifty five feet (55') in height.
B. Exceptions:
1. Rooftop Bathrooms: A maximum of two (2) rooftop bathrooms associated with rooftop swimming pools or spas may exceed the height limit of a
building in an R-3, R-4, R-4X1, or R-4X2 zone, provided that:
a. The maximum total area of all rooftop bathrooms does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet;
b. Such structures do not exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from the adjacent roof deck;
c. Such structures do not exceed thirty three percent (33%) of the roof area upon which they are located;
d. Such structures do not exceed or intersect a line projecting from the perimeter of the roof upward at an angle of forty five degrees (45°) from the
horizontal;
e. Pursuant to the provisions of article 28.5 of this chapter, the reviewing authority issues an R-4 permit upon a finding that the subject structures will
not adversely affect the privacy of neighboring properties or access of neighboring properties to light, nor will the subject structures significantly
increase noise to adjacent properties.
2. Additions To Buildings With Legally Nonconforming Height: If a legally constructed building located adjacent to the business triangle in an R-4 zone
does not conform to the height restrictions set forth in this section, additions to existing dwelling units on the nonconforming story of such building
may exceed the height restrictions set forth in this article provided that:
a. The additions do not exceed the maximum existing height of the legally nonconforming building as defined in article 1 of this chapter;
b. The additions do not cause the nonconforming story of the building to occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the floor area of the floor
immediately below it;
c. The additions are compatible with the building design, the nearby streetscape, and surrounding development. To ensure compliance with this
requirement, any additions proposed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of article 30 of this chapter concerning architectural
review;
d. The additions do not result in the creation of any new bedrooms;
e. The additions are not located in the rear thirty three percent (33%) of the existing building footprint if the building is located on a property where
the rear property line is adjacent to a residential zone; and
f. Pursuant to the provisions of article 28.5 of this chapter, the reviewing authority issues an R-4 permit upon finding that the additions will not
adversely affect the privacy of neighboring properties, access of neighboring properties to light and air, or the integrity of the streetscape.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 671/797
g. A public benefit is offered to the city that offsets any long term impacts to the affordability of the city's housing inventory that result from the
additions.
For the purposes of this exception, the "business triangle" shall be defined as the area bounded by the centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, the
centerline of Santa Monica Boulevard, south roadway, and the centerline of North Crescent Drive.
C. Height District Boundaries: The boundaries of height districts A, B, and C are identified on the height district maps adopted by the city council and on
file in the office of the city clerk and in the department of planning and community development. For purposes of clarification, where any single block is
divided into two (2) or more height districts without an alley separating such height districts, the following provisions shall be applicable:
1. For those multiple-family residential zoned blocks lying within the area bounded on the east by the first alley west of Doheny Drive, bounded on the
west by the first alley west of Spalding Drive, and bounded by Wilshire Boulevard on the north and Charleville Boulevard on the south:
a. The first two (2) lots adjacent to the commercial zone south of Wilshire Boulevard shall be in height district C;
b. The first two (2) lots north of Charleville Boulevard shall be in height district A, excepting therefrom the first two (2) lots north of Charleville
Boulevard and lying within the first block west of Spalding Drive, the first two (2) lots north of Charleville Boulevard and lying within the first block
west of Reeves Drive, and the first two (2) lots north of Charleville Boulevard between Rodeo Drive and the first alley west of Rodeo Drive;
c. All remaining lots in said area shall be in height district B.
2. The first two (2) lots at the southwest corner of Charleville Boulevard and El Camino Drive and the first two (2) lots at the southeast corner of
Charleville Boulevard and El Camino Drive shall be in height district A.
3. Those multiple-family residential zoned lots lying south of Olympic Boulevard and abutting Shirley Place or Spalding Drive shall be in height district
A; provided that the third story is set back from any common property line an additional fifteen feet (15') beyond any setback required by this code.
4. For those multiple-family residential zoned lots south of Wilshire Boulevard, north of Gregory Way, west of Tower Drive, and east of La Cienega
Boulevard:
a. The first two (2) lots adjacent to the commercial zone south of Wilshire Boulevard shall be in height district C;
b. The first two (2) lots north of Gregory Way shall be in height district A; and
c. All remaining lots shall be in height district B.
5. For those blocks bounded by Burton Way on the south, Third Street on the north, Maple Drive on the west, and the city limits on the east:
a. The first two (2) lots adjacent to Burton Way shall be in height district C; and
b. All remaining lots shall be in height district B. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 16-O-2699, eff. 3-18-
2016)
10-3-2805: PROHIBITION AGAINST BASEMENT DWELLING UNITS:
No dwelling unit in a multiple-family residential zone shall have a finished floor level that is more than one foot (1') below the adjacent grade. (Ord. 95-0-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2806: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES; FRONT SETBACKS AND MODULATION REQUIREMENTS:
The front setback for all R-3, R-4, R-4X1, and R-4X2 zoned property shall be as shown on the "residential street setback map of the city of Beverly Hills"
on file in the department of building and safety. If the front setback for a site area is not shown on such map, then the front setback shall be fifteen feet
(15').
A. Exception; Properties Previously Zoned R-1.5: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the front setback for any site area heretofore rezoned
from zone R-1.5 to zone R-4 shall be fifteen feet (15').
B. Modulation Requirement For Lots That Do Not Exceed Fifty Feet In Width: In addition to the front setback otherwise required by this section, the front
facade of a building constructed on a lot that does not exceed fifty feet (50') in width shall be modulated so that a portion or portions of the building are
set back at least five feet (5') from the front setback line and the area of the modulation created by this additional setback equals or exceeds the
requirements set forth in subsection C of this section.
1. R-3 Properties Excepted: The provisions of this subsection B shall not apply to those properties located in the R-3 Zone.
C. Modulation Requirement For Lots That Exceed Fifty Feet In Width: In addition to the front setback otherwise required by this section, the front facade of
a building constructed on a lot that exceeds fifty feet (50') in width shall be modulated so that a portion or portions of the building are set back at least
ten feet (10') from the front setback line and the area of the modulation created by this additional setback equals or exceeds the requirements set forth
as follows:
1. R-3 Properties Excepted: The provisions of this subsection C shall not apply to those properties located in the R-3 Zone.
2. Area Of Modulation Required: For buildings that do not exceed three (3) stories in height, the area of the modulation shall be three percent (3%) of
the aggregate principal building area or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, whichever is less. For buildings that are four (4) stories in
height, the area of the modulation shall be three and one-half percent (3.5%) of the aggregate principal building area or one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet, whichever is less. For buildings that are five (5) stories in height, the area of the modulation shall be four percent (4%) of the
aggregate principal building area or one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, whichever is less.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 672/797
For the purposes of this section, the "aggregate principal building area" shall mean the principal building area of the site multiplied by the number of
stories of the building.
3. "Area Of The Modulation" Defined: For the purposes of this subsection C and subsection B of this section, the "area of the modulation" shall be
calculated as follows:
AM = (D x W x S)
AM = The area of modulation in square feet
D = The depth of the additional setback in feet as measured from the front setback line
As provided in this subsection C and subsection B of this section, the depth of the additional setback shall be at least five feet (5') on lots that do not
exceed fifty feet (50') in width and ten feet (10') on lots that exceed fifty feet (50') in width. Additionally, without regard to the actual depth of the setback, D
shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') for the purposes of calculating this formula.
W = The width of the additional setback
S = The number of stories affected by the setback
The depth and width of the setback shall be measured in the same manner as the depth and width of a lot.
a. As provided in the above formula, the depth of an additional setback in excess of twenty five feet (25') shall not be considered part of the "area of
modulation".
b. If a facade has been modulated in more than one location, then the "area of the modulation" shall be the sum of the areas of each separate
modulation. No ground floor area set back from the front setback line for the purpose of accommodating a garage entrance or balconies or other
usable open space shall be counted toward the required area of modulation. However, balconies or other usable open space on the top floor of a
structure can be counted toward the required area of modulation, provided there is no floor or level above them.
D. Exception; R-4 Permit To Allow Reduction Of Modulation Requirement: A reviewing authority may issue an R-4 permit to allow the depth of the
additional setback required by subsections B and C of this section to be reduced if the reviewing authority determines that the proposed development,
as modulated, does not have an adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape.
E. Modulation Requirements For Large Scale Multiple Residential Developments: Except as hereafter provided large scale multiple residential projects
shall comply with the modulation and front setback requirements otherwise required by this section. For the purposes of this section, "large scale
multiple residential developments" shall mean a multiple residential building with a width of one hundred feet (100') or more.
1. Legislative Purpose: The city council finds that the scale and massing of buildings in the R-4 zone is of concern to the community at large. In order to
encourage the development that promotes smaller scale structures that maintain the character and individuality of the city's existing neighborhoods,
the city council finds it is necessary to modify development standards to require additional modulation for certain large scale multiple residential
developments to ensure that such developments maintain a scale which fosters a sense of place and identity without compromising the variety and
diversity of housing options available to the city's residents. The city council further finds that this article promotes the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare by preserving both the quality of life of the city's residents and the character of the city's existing residential
neighborhoods.
2. Standard Modulation Requirements Modified: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no minimum or maximum setback from the front
setback line shall apply to the modulation requirements for large scale multiple residential projects.
3. Additional Modulation Requirements For Large Scale Multiple Residential Developments: In addition to the modulation and front setback otherwise
required by this section, large scale multiple residential developments shall also comply with the requirements set forth below:
a. Additional Modulation: Large scale multiple residential projects shall provide an additional area of front modulation based on the following formula:
AM = WBA x 5 feet x S
AM = The area of additional modulation in square feet
WBA = The width of the principal buildable area
S = The number of stories
If a facade has been modulated in more than one location, then the "area of the modulation" shall be the sum of the areas of each separate modulation.
No ground floor area set back from the front setback line for the purpose of accommodating a garage entrance or balconies or other usable open space
shall be counted toward the required area of modulation. However, balconies or other usable open space on the top floor of a structure can be counted
toward the required area of modulation, provided there is no floor or level above such balconies or open space.
b. Setback Requirement: A minimum of sixty percent (60%) and a maximum of seventy percent (70%) of the front facade of the first two (2) stories of
a large scale multiple residential project shall be built to the front setback line.
The planning commission may issue an R-4 permit to allow less than sixty percent (60%) of the front facade of the first two (2) stories of a large
scale multiple residential development to be built to the front setback line if the planning commission finds that the proposed development would
not have an adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 673/797
c. Corner Lot Modulation Requirement: If a large scale multiple residential project is located on a corner lot, the required front building modulation
area (the building elevation facing the principal street) shall be allocated proportionately between the elevation of the building which faces the
principal street and the elevation of the building which faces the secondary street. Such allocation shall be based on the percentage of building
length to street frontage for each elevation.
d. Walls, Fences And Hedges: Any walls, fences and/or hedges which enclose any ground level outdoor living spaces or courtyards shall be limited
to a maximum height of six feet (6'). Any gates which provide entry or exit to such outdoor living spaces or courtyards shall be "open to public
view" as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-
11-1998; Ord. 03-O-2424, eff. 3-7-2003; Ord. 15-O-2675, eff. 5-22-2015)
10-3-2807: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES; SIDE SETBACKS:
The following side setback requirements shall govern the R-3, R-4, R-4X1, and R-4X2 zones:
A. For those sites occupied by buildings of no more than three (3) stories, or by buildings of no more than thirty three feet (33') in height, the sum of the
side setbacks from the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least seventeen feet (17'). In addition, each side setback shall be at least eight feet (8').
B. For those sites occupied by buildings of four (4) stories or by buildings of greater than thirty three feet (33') in height, but less than or equal to forty five
feet (45') in height, the sum of the side setbacks from the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least nineteen feet (19'). In addition, each side
setback shall be at least eight feet (8').
C. For those sites occupied by buildings of more than four (4) stories or by buildings of greater than forty five feet (45') in height, the sum of the side
setbacks from the two (2) longest side lot lines shall be at least twenty three feet (23'). In addition, each side setback shall be at least nine feet (9').
(Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2808: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES; REAR SETBACKS:
The rear setback for any building or structure in the R-3, R-4, R-4X1, or R-4X2 zone shall be fifteen feet (15') from the rear lot line or twenty two and onehalf
feet (221/2') from the centerline of the abutting alley, whichever is greater.
A. Exception; Tower Drive: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the rear setback for those site areas fronting on the east side of Tower Drive
shall be twenty feet (20').
B. Exception; Replacement Of Garage Or Carport: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if a garage or carport associated with existing
residential structures is lost due to casualty, or is proposed to be replaced, a reviewing authority may issue an R-4 permit to authorize the replacement
of such structure within the rear yard pursuant to article 28.5 of this chapter if that authority finds that such structure is the only feasible means to
replace such parking.
C. Exception; Expansion Of Garage Or Carport: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an existing, legally nonconforming garage or carport
may be expanded within the required rear yard pursuant to an R-4 permit as provided in article 28.5 of this chapter if:
1. Such garage or carport is expanded solely for the purpose of providing parking for a dwelling unit or units constructed prior to the expansion,
2. After expansion, the total parking provided for the dwelling unit or units will not exceed the parking required by current zoning standards if the
dwelling unit or units were newly constructed, and
3. The reviewing authority finds that:
a. The proposed structure does not exceed one story and does not exceed fourteen feet (14') in height or the height of the existing garage or carport,
whichever is lower;
b. The proposed structure is designed to be used only for off street parking purposes;
c. The proposed structure is set back from the rear property line a minimum of five feet (5') to allow for an adequate vehicular turning radius to
provide ingress to and egress from the proposed structure;
d. The proposed structure shall match the character of the existing garage and shall not create any significantly adverse impacts on the privacy of
neighboring properties;
e. The proposed structure shall not create any significantly adverse impacts on neighboring properties by blocking access to light and air; and
f. The proposed structure does not impede or prevent solid waste collection services.
Any addition to a garage or carport permitted pursuant to this subsection C shall be removed upon the replacement of the building served by the
garage or carport or upon any expansion to such building if the expansion would require the provision of additional parking.
D. Exception; Addition Of Units Above Garage Or Carport: The provisions of this section shall not apply if a reviewing authority issues an R-4 permit to
allow a property owner to add one or more units above an existing garage or carport pursuant to section 10-3-2819 of this article.
E. Exception; Large Scale Multiple-Residential Projects: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a large scale multiple residential project may
reduce the required rear yard setback from fifteen feet (15') to ten feet (10') to offset the loss of usable floor area to the modulation requirements of
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 674/797
subsection 10-3-2806E of this article, provided that such reduction does not result in a floor area that exceeds the maximum allowable floor area for the
subject site and further provided that the rear property line of the subject site does not abut property zoned R-1 unless the subject site is separated
from such R-1 zoned property by an alley. For the purposes of this section, "maximum allowable floor area" shall mean the maximum floor area
potentially developable on a multiple residential site which confirms to all setback requirements and is developed at the maximum density permitted by
this article. For the purposes of calculating the maximum allowable floor area, the setback lines established by the applicable provisions of this article
shall be used. No reduction in any setback line, whether or not authorized by any procedure set forth in this article, shall be considered in calculating
the maximum allowable floor area, and the maximum allowable floor area shall not be increased as the result of a reduction in the required setback
lines.
1. Subject to the requirements set forth in article 28.5 of this chapter, the planning commission may permit, through an R-4 permit, a reduction in the
required rear setback for large scale multiple residential projects to a minimum of five feet (5') provided:
a. The rear property line of the site seeking the reduction does not abut property zoned R-1 or is separated from such R-1 zoned property by an
alley.
b. Such reduction is granted to offset the loss of usable floor area to the modulation requirements of subsection 10-3-2806E of this article, and such
reduction does not result in a floor area that exceeds the maximum allowable floor area for the subject site; and
c. The planning commission finds that:
(1) The proposed reduction in the rear setback does not create any significantly adverse impacts on the scale and massing of the streetscape;
(2) The proposed reduction in the rear setback does not create any significantly adverse impacts on the neighboring properties by blocking access
to light and air;
(3) The proposed reduction in the rear setback does not create any significantly adverse impacts on the privacy of neighboring properties; and
(4) The proposed reduction in the rear setback does not create any significantly adverse impacts on alley access. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995;
amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 01-O-2388, eff. 1-4-2002; Ord. 03-O-2424, eff. 3-7-2003)
10-3-2809: MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES; LENGTH OF BUILDINGS:
No portion of a building in the R-3, R-4, R-4X1, or R-4X2 zones above the ground level shall exceed one hundred seventy five feet (175') in either width or
depth. If a building exceeds one hundred seventy five feet (175') in width or depth belowground level, then any two (2) portions of the building
aboveground level that would together exceed one hundred seventy five feet (175') shall be considered separate buildings with an assumed common lot
line between them, and each portion shall be set back from such assumed common lot line as prescribed in section 10-3-2807 of this article. (Ord. 95-0-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1999)
10-3-2810: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO REQUIRED SIDE YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any side yard of a multiple-family residential site area except the following:
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the requirements of this chapter;
B. Roof eaves projecting no more than twenty inches (20") into such yard provided that such eaves have been approved by the architectural commission;
C. Balconies that comply with all of the following provisions:
1. The balcony does not project into the required yard more than twenty four inches (24");
2. The total length of the balcony at any one story does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the length of the wall on which it is located;
3. Any end of any balcony is not closer than three feet (3') to the front or rear corner of the building; and
4. The enclosure of the balcony does not exceed fifty four inches (54") in height;
D. Exit stairs at or below the first floor level provided that handrails for such stairs shall not extend more than forty two inches (42") above the first floor
level;
E. Swimming pools and basement garages provided no part of such structure exceeds three feet (3') above the adjacent grade at any point, and no
mechanical equipment servicing any such pool is located within a required side yard;
F. Gas and electric meter enclosures projecting no more than eighteen inches (18") into such yard; and
G. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, but excluding balconies, projecting no more than twelve inches
(12") into such yard. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2811: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO FRONT AND STREET SIDE YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any front yard or street side yard of a multiple-family residential site area except the following:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 675/797
A. A fence, gate, or wall that otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter;
B. Roof eaves projecting no more than four feet (4') into such yard provided that such eaves have been approved by the architectural commission;
C. Balconies that comply with all of the following provisions:
1. The balcony does not project into the required yard more than three feet (3');
2. Any end of the balcony does not project beyond the corner of the building; and
3. The enclosure of the balcony does not exceed fifty four inches (54") in height;
D. Entries and exit stairs at or below the first floor level provided that handrails for such elements shall not exceed forty two inches (42") above the first
floor level;
E. Basement garages provided no part of such structure is higher than two feet (2') below the finished level of the adjacent sidewalk and at least two feet
(2') of soil depth is provided above the garage for planting purposes;
1. Exception; R-4 Permit: A reviewing authority may issue an R-4 permit to allow a basement garage to encroach into the front setback even if the
garage is not two feet (2') below the finished level of the adjacent sidewalk if the building is subject to the requirements of title 9, chapter 7 of this
code concerning protection against water intrusion, no portion of the encroachment is more than three feet (3') above grade, and the reviewing
authority determines that the applicant will provide alternate means to accommodate substantial landscaping in the front yard;
F. Architectural projections, such as half timbers, corbels, and window and door accents, but excluding balconies, projecting no more than twelve inches
(12") into such yard. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 96-0-2269, eff. 11-15-1996)
10-3-2812: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS INTO REAR YARDS:
No structure or element of a building may encroach into any rear yard of a multiple-family residential site area except the following:
A. All structures or elements as set forth in subsections 10-3-2811A through D and F of this article;
B. Basement garages provided no part of such structure exceeds three feet (3') above the adjacent grade at any point;
C. Trash storage facilities;
D. Swimming pools provided no part of such structure exceeds three feet (3') above the adjacent grade; and
E. Garage exhaust vent stacks. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2813: PAVING OF SETBACKS; MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no portion of any front yard within a multiple-family residential zone shall be paved, except for not more
than one walkway not exceeding five feet (5') in width and one driveway not exceeding the width of its curb cut.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, more than one walkway of up to five feet (5') in width may be paved in a front yard to provide equivalent
access to a building in accordance with the requirements of local, state, and federal handicapped accessibility laws provided that such additional
walkways are necessary because handicapped accessibility requirements cannot reasonably be met without the provision of such additional walkways.
C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a reviewing authority may permit more than one walkway of up to five feet (5') in width to be paved within
a front yard pursuant to an R-4 permit as provided in article 28.5 of this chapter if: 1) the walkway provides direct access to the primary entryway of an
individual unit within a building, and 2) the reviewing authority finds that the proposal would not significantly and adversely affect the streetscape,
including opportunities for landscaping.
D. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a reviewing authority may grant the equivalent of one five foot (5') wide walkway in the front yard per fifty
feet (50') of frontage along the front lot line of the subject site pursuant to an R-4 permit as provided in article 28.5 of this chapter if the reviewing
authority finds that the proposal is compatible with the nearby streetscape and the scale of the surrounding development. For the purposes of this
subsection, any fraction in excess of a multiple of fifty feet (50') of frontage shall be rounded down. Not more than one walkway shall exceed a width of
five feet (5'), and such walkway shall not exceed a width of fifteen feet (15').
E. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the planning commission may grant the equivalent of one 5-foot wide walkway in the front yard per fifty
feet (50') of frontage along the front lot line of the subject site, in any configuration, pursuant to an R-4 permit as provided in article 28.5 of this chapter,
if the planning commission finds that the proposal is compatible with the nearby streetscape and the scale of the surrounding development. For the
purposes of this subsection, any fraction in excess of a multiple of fifty feet (50') of frontage shall be rounded down. (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-1995;
amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 676/797
10-3-2813.5: SYNTHETIC TURF IN FRONT YARDS:
Synthetic turf shall be allowed as landscaping for the purposes of this article provided that the following provisions are satisfied for synthetic turf placed in
front yards:
A. Stage D Required: Applications for the use of synthetic turf may only be approved, and permits for installation may only be issued when the city council
has declared and implemented stage D water conservation measures. Synthetic turf that is legally installed during stage D declared periods may be
retained thereafter, even if the city council withdraws the stage D declaration, provided the synthetic turf is maintained in accordance with all applicable
standards.
B. Permit Required: A building permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any synthetic turf in the front yard visible from the public right of way of a
residentially zoned property. Upon application for a building permit the following shall be submitted to the community development department:
1. A landscape plan that includes:
a. Dimensions and details of the landscaped area including the synthetic turf and other landscaping materials.
b. Drawings that include scaled cross sections of the proposed landscaping materials and details showing the methods of installation and attachment
of the synthetic turf as well as drainage information.
2. Material description including manufacturer's product data, specifications and installation instructions, installer information and qualifications, and
warranty information.
3. A sample of the proposed synthetic turf material that is at least twelve inches by twelve inches (12" x 12").
4. Maintenance information for the synthetic turf.
C. Coverage: Synthetic turf located in the front yard may be used for up to seventy percent (70%) of the landscaped area but no more than forty percent
(40%) of the entire front yard area. Synthetic turf shall not be located:
1. Within the public right of way/parkway.
2. Within the dripline of any native or "heritage tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this chapter. Further, the installation of turf shall not disturb the
area within the dripline of any native or heritage tree.
3. Within eighteen inches (18") of a front lot line. The eighteen inch (18") buffer between the front lot line and synthetic turf shall be landscaped with
living plant material.
4. Within three feet (3') of a multiple-family dwelling.
5. In any area that is used for the parking or driving of motor vehicles.
D. Material: Synthetic turf in a front yard must simulate the appearance of natural live grass and shall:
1. Be of a type known as cut-pile infill with parallel long slit blades. The long slit blades shall be manufactured from polyethylene or polypropylene. The
minimum pile length shall be one and three-fourths inches (13/4") and the maximum pile length shall be two and one-half inches (21/2"). The turf shall
contain a beige or tan thatch layer. The synthetic turf blades (not including the thatch layer) shall be required to contain at least two (2) colors. The
synthetic turf shall comply with all federal and state standards related to lead and heavy metal content. Turf that is made from recycled materials is
encouraged. The use of indoor or outdoor plastic or nylon carpeting is prohibited.
2. Be constructed to maximize dimensional stability, resist damage during normal use and to minimize UV degradation. Further, the synthetic turf shall
be resistant to staining, weather, insects, rot, mildew and fungus growth, and shall be nonallergenic and nontoxic.
3. Contain an infill material of clean silica sand or zeolite material that is brushed into the synthetic turf to keep the blades upright and achieve a natural
grass look. Any replacement infill shall be silica sand or zeolite material. Rubber infill is prohibited.
4. Be affixed to a permeable triple layer primary backing with a tuft bind strength of at least eight (8) pounds. The backing shall allow water to percolate
through the synthetic turf at a drain rate of at least thirty inches (30") per hour. The synthetic turf system shall allow for the free movement and
drainage of water through the system to prevent runoff, pooling, and flooding.
5. Have a manufacturer's warranty lasting at least eight (8) years.
6. Have spacing between tufting rows (gauge) of no more than three-eighths inch (3/8") as defined by the manufacturer.
7. Have a face weight of at least sixty (60). The "face weight" is defined as the weight in ounces of the synthetic turf fibers found in one square yard of
synthetic turf as defined by the manufacturer.
8. Have tear grab strength of at least two hundred (200) pounds.
9. Pass the pill burn test for flammability (ASTM D2859).
E. Installation: Synthetic turf shall be installed pursuant to manufacturer's requirements by licensed professionals who are experienced and trained by the
manufacturer in the installation of the synthetic turf. In addition:
1. The synthetic turf shall be installed over at least three inches (3") of a compacted aggregate base that provides adequate drainage. The base
material shall be installed over subgrade that is compacted to a firm condition to ensure stability and maintain adequate drainage.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 677/797
2. Seams shall not be visible and shall be fastened in a manner that ensures they are firm, tight and permanent. Seams shall be sewn and fibers shall
be brushed to provide full coverage of the fibers over the seams.
3. The synthetic turf shall be anchored over the entire coverage area and shall be installed with a nailer board or any such substitute recommended by
the manufacturer intended to conceal edges and ensure proper anchoring of turf.
4. All existing irrigation infrastructure in the synthetic turf area including piping and sprinkler heads that are no longer used must be capped or removed
and shall not be visible.
5. All reasonable efforts shall be made to protect existing trees and tree roots from damage during installation.
F. Maintenance: Synthetic turf shall be maintained in an attractive and clean condition pursuant to title 5, chapter 7 of this code and shall not contain holes,
tears, stains, discoloration, seam separations, uplifted surfaces, heat degradation, or excessive wear. (Ord. 15-O-2691, eff. 11-6-2015)
10-3-2814: WALLS, FENCES AND HEDGES:
In addition to any requirements imposed pursuant to title 9 of this code or any other law, a building permit shall be required for any wall or fence greater
than six feet (6') in height, and shall also be required for any wall or fence, regardless of its height, that is located in a front yard.
A. Thickness: No wall or fence shall exceed two feet (2') in thickness. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or personal property.
B. Supporting Elements: No column, pillar, post, or other supporting element of a wall or fence shall be more than twenty four inches (24") in width.
C. Front Yards: The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the first twenty percent (20%) of the front yard, measured from the
front line of the lot, shall be three feet (3').
The maximum allowable height of a wall, fence, or hedge located within the front yard at a distance from the front lot line of more than twenty percent
(20%) of the front setback shall be six feet (6'); provided, however, that any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge which exceeds three feet (3') in height
shall be open to public view.
D. Side Yards: The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in both a side yard and a front yard shall be six feet (6');
provided, however, that any portion of such wall, fence, or hedge which exceeds three feet (3') in height shall be open to public view.
The maximum allowable height for that portion of a wall, fence, or hedge located in a side yard, but not in a front yard, shall be seven feet (7') except
that the maximum allowable height shall be eight feet (8') for such a wall, fence, or hedge located within five feet (5') of a rear lot line and parallel to
such rear lot line.
E. Rear Yards: The maximum allowable height for a wall, fence, or hedge located solely in a rear yard shall be eight feet (8'). (Ord. 95-0-2239, eff. 7-7-
1995; amd. Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2815: PROHIBITION OF OUTDOOR GAME COURTS:
No outdoor game courts shall be permitted in a multiple-family residential zone. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2816: PARKING REQUIREMENTS; NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this section, one parking space shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit that is an efficiency unit of less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet. Two (2) spaces shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit that contains one bedroom. Two and one-half
(21/2) parking spaces shall be provided for each multiple-family dwelling unit that contains two (2) bedrooms. Three (3) parking spaces shall be provided
for each multiple-family dwelling unit that contains three (3) or four (4) bedrooms. Four (4) parking spaces shall be provided for each multiple-family
dwelling unit that contains five (5) or more bedrooms. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the total number of multiple-family dwelling units in a project can
satisfy the parking requirements of this section through the use of tandem parking spaces. The planning commission, as part of an application for an R-4
permit pursuant to section 10-3-2819 of this article, may increase the percentage of units in a project that may satisfy the parking requirements of this
section through the use of tandem parking spaces.
Any den or similar room capable of being used as a bedroom shall be deemed to be a bedroom for the purposes of this section.
The dimensions of each parking space shall comply with the parking standards adopted by the city council and on file in the department of building and
safety. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; amd. Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1998; Ord. 00-O-2351, eff. 10-20-2000; Ord. 01-O-2388, eff. 1-4-2002)
10-3-2817: GUEST PARKING:
Every multiple-family residential development, other than housing for the elderly and handicapped as defined under article 12.5 of this chapter and
congregate housing for the elderly and disabled as defined under article 12.8 of this chapter, shall have one permanent guest parking space for each four
(4) dwelling units, or any fraction thereof. Guest parking spaces shall not be reserved for exclusive use by residents of the development. Except as
specifically provided in this section, all such parking shall comply with the parking standards adopted by the city council and on file in the department of
building and safety. All such parking shall also be readily accessible by visitors to the development and designated in a manner that gives notice to visitors
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 678/797
of the availability of such parking. The manner of access, designation, and location of guest parking spaces shall be subject to the approval of the director
of transportation. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; amd. Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1998; Ord. 05-O-2479, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-3-2818: PARKING; LOCATION AND SHIELDING OF FACILITIES:
All parking facilities in the R-3 and R-4, R-4X1, and R-4X2 multiple-family residential zones shall be provided within a structure on the same site as the
building which contains the dwelling unit served by the parking. Furthermore, no parking space shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of the front
entrance to such parking structure, unless such parking space is completely screened from view from all public streets. The front access, including
driveways and entrances, to a parking facility shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in width if the parking facility serves a site area of less than or equal to sixty
feet (60') in width.
Except for the required entrances and exits, all parking structures shall be constructed so as to shield the parked automobiles from horizontal view in all
directions and so as to comply with the noise abatement provisions of this code. Additionally, such structures shall be enclosed with solid walls when the
structures are adjacent to a residentially zoned property or separated from that property solely by an alley.
No parking space shall be located within a front yard. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2819: DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
A. Unit Bonus: Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and subject to the requirements set forth in article 28.5 of this chapter, a reviewing
authority may permit, through an R-4 permit, a property owner to add one or more additional units above an existing carport or garage structure
provided each of the following requirements is satisfied:
1. The site on which the additional unit (or units) will be constructed is zoned R-4;
2. The rear property line of the site on which the additional unit (or units) will be constructed abuts an alley;
3. The site on which the additional unit (or units) will be constructed is not adjacent to property in a single-family residential zone. For the purposes of
this section, a site shall be considered "adjacent" to property in a single-family residential zone if the site shares a property line with a lot or parcel in
a single-family residential zone or is separated from a lot or parcel located in a single-family residential zone only by a public street, alley, or other
right of way. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a site shall not be considered "adjacent" to property in a single-family residential zone if the only portion
of the site facing a lot or parcel in a single-family residential zone is the front property line of the site and the front property line is separated from a lot
or parcel located in a single-family residential zone by a public street.
B. Standards: Upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the director of planning and community development, any unit or units
authorized pursuant to an R-4 permit issued pursuant to this section shall comply with all of the following standards and requirements:
1. Notwithstanding the density limits set forth in section 10-3-2801 of this article, any property that satisfies the requirements set forth in subsection A of
this section may be permitted to add one unit. No more than one additional unit may be added to structures which are legally nonconforming as to
density and in existence as of December 4, 2001. For all other structures, additional units beyond one may be permitted only if such additional units
comply with the applicable density limits.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2802 of this article, each unit shall have a minimum floor area of four hundred (400) square feet and a
maximum floor area of nine hundred ninety nine (999) square feet.
3. Each unit may provide a maximum of one bedroom.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2816 of this article, one parking space shall be provided for each unit constructed pursuant to
subsection A of this section.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 10-3-2803 and 10-3-2817 of this article, no outdoor living space or guest parking shall be required for a
unit constructed pursuant to subsection A of this section. In addition to the foregoing, the reviewing authority may reduce the existing outdoor living
area in an amount necessary to accommodate any additional parking required for the additional unit or units.
6. The structure housing the garage or carport and the unit or units constructed pursuant to subsection A of this section shall not exceed a maximum
height of twenty eight feet (28'), or the existing height of the principal building, whichever is less.
7. The minimum yard setbacks described in sections 10-3-2807 and 10-3-2808 of this article shall not apply to units constructed pursuant to this
section, provided the proposed units comply with all applicable building code requirements and the reviewing authority makes the findings required
by subsection C of this section.
8. The structure housing the garage or carport and the unit or units constructed pursuant to subsection A of this section meets or shall be rehabilitated
to meet all current building codes and safety standards.
9. The architectural style of the structure housing the unit or units constructed pursuant to this section shall be compatible with the architectural style of
the existing structure(s) on the site. To ensure compliance with this requirement, any unit or units constructed pursuant to this section shall be subject
to the provisions of article 30 of this chapter concerning architectural review.
C. Findings: The reviewing authority shall not issue an R-4 permit for any unit pursuant to subsection A of this section unless the reviewing authority finds
that the proposed development will not have a substantial adverse impact on:
1. The scale and massing of the streetscape;
2. Neighbors' access to light and air;
3. Neighbors' privacy; and
4. The garden quality of the city. (Ord. 01-O-2388, eff. 1-4-2002; amd. Ord. 02-O-2394, eff. 3-22-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 679/797
Article 28.5. R-4 Permits
10-3-2850: R-4 PERMITS THAT MAY BE GRANTED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the director of planning and community
development, the reviewing authority may issue an R-4 permit to the following development standards as provided within this chapter:
A. Subsections 10-3-2808B, C and E1 regarding rear setbacks;
B. Subsection 10-3-2804B regarding the height of buildings and rooftop bathroom facilities;
C. Section 10-3-2806 regarding the depth of required modulation;
D. Section 10-3-2809 regarding length of buildings;
E. Subsection 10-3-2811E1 regarding the depth of garages that encroach into a front setback; and
F. Section 10-3-2813 regarding front yard paving.
G. Section 10-3-2819 to permit residential units above existing garages or carports.
H. Subsection 10-3-1238A regarding setback encroachments.
I. Subsection 10-3-2806E3b regarding the percentage of front facade of the first two (2) stories of a large scale multiple residential development that is
required to be built to the front setback line.
J. Section 10-3-2804 regarding extension of legally nonconforming height. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; amd. Ord. 96-O-2269, eff. 11-15-1996; Ord.
01-O-2388, eff. 1-4-2002; Ord. 03-O-2424, eff. 3-7-2003; Ord. 04-O-2453, eff. 10-10-2004; Ord. 15-O-2675, eff. 5-22-2015; Ord. 16-O-2699, eff. 3-18-
2016)
10-3-2851: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
If an application for an R-4 permit accompanies an application for any other type of discretionary approval from the planning commission or the city council
for the same site area, then the reviewing authority for the other discretionary approval shall also be the reviewing authority for the application for an R-4
permit and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested R-4 permit.
Except as provided in this section or as otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for an R-4 permit shall be the director of planning and community
development. If, in the opinion of the director, an application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such application to the
planning commission and the planning commission shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the
requested R-4 permit. (Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2852: NOTICE:
Noticing of an R-4 permit application shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-
2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-2853: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting an R-4 permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the findings
required for such permit. (Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2854: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding an R-4 permit by a reviewing authority other than the city council may appeal the
decision to the city council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 96-0-2266, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-3-2855: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting an R-4 permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in accordance with
the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 680/797
Article 28.6. Hotel Regulations
10-3-2860: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article shall include, but is not limited to, the following municipal objectives: Standards for hotel development which are sensitive to the
quality of life and the character of adjacent residential zones and which distinguish between the nature of hotel related activities and those associated with
general commercial development are necessary and desirable. Accordingly, appropriate procedures are hereby established whereby hotel proposals will
be publicly evaluated and criteria established to assure the compatibility of hotel sites with their surrounding environment and the establishment of a limit
on the number of new hotel rooms which can be developed in order to minimize potentially adverse traffic and other environmental impacts which may
result from unrestricted hotel development. This article establishes zoning regulations applicable to hotel development which would require hotels to
conform to the special standards and limitations of this article. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
10-3-2861: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
APPURTENANT SERVICE USES: Those service uses which are customarily supplied in a hotel, or related to hotel functions, such as restaurants/bars to
the extent used primarily by the hotel guests; public meeting rooms; beauty salons; shops selling such items as newspapers, magazines, toiletries,
pharmaceuticals, and sundries; reservation services for automobile rentals, travel, theaters, and tour reservations; and exercise or similar healthcare
facilities; provided, however, with the exception of restaurants/bars located in the triangular area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard, South Santa Monica
Boulevard, and the alley between Crescent Drive and Cañon Drive, no appurtenant service use shall have any direct entry onto any street, nor shall such
appurtenant service use have any display or signage of any kind which is visible from any street. Except for restaurants/bars located in the triangular area
bounded by Wilshire Boulevard, South Santa Monica Boulevard, and the alley between Crescent Drive and Cañon drive, any service use which has such
entry, display, or signage shall be deemed a retail store. Public assembly areas shall not constitute an appurtenant service use.
CAPACITY (Relative To Public Assembly Areas, Restaurants/Bars, Or Public Meeting Rooms Or Restaurants/Bars Designated As Appurtenant Service
Uses): The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy such areas as authorized by the conditional use permit issued to the hotel. The capacity
shall be conspicuously posted in each such area.
GROUND FLOOR STREET FRONTAGE: Frontage adjacent to the street level or within a vertical distance of eight feet (8') above the curb level or five feet
(5') below the curb level.
GUESTROOM: A room or suite of rooms designed for occupancy as a single unit, exclusive of units designed or used for occupancy by on site
management and/or maintenance personnel.
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AREA: Any area or room without fixed seating, excluding foyers or anterooms not designed for concurrent public assembly, for
routine use as a meeting place for scheduled events or functions, whether or not such room contains movable partitions. Public meeting rooms which
qualify as appurtenant service uses shall be excluded from this definition.
PUBLIC MEETING ROOM: A room which cannot be expanded by movable partitions, the use of such room which is primarily by hotel guests, and the
maximum capacity of such room or the aggregate capacity of rooms within any hotel does not exceed one-half (1/2) the number of guestrooms in the hotel.
A public meeting room which fails to meet the criteria for appurtenant uses shall be considered a public assembly area.
RETAIL STORE: A retail facility which carries on as its principal business the selling of tangible commodities in small quantities directly to consumers and
including restaurants/bars. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
10-3-2862: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS REQUIRED:
Any construction of a new hotel, any expansion of the building envelope of an existing hotel, any new or relocated outdoor recreation or dining facilities,
any relocation of public entrances to the building or any intensification of hotel use that would allow either a greater number of guests to reside at a hotel or
would allow the total capacity of function rooms or areas to increase shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit. As part of its review under this
section, the decision maker may require the applicant to submit studies concerning traffic impacts, land use impacts, air quality impacts, public services
impacts, shade/shadow impacts, geological impacts, or any other impact of the proposed project that may influence the determination regarding the
appropriateness of issuing a conditional use permit. Furthermore, in addition to the consideration of the criteria for conditional use permits under article 38
of this chapter, the decision maker shall deny the conditional use permit if it finds that, notwithstanding the inclusion of mitigation measures as conditions
of the conditional use permit, the proposed hotel use will nevertheless significantly increase traffic congestion on commercial streets during peak traffic
hours or significantly increase traffic congestion on residential streets at any time. Notwithstanding this requirement, the decision maker may nevertheless
grant the conditional use permit without mitigating a significant increase to traffic congestion on commercial streets or street segments devoted to
commercial use if the decision maker finds that the mitigation measures identified to reduce the traffic congestion may contribute to significant
environmental impacts. Where occupancy capacity is set by the conditional use permit, an annual inspection fee to reimburse the city for the additional
enforcement costs shall be imposed.
Conditional use permits issued pursuant to this section shall lapse one year after the date of issuance unless physical construction of the permitted project
has commenced. This period may be extended no more than two (2) times for additional one year periods. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984; amd. Ord. 91-
0-2129, eff. 11-22-1991; Ord. 91-0-2133, eff. 12-5-1991; Ord. 93-0-2180, eff. 10-29-1993; Ord. 02-O-2400, eff. 6-20-2002)
10-3-2863: GROUND FLOOR STREET FRONTAGE:
The entire ground floor street frontage of any hotel, except for such area as may be necessary for vehicle access, courtyard area, or for any pedestrian
entry, shall be used exclusively for one or more of the following uses:
A. Retail store uses;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 681/797
B. The replacement of existing uses to the extent otherwise permitted by this code; and
C. Pedestrian amenities, such as landscaped plazas, sculpture gardens, or other park like treatment.
Notwithstanding subsections A, B and C of this section, hotels in the vicinity of residential areas shall be designed to provide transitional compatibility
with such residential environment. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
10-3-2864: MAXIMUM CAPACITY OF PUBLIC MEETING ROOMS AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AREAS:
The aggregate of all public meeting rooms and public assembly areas in any hotel shall not exceed:
A. A maximum of seven (7) square feet per guestroom; or
B. Such larger area as may be designated by the conditional use permit; provided, however, the total person capacity authorized by the conditional use
permit shall not exceed the number of guestrooms in the hotel, and the total area shall not exceed twenty one (21) square feet per person. (Ord. 84-O-
1937, eff. 11-1-1984; amd. Ord. 96-0-2264, eff. 8-16-1996)
10-3-2865: CAPACITY OF OTHER USES:
The maximum capacity of public meeting rooms shall be determined for each hotel under the conditional use permit. The maximum capacity of public
meeting rooms in any hotel shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the number of guestrooms in the hotel. The capacity of restaurants for the purposes of this
section shall be based on one person for each fifteen (15) square feet, unless a greater square foot area per person is established by the conditional use
permit. The maximum aggregate capacity of the combination of public meeting rooms and restaurants/bars in any hotel which may be classified as
appurtenant service uses shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the number of guestrooms in the hotel. To the extent restaurants/bars do not qualify as
appurtenant service uses, parking shall be provided in accordance with section 10-3-2866 of this article. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
10-3-2866: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
Any hotel developed under this article shall comply with the following minimum parking requirements:
A. On site parking space for hotel guestrooms as required by subsection 10-3-2730B1 of this chapter;
B. On site parking for hotel restaurant and bar uses that are open to the public shall be provided as required by subsection 10-3-2730B9 of this chapter,
except that the twenty five percent (25%) credit for parking set forth in that subsection shall not apply to a hotel restaurant or bar that is open to the
public;
C. On site parking space for public assembly areas as required by subsection 10-3-2730B4 of this chapter or, where public assembly capacity is
established by conditional use permit, not less than one parking space for each two (2) occupants;
D. On site parking space for retail and other commercial uses as required by section 10-3-2730 of this chapter; provided, further:
1. Fifty percent (50%) of the parking furnished under subsection A of this section may be credited to the parking requirements under this subsection;
2. The parking requirements specified in this article include parking for any floor area used as an integral part of the designated use, and subsection
10-3-2730B10 of this chapter shall not be applicable to such areas;
E. One-third (1/3) of the parking spaces required by subsection A of this section shall be used exclusively for hotel employee parking, and such spaces
shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. Such parking shall be furnished without charge to the employees;
2. Employee parking as designated in subsection E1 of this section may be off the site if such parking is situated within five hundred feet (500') of the
hotel and the off site parking is authorized under the conditional use permit;
F. "Appurtenant service uses" as defined in this article shall be exempt from the parking requirements set forth in this section;
G. A program of validated parking for hotel and hotel related uses shall be developed by the city manager or his designee and shall be effective when
approved by the council. Such validated parking program shall be phased in and uniformly applied to both existing and new hotels;
H. The required parking space requirements under this article may be satisfied by providing tandem parking spaces or compact automobile parking spaces
which comply with the applicable regulations set forth in the minimum parking standards adopted pursuant to section 10-3-2727 of this chapter;
provided, further, such compact spaces may not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the required parking under this article, and such compact or
tandem parking spaces shall be approved by conditional use permit in conjunction with a parking operations management program; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 682/797
I. The number of parking spaces required by this section may be reduced by not more than fifteen percent (15%) where a finding is made in approval of
the conditional use permit that; because of the location of the hotel; availability of public transportation; or proximity and concentration of shopping to
the hotel site, the hotel use will not generate a need for the number of parking spaces designated by this section. The provisions of section 10-3-2730
of this chapter relative to the joint use of parking facilities where one use is primarily a daytime use and the other use is primarily a nighttime use shall
not be applicable to the parking required by this article. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984; amd. Ord. 87-0-2005, eff. 10-15-1987; Ord. 96-0-2256, eff. 4-
5-1996; Ord. 98-O-2304, eff. 8-7-1998; Ord. 98-O-2306, eff. 9-11-1998)
10-3-2866.1: LOADING RESTRICTIONS:
With regard to hotel facilities that do not have public assembly areas and contain less than one hundred fifty (150) guestrooms, the planning commission
shall have the discretion to approve loading spaces other than as required under this chapter where a finding is made in the approval of a conditional use
permit that the loading spaces proposed for the existing and/or proposed uses on the site are adequate to service the existing and/or proposed uses on
the site. (Ord. 98-O-2304, eff. 8-7-1998; amd. Ord. 01-O-2389, eff. 1-10-2002)
10-3-2867: HOTEL ACCESS AREAS:
A. In addition to the parking requirements of section 10-3-2866 of this chapter, a hotel access area shall be provided in the vicinity of the entrance to the
hotel, and such area shall accommodate on site holding for not less than the following aggregate number of vehicles; provided, further, the planning
commission, under the conditional use permit, may reduce such requirements up to a maximum of thirty percent (30%) if the planning commission finds
that a proportional increase in the level of valet parking service is effected through the use of additional valet parking personnel:
1. Four and one-half percent (41/2%) of the parking required for the hotel guestrooms under subsection 10-3-2866A of this chapter;
2. Four and one-half percent (41/2%) of the parking required for the restaurant/bar facilities under subsection 10-3-2866B of this chapter;
3. Sixteen percent (16%) of the parking required for the public assembly areas under subsection 10-3-2866C of this chapter; and
4. One taxicab parking space for each forty (40) hotel guestrooms.
B. The traffic pattern for vehicle ingress and egress from the hotel access area to the public streets shall be designed to minimize interference with the flow
of traffic on public streets, shall require the approval of the transportation/engineering official, and shall be designated in the site plan for inclusion in the
conditional use permit approval process. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
10-3-2868: REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the C-3 zone regulations shall be applicable to any hotel development under this article.
B. Hotels may not be developed on lots which abut or are separated only by an alley from the R-1 zones.
C. Hotels developed outside of that triangular area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard, South Santa Monica Boulevard, and the alley between Crescent Drive
and Cañon Drive shall be restricted as follows:
1. Public assembly areas shall be prohibited.
2. The maximum capacity of any separate public meeting room shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the number of guestrooms in the hotel.
3. The aggregate maximum capacity of all restaurants shall not exceed the number of guestrooms in the hotel, except that in commercial districts
located outside of the business triangle, the aggregate maximum capacity of all restaurants shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) times the number
of guestrooms. Restaurants and dining in nonconforming hotels located in the R-4 zone shall also be subject to the provisions set forth in section 10-
3-1207, "Dining In Nonconforming Hotels", of this chapter.
4. The maximum number of floors shall not exceed four (4) provided the height limitation set forth in subsection 10-3-2726A of this chapter is
maintained.
D. With respect to hotel facilities located within the triangular area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard, South Santa Monica Boulevard, and the alley between
Crescent Drive and Cañon Drive, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The floor area, whether permitted by the provisions of this chapter or by the provisions of prior applicable law, of a legally nonconforming hotel facility
may be increased by not more than fifteen percent (15%), provided that in connection with such increase, the following conditions are satisfied:
a. At least fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area, inclusive of the increased area, is street level retail space added to the hotel facility;
b. A finding is made in the approval of a conditional use permit that, because of the location of the hotel, the addition of the retail space will promote
the retail character of the area, and will be compatible with and enhance the retail uses in the immediate vicinity by attracting and serving potential
retail customers;
c. Any space added to the hotel facility in connection with such fifteen percent (15%) increase in the total floor area may include an increase in the
height of the existing guestrooms so long as the existing overall height of the hotel facility is not increased; and
d. Any space added to the hotel facility in connection with such fifteen percent (15%) increase in the total floor area will not increase the number of
hotel guestrooms or otherwise intensify the hotel use or substantially increase any adverse impact of the hotel use on the surrounding retail uses.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 683/797
2. Notwithstanding any provision of article 33 of this chapter to the contrary, hotel uses with retail facilities in a legally nonconforming building located
within the triangular area bounded by Wilshire Boulevard, South Santa Monica Boulevard, and the alley between Crescent Drive and Cañon Drive
may be eligible to participate in the "in lieu parking district" as defined in said article, subject to the application and hearing procedures, review
standards, appeals process, fees and fee regulations, and other restrictions set forth in sections 10-3-3307 through 10-3-3310, and 10-3-3312
through 10-3-3317 of this chapter. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984; amd. Ord. 98-O-2304, eff. 8-7-1998; Ord. 01-O-2389, eff. 1-10-2002; Ord. 10-O-
2589, eff. 10-22-2010)
10-3-2869: MAXIMUM DEVELOPMENT:
The maximum number of hotel guestrooms which may be approved citywide subsequent to November 1, 1984, shall not exceed one thousand (1,000)
rooms. Applications for conditional use permits for hotel development shall be considered in the sequence filed, for the purposes of the one thousand
(1,000) hotel room limit, with new applications accepted for filing on or after January 30, 1985. (Ord. 84-O-1937, eff. 11-1-1984)
Article 28.8. Commercial Hotel Overlay Zone (C-H (O))
10-3-2880: CRITERIA FOR APPLICATION OF THE C-H (O) OVERLAY ZONE:
The C-H (O) overlay zone may be applied only to property that meets all of the following criteria:
A. The underlying zone on the property is R-4X2.
B. The property is contiguous to property zoned C-3, which contiguous property shall be developed as an existing hotel on April 15, 2007, and that is
operating in conformance with the city's zoning code. For purposes of this provision, "contiguous" does not include properties that are separated by an
alley, street, or other public right of way.
C. The property is adjacent to an alley along a side property line that is not between the property and the contiguous hotel, or the rear property line, or both
the rear property line and a side property line as described in this subsection. (Ord. 07-O-2511, eff. 4-13-2007)
10-3-2881: USES PERMITTED:
Except as otherwise provided or restricted by this article, no lot, premises, building or portion thereof in the C-H (O) zone shall be used for any purpose
except the following:
A. Uses permitted in the underlying zone.
B. Hotel uses, subject to prior approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission, in accordance with article 38 of this chapter, except that no
restaurants, bars, entertainment facilities, rooftop uses, pool amenities, commercial or service uses including, but not limited to, spas, salons, gift
shops, or similar uses shall be permitted in the C-H (O) zone. In order to grant a conditional use permit for hotel uses as described in this subsection,
the decision making body must make the following findings:
1. The proposed location of the hotel uses will not be detrimental to adjacent property or to the public welfare.
2. The proposed project is consistent with the city's general plan.
3. The proposed hotel uses will not impact the character of any surrounding residentially zoned areas.
4. Adequate parking exists on the property to serve the parking demands of the proposed hotel uses.
The planning commission may impose such conditions on the proposed hotel use as it deems appropriate to protect adjacent property and the public
welfare from potential adverse impacts related to the proposed use.
C. Signage, subject to the standards established by the underlying R-4X2 zone. (Ord. 07-O-2511, 4-13-2007)
10-3-2882: DURATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS GRANTED PURSUANT TO THIS ARTICLE:
Conditional use permits that may be granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for an initial term as specified in the conditional use permit, but in no
event shall the initial term exceed five (5) years. Any renewal of the conditional use permit shall be at the discretion of the planning commission, and may
be made subject to new or revised conditions of approval as may be deemed appropriate. (Ord. 07-O-2511, eff. 4-13-2007)
Article 29. Regulation Of Trees On Private Property
10-3-2900: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 684/797
ARBORIST: An individual certified as an arborist by the International Society Of Arboriculture (ISA), or an individual who is currently listed as a consulting
arborist by the American Society Of Consulting Arborists (ASCA).
DAMAGE: Any action which may cause death or significant injury to a tree or which places the tree in a hazardous condition or an irreversible state of
decline. Such action may be taken by, but is not limited to, cutting, topping, girdling, poisoning, trenching, grading or excavating within the drip line of the
tree.
HERITAGE TREE: Any tree not listed on the city's official list of native trees with a primary trunk circumference of forty eight inches (48") or more,
measured at a height of four feet six inches (4'6") above natural grade.
NATIVE TREE: A tree listed on the city's official list of local native trees, as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council, and which has a
primary trunk circumference of twenty four inches (24") or more, measured at a height of four feet six inches (4'6") above natural grade. The official list of
local native trees shall be maintained on file in the departments of planning and community development, building and safety and recreation and parks.
PROTECTED TREE: Any native tree, heritage tree, or tree within an urban grove.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, consisting usually of a single elongated main stem or trunk and many branches.
URBAN GROVE: Fifty (50) or more trees where the branches of each tree are within six feet (6') of the branches of one of the other trees in the grove.
Individual trees in an urban grove may be of any size and are not subject to any circumference limitations. Any reference to an urban grove in this article
shall mean the entire grove or one or more trees within the grove. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; amd. Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-3-2901: TREE REMOVAL PERMIT:
A. No person shall damage or remove, or cause to be damaged or removed, any protected tree on his or her property without a tree removal permit first
being obtained in accordance with the requirements of this article. This article is applicable to:
1. Any native or heritage tree that is located within the front yard or in the area of the site between a line within a site area parallel to the front lot line
and located at a distance from the front lot line equal to the shortest distance between front lot line and the existing or proposed primary residence on
a single-family residential property, if that shortest distance is greater than the front setback.
2. Any native or heritage tree that is located within the street side yard or in the area of the site between a line within a site area parallel to the street
side lot line and located at a distance from the street side lot line equal to the shortest distance between street side lot line and the existing or
proposed primary residence on a single-family residential property, if that shortest distance is greater than the street side setback.
3. An urban grove located anywhere on a single-family residential property.
B. A tree removal permit shall be obtained from the department of building and safety in the following circumstances:
1. The protected tree proposed for removal is relocated on the same property and such relocation will not damage the tree.
2. The protected tree proposed for removal is in such a condition that it poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety or to property.
3. The protected tree proposed for removal is dead or diseased as determined by a licensed arborist who submits a written report certifying that the
disease afflicting the tree or the condition of the tree requires its removal.
4. The protected tree proposed for removal is damaging a sidewalk, street, or other public property and such damage has created a public safety
hazard.
5. The protected tree proposed for removal is damaging improvements on private property.
6. The protected tree proposed for removal is interfering with public utilities and such interference cannot be avoided by target pruning performed in a
manner that would not damage the tree.
7. The protected tree proposed for removal is a native tree and such tree is replaced by one healthy native tree of any species and of the same size. A
native tree proposed for removal from the front setback area shall be replaced in the front setback area. A native tree proposed for removal from the
side setback area shall be replaced in the side setback area. Once the replacement tree is planted, the replacement tree shall not be removed
without a tree removal permit first being obtained in accordance with the requirements of this article.
8. The protected tree proposed for removal is obstructing an existing view of the Los Angeles area basin from a habitable building on the property
where such tree is located.
9. The removal of one or more trees in an urban grove is necessary for the preservation of the health of the grove as determined by a licensed arborist.
C. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, if a protected tree proposed for removal is in such a condition that it poses an imminent threat to the public
health or safety or to property, then the required tree removal permit may be obtained from the department of building and safety after the tree has
been removed.
D. Prior to the issuance of a tree removal permit, the department of building and safety may request that a report concerning the subject tree be submitted
by a licensed arborist.
E. The decision by the department of building and safety on a tree removal permit application shall be appealable by the owner of the tree proposed for
removal to the planning commission in the same manner as an appeal to the city council as provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The
department may refer any tree removal application to the planning commission for its decision. The decision by the planning commission on an appeal
or referral shall be appealable by the owner of the tree proposed for removal to the city council as provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 685/797
F. A tree removal permit shall be obtained from the planning commission whenever a protected tree is proposed to be removed as part of a development,
building addition, or remodel of an existing building which is subject to a discretionary permit or other approval issued by such commission. The tree
removal permit may be applied for concurrently with the related discretionary review application. The decision by the planning commission on a tree
removal permit application shall be appealable in the same manner as the related discretionary review application. Upon planning commission approval
of a tree removal, the tree removal permit shall be issued by the department of building and safety.
G. A tree removal permit shall be approved under subsection F of this section, if the following findings are made by the reviewing body:
1. The removal of the protected tree cannot be reasonably avoided by redesigning the location or nature of any proposed improvements on the
property which have caused the need to remove the protected tree.
2. The removal of the protected tree will not have any significant environmental effects or otherwise harm the public health or general welfare.
3. The removal of the protected tree will not significantly and adversely affect erosion, soil retention, or the flow of surface water.
4. The removal of the protected tree will not significantly and adversely affect the aesthetic quality and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood.
H. Except as otherwise provided by subsection B9 of this section, a tree removal permit shall be obtained from the planning commission whenever ten
percent (10%) or more of the protected trees in an urban grove are proposed to be removed. Notice of the hearing on such permit before the planning
commission shall be mailed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. The decision of the planning
commission shall be appealable by the owner of the trees proposed for removal or any person entitled to receive notice of the planning commission
hearing under this subsection to the city council. Notice of the hearing on the appeal before the city shall be given to all persons who are entitled to
receive notice of the hearing before the planning commission.
I. The application for a tree removal permit shall be made on the form approved by the department of building and safety. An application fee may be
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 07-O-2512, eff. 5-11-2007;
Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-2902: ALTERNATIVE TREE REMOVAL APPROVAL:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-2901 of this chapter, the planning commission may approve the removal of a protected tree under any
circumstance if the planning commission determines that:
A. The removal of the protected tree will not adversely affect the neighboring properties or the general welfare or safety of the surrounding area; and
B. The removal of the protected tree will not adversely affect the garden quality of the city.
The decision by the planning commission on a tree removal permit considered under the alternative provisions of this section shall be appealable by
the owner of the tree proposed for removal to the city council as provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. In the event that the requested tree
removal permit involves the removal of ten percent (10%) or more of the protected trees in an urban grove, the notice and appeal provisions of
subsection 10-3-2901H of this chapter shall apply. Upon approval of an application by the city council pursuant to this section, the department of
building and safety shall issue a tree removal permit. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993)
10-3-2903: REPLACEMENT OF NATIVE TREES:
Any native tree removed pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3-2901 of this chapter shall be replaced by another native tree. The replacement tree
shall have a box size of at least thirty six inches (36"). Furthermore, a native tree removed from the front setback area shall be replaced in the front
setback area and a native tree removed from the side setback area shall be replaced in the side setback area. Once the replacement tree is planted, the
replacement tree shall not be removed without a tree removal permit first being obtained in accordance with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 93-O-
2176, eff. 8-20-1993)
10-3-2904: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
A. The removal of a protected tree in accordance with the terms and conditions of a single-family development permit, Hillside development permit,
variance, minor accommodation, final subdivision map, or building permit approved or issued prior to November 19, 1991.
B. The removal of a tree or stand of trees as defined by and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a tree removal permit issued under ordinance
91-O-2134.
C. Trimming or pruning of a protected tree which does not damage the protected tree, including, without limitation, trimming or pruning for view
preservation.
D. The removal of a protected tree pursuant to a view restoration permit issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of section 10-8-106 of this
title. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; amd. Ord. 94-O-2202, eff. 7-22-1994; Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 686/797
10-3-2905: PROTECTIONS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
The director of building and safety may require any of the following measures to be taken to preserve a protected tree located on a property upon which
construction is occurring:
A. Install a fence which encloses the extended drip line area of the protected tree.
B. Prohibit the penetration or abrasion of the protected tree.
C. Any other measures deemed necessary by the Director of Building and Safety. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993)
10-3-2906: VIOLATIONS OF THIS ARTICLE:
A. A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor unless prosecuted as a civil
administrative matter pursuant to title 1, chapter 3, article 3 of this Code. Each and every protected tree removed or damaged in violation of this article
shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to subsection A of this section, any person who removes or damages a protected tree in violation of this
article may be required to provide restitution to the City by either:
1. Planting a healthy replacement tree of the same or similar species and size as the tree removed or damaged, or
2. Paying a cash contribution to the City in an amount equal to the estimated replacement value of the removed or damaged tree as determined by an
arborist approved by the City. (Ord. 93-O-2176, eff. 8-20-1993; amd. Ord. 00-O-2356, eff. 11-3-2000)
Article 30. Architectural Commission, Architectural Review, And Procedure
10-3-3001: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
The Council hereby finds that Beverly Hills is internationally known and has become a worldwide synonym for beauty, quality, and value; that by far the
largest area of the community is zoned for single-family residences, but a significant part is zoned for apartment, commercial, and industrial uses; that
most persons who travel through Beverly Hills or do business in and with Beverly Hills do so in its apartment, commercial, and industrial areas; that there
is a tendency of some owners and developers in these areas to disregard beauty and quality in construction and a consequent serious danger that
construction of inferior quality and appearance in the apartment, commercial, and industrial areas will degrade and depreciate the image, beauty, and
reputation of Beverly Hills with adverse consequences for the entire City, including single-family residential areas as well as apartment, commercial, and
industrial areas; and that poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood or in the development and
maintenance of structures, landscaping, signs, and general appearances affect the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for residential
and business purposes or other uses and, by so doing, impair the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impair the stability in value of
both improved and unimproved real property in such areas, prevent the most appropriate development of such areas, produce undesirable conditions
affecting the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and destroy the proper relationship between the taxable value of real
property in such areas and the cost of Municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this article to prevent these and other harmful effects of
such exterior appearances of buildings erected in any neighborhood and thus to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the
community, to promote the public convenience and prosperity, to conserve the value of buildings, and to encourage the most appropriate use of land within
the City. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966)
10-3-3002: ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION:
An Architectural Commission is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the City. At least one member shall be
a licensed architect in the State of California and at least one other member shall be a licensed architect in the State of California. In the event no person
eligible for appointment from a designated field is a resident of the City, the Council may waive the residency requirement; provided, however, there shall
be no more than two (2) nonresident members of the Architectural Commission. (Ord. 19-O-2772, 3-8-2019)
10-3-3002.1: ELIGIBILITY:
All members of the Architectural Commission shall be residents of the City except as expressly waived by the provisions of section 10-3-3002 of this
chapter. (Ord. 75-O-1545, eff. 2-6-1975)
10-3-3003: DUTIES:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the duties of the architectural commission shall be as follows:
A. Exercise the authority set forth in this article and as otherwise provided in this code;
B. In carrying out its duties pursuant to this code:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 687/797
1. Review and authorize the overall conceptual design of a proposed structure, landscaping, and signs, recognizing that minor design details will
change when construction drawings are prepared and during field construction;
2. Focus greater attention to overall design themes and less to ornamental design features, hardware, balcony railings, and other secondary features;
and
3. Balance the desire for efficient application processing with the desire to ensure high quality architectural and landscape designs;
C. Develop educational material that aid project applicants in achieving high quality design standards and provide guidance to applicants;
D. Recommend and amend policies as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this article;
E. Participate in, promote, and conduct informational and educational programs pertaining to urban design in commercial and multi-family zones;
F. Develop a program to celebrate exemplary commercial and multi-family architecture, and landscape designs;
G. Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the city council. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
10-3-3004: RULES:
The architectural commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966; amd. Ord. 81-O-1789, eff. 4-16-
1981; Ord. 82-O-1855, eff. 8-5-1982; Ord. 97-O-2286, eff. 12-5-1997)
10-3-3005: SECRETARY:
The director of planning shall serve as the official secretary to the architectural commission. The records of all proceedings and the basis for all findings
shall be available to the council and to the public. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973)
10-3-3006: MEETINGS:
The architectural commission shall meet at intervals at least once each month on regularly scheduled dates. Additional meetings shall be arranged in
order to process applications within the time required by this code. Special meetings shall be called in accordance with the provisions of section 54956 of
the Government Code of the state. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966)
10-3-3007: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW REQUIRED:
A. 1. Approval: No building, structure, sign, wall, fence, or landscaping located in any zone other than a single-family (one-family) residential zone shall be
erected, constructed, altered, or remodeled unless the elevations and plans for the exterior portions and areas and the interiors of mall areas, as
defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, have first been reviewed and approved by the architectural commission, or by the council on appeal.
2. Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A1 of this section, temporary seasonal decorations may be displayed on private property,
without architectural review, during the period between November 15 of each year and January 10 of the following year.
B. No exterior portion or area of an existing building, structure, sign, wall, fence, or other improvement to real property, or the interior of any mall area,
located in any zone other than a residential zone shall be painted, repainted, textured, or retextured unless the plans, colors, and textures for such
work have been reviewed and approved by the architectural commission, or by the council on appeal.
C. No permit shall be issued for any work described in subsections A and B of this section and unless the necessary approval required therefor is first
granted.
Prior to the commencement of any work described in subsections A and B of this section, an application for approval shall be made in writing to the
architectural commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in this article.
D. Notwithstanding the issuance of an open air dining permit pursuant to article 35 of this chapter, no open air dining operations shall be established
unless the plans for all improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities to be located in the public right of way have been reviewed and approved by the
architectural commission, or by the council on appeal. For the purposes of this subsection "facilities" shall include, but not be limited to, tables and
chairs.
E. When in the opinion of the director, the approval of an application for a minor or insignificant permit does not defeat the purposes and objectives of this
article, the official may grant the approval without submitting the matter to the architectural commission for its approval, notwithstanding any other
provision of this section or this article. The decision of the director may be appealed to the architectural commission by filing an appeal petition with the
director no later than fourteen (14) days after the official's decision. The petition shall be on a form designated by the director.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, architectural review may be a condition of the granting of a conditional use permit or a variance when
required for any use or improvement in a residential zone.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 688/797
G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, architectural review shall be a condition of the grant of a sign accommodation pursuant to chapter 4,
article 9 of this title.
H. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, architectural review shall be a condition precedent to the approval of a final map to convert an existing
multi-family residential apartment building to a common interest development project or to convert a common interest development previously created
prior to January 1, 2006, to another form of common interest development in accordance with chapter 2, article 7 of this title for any building that the
Planning Commission determined to be a "character contributing building" in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this title and, based on that
determination, granted a waiver of any of the requirements of said chapter 2, article 7 of this title. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3008: BUILDING RELOCATION:
The Architectural Commission shall review all plans submitted with applications for moving buildings within or into the City. Photographs shall be included
with the application showing all elevations, the structure proposed to be moved, the proposed site, and the buildings adjacent to the proposed site. The
commission shall determine whether the building proposed to be moved will fit harmoniously into the neighborhood wherein it is to be located. The
commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the issuance of a permit to move such building. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966)
10-3-3009: PROCEDURE:
A. Preliminary sketches of the design of a proposed structure or alteration may be submitted to the Planning Department for informal review so that an
applicant may be informed of Architectural Commission policies prior to preparing working drawings. If approved, such sketches shall serve as a guide
in the further consideration of the same proposed building or structure.
The applicant for a building permit, when subject to the requirements of this article, shall submit to the Director of Planning a site plan, as defined by
section 10-3-3012 of this article, and exterior elevations and such other data as will assist the Architectural Commission and the Director of Planning in
evaluating the proposed building or structure.
Final plans and elevations shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of
the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the street address
of the work and the name and address of the owner and the person who prepared the plans. The final plot plan shall conform to section 10-3-3012 of
this article. Work not thus presented may be rejected by the Director of Planning.
B. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director shall refer the project to the Architectural Commission at the next feasible regular meeting for a
hearing, unless an extension of time is consented to by the applicant. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1960; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973; Ord. 19-O-2785,
eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-3010: CRITERIA:
The Architectural Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the issuance of a building permit in any matter subject to its
jurisdiction after consideration of whether the following criteria are complied with:
A. The plan for the proposed building or structure is in conformity with good taste and good design and, in general, contributes to the image of Beverly Hills
as a place of beauty, spaciousness, balance, taste, fitness, broad vistas, and high quality;
B. The plan for the proposed building or structure indicates the manner in which the structure is reasonably protected against external and internal noise,
vibrations, and other factors which may tend to make the environment less desirable;
C. The proposed building or structure is not, in its exterior design and appearance, of inferior quality such as to cause the nature of the local environment
to materially depreciate in appearance and value;
D. The proposed building or structure is in harmony with the proposed developments on land in the general area, with the general plan for Beverly Hills,
and with any precise plans adopted pursuant to the general plan; and
E. The proposed development is in conformity with the standards of this Code and other applicable laws insofar as the location and appearance of the
buildings and structures are involved.
F. In addition to the foregoing criteria, in connection with any application to convert an existing residential apartment building determined by the Planning
Commission to be a "character contributing building" in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this title, the architectural commission shall not approve a
renovation to the exterior of a character contributing building unless it makes the following additional finding:
1. The proposed development is designed in a manner that protects and preserves those exterior elements of the building which the planning
commission found contributed to the determination of the project as a "character contributing building" in accordance with section 10-2-707 of this
title.
If the criteria set forth in this section are met, the application shall be approved. Conditions may be applied when the proposed building or structure does
not comply with such criteria and shall be such as to bring such building or structure into conformity. If an application is disapproved, the architectural
commission shall detail in its findings the criterion or criteria that are not met. The action taken by the architectural commission shall be reduced to writing
and signed by the chairman, and a copy thereof shall be made available to the applicant upon request.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 689/797
A decision or order of the architectural commission or the director of planning shall not become effective until the expiration of fourteen (14) calendar days
after the date upon which a ruling of the architectural commission or the director of planning has been made.
Nothing required by this article shall be construed to supersede the requirements set forth in chapter 2, article 7 of this title regarding the conversion of the
form of ownership of an existing rental apartment building that has been determined by the planning commission to be a "character contributing building" in
accordance with section 10-2-707 of this title to a common interest development within the meaning and definitions of that article. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-
1966; amd. Ord. 74-O-1511, eff. 4-11-1974; Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-3-3011: APPEALS:
The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal any decision of the director of planning or the architectural commission to the council as provided in
title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966; amd. Ord. 74-O-1511, eff. 4-11-1974; Ord. 84-O-1948, eff. 3-21-1985)
10-3-3011.5: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting an architectural review approval, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced
in accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
10-3-3012: SITE PLANS:
A site plan shall be drawn to scale and shall indicate the following sufficiently for the consideration of visual, safety, and economic factors:
A. The dimensions and orientation of the parcel;
B. The location of the buildings and structures, both existing and proposed;
C. The location of off street parking and loading facilities;
D. The location and dimensions of present and proposed street and highway dedications required to handle the traffic generated by the proposed uses;
E. The location of the points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and the internal circulation pattern;
F. The location of walls and fences and the indication of their height and the materials of their construction;
G. An indication of the exterior lighting standards and devices adequate to review the possible hazards and disturbances to the public and adjacent
properties;
H. The location and size of the exterior signs and outdoor advertising;
I. A preliminary landscaping plan;
J. The grading and slopes where they affect the relationship of the buildings;
K. An indication of the heights of buildings and structures;
L. An indication of the proposed use of the buildings shown on the site; and
M. Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to permit the necessary findings that the provisions of this code are being complied
with.
The requirements set forth in subsections A through M of this section may be waived by the director of planning if he deems the information not
essential.
Where an attachment or minor addition to an existing building or structure is proposed, the site plan shall indicate the relationship of such proposal to
the existing development. (Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966; amd. Ord. 73-O-1493, eff. 11-1-1973)
10-3-3013: ENCROACHMENTS:
Applications for permission to encroach upon city property, such as refacing a building, may be referred to the architectural commission. The commission
shall make recommendations to the council in such cases as to whether the alterations proposed would conform to the standards set forth in this article.
(Ord. 1223, eff. 3-1-1966)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 690/797
10-3-3014: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this article shall become effective and be in full force and operation at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on March 1, 1966.
(Ord. 1223, eff. 1-1-1966; amd. Ord. 1226, eff. 3-1-1966)
10-3-3015: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE PROVISIONS TO BUILDING APPLICATIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the processing of applications for building permits filed with the public services director prior to the effective
date of this article. (Ord. 1226, eff. 3-1-1966)
10-3-3016: FILING FEES:
A. Applications for architectural review by the director as set forth in subsection 10-3-3007E of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
established by the city council.
B. Applications for architectural review required to be submitted to the architectural commission for approval shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
established by the city council.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, no fee shall be required for any architectural review required by subsection 10-3-
3007B of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3017: RESTAURANTS:
The commission chair shall appoint a two (2) member restaurant subcommittee to review certain restaurant applications. The chair may select an alternate
member or members in the event the restaurant subcommittee members are unable to meet within fourteen (14) days of an application filing that is subject
to the provisions of this section. In the event a subcommittee meeting does not occur within fourteen (14) days, the matter shall be scheduled for the next
available commission meeting.
Upon the filing of a complete application with the community development department for a project that requires architectural review and is solely related
to a restaurant use, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Within fourteen (14) days of the date on which an application is deemed complete, the architectural commission shall review the application or the
restaurant subcommittee of the architectural commission and the director, or his/her designee, shall meet for the purposes of determining whether the
project is minor and not subject to review before the architectural commission. The architectural commission restaurant subcommittee decision that the
project is minor must be unanimous, otherwise the matter shall be scheduled for the next available architectural commission meeting. Projects
determined minor shall be approved by the director or designee.
B. For projects that require review before the architectural commission, the application shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied in one
meeting. The commission shall not have the authority to impose conditions of approval requiring further review by any authority other than the director,
except as provided below. If no action is rendered at the meeting, the application shall be deemed denied.
1. The architectural commission may delegate final action to the restaurant subcommittee. If delegated, the restaurant subcommittee shall make a
decision within fourteen (14) days after the architectural commission meeting unless the applicant requests an extension of this deadline. A
unanimous approval of the restaurant subcommittee is required for the project to be approved. All other action by the restaurant subcommittee,
including a failure of the subcommittee to meet within fourteen (14) days or the time period as extended upon request of the applicant, shall be
determined to be a technical denial. Final decisions of the restaurant subcommittee pursuant to this subsection shall be appealable to the City
Council pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code.
C. Applications that include a request for a sign accommodation shall comply with chapter 4 of this title, however, such applications shall not be subject to
the public notice requirements in section 10-4-904 of this title.
D. Applications for temporary construction barricades that include graphics and will remain in place for less than six (6) months shall be approved or
denied by the Director of Community Development. The Director may forward any construction barricade application to the Architectural Commission to
be processed pursuant to subsection B of this section. Temporary construction barricades with graphics that will remain in place for a period of six (6)
months or longer shall require Architectural Commission review pursuant to subsection B of this section. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
Article 31. Development Plan Review
10-3-3100: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code or ordinance of the City of Beverly Hills, the following shall not be permitted to be established unless a
development plan is approved pursuant to the provisions of this article establishing a development plan review procedure unless exempted pursuant to
section 10-3-3101 of this article:
A. All uses involving new construction that requires the issuance of a building permit other than new construction subject to a discretionary permit under
this chapter (excluding architectural review) or any other interim zoning ordinance of the City.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 691/797
B. All rooftop gymnasiums and lunchrooms permitted pursuant to section 10-3-3107 of this article.
C. All projects constructed pursuant to a density bonus permit.
D. All new parking lots.
A new parking lot shall mean a parking lot established in a location not previously used for parking purposes.
E. Conversion of parking to a commercial parking lot.
Parking shall be considered to be converted to a commercial parking lot upon the initial posting of signs advertising the availability of such parking to
the general public. Nothing in this subsection shall require development plan review of an existing parking lot that currently contains signage
advertising the availability of parking to the general public. Signage indicating the availability of parking for patrons or employees of a commercial
establishment shall not be considered to be signage advertising the availability of parking to the general public.
F. All common interest development projects, as defined in chapter 2, article 7 of this title.
G. All projects which would increase the floor area of a structure or building by two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more.
H. All projects which would increase the height of a structure or building, unless the addition is specified in this chapter as an element not considered when
determining building height. (Ord. 18-O-2755, eff. 7-20-2018)
10-3-3101: EXEMPTIONS FROM DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW:
The development plan review procedure required by this article shall not apply to the following:
A. Single-family residences and accessory uses permitted in single-family zones except single-family residences constructed pursuant to a density bonus
permit.
B. Signs.
C. Sculptures or other types of artwork.
D. Landscaping not involving any new construction of buildings or structures on the site.
E. Facade remodeling of existing buildings or structures not increasing the square footage by two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more, or
the height of the building or structure.
F. Awnings.
G. Encroachment permits approved by the City Council.
H. New construction involving less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of new or additional floor area that does not increase the height of
the structure or building and is not for the purpose of establishing a rooftop gymnasium or lunchroom pursuant to section 10-3-3107 of this article, or an
automatic teller machine adjacent to a public right-of-way.
I. Resurfacing, restriping and similar alteration of an existing legally nonconforming surface parking facility.
J. Satellite dish antennas permitted as accessory uses pursuant to section 10-3-4503 of this chapter.
K. Wireless telecommunication antenna facilities permitted without a conditional use permit pursuant to section 10-3-4509 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2615,
eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3102: REVIEWING AUTHORITY FOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW APPLICATIONS:
A. The Planning Commission shall be the reviewing authority for all development plan review applications involving the following:
1. Projects in the C-5 or Public Service Zone involving new construction with a floor area ratio greater than 1.5, other projects in those zones involving
more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of new or additional floor area, and projects in any other zone involving more than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet of new or additional floor area.
2. Multi-family residential projects involving five (5) or more new units.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 692/797
3. Any project requiring the granting of a variance.
4. Rooftop gymnasiums and lunchrooms in the C-3, C-R, C-3A, and C-3B Zones.
5. Any project referred to the Planning Commission by the Planning Director.
6. All common interest development projects, as defined in chapter 2, article 7 of this title.
7. Any project constructed pursuant to a density bonus permit.
The reviewing authority for all other projects subject to the provisions of this article shall be the City Planning Director or such other person that may
be designated by the City Manager. The Planning Director or such other designated person may refer to the Planning Commission any project that
the Director or other designated person deems appropriate for review by the commission due to the size, location, or other characteristics or impacts
of the project. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3103: PUBLIC HEARING REQUIRED FOR PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
APPLICATIONS:
A. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on all applications for which it is the reviewing authority. Noticing shall be completed in
accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice guidelines. A public hearing shall not be required for applications subject to
review by the Director of Planning and Community Development pursuant to this article.
B. A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all applications for which it is the reviewing authority pursuant to the procedures set forth in
subsection A of this section. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3104: STANDARD OF REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW APPLICATIONS:
Except as provided in this section for development plans to be located in the C-5 Zone and reviewed by the Director of Planning and Community
Development, the reviewing authority shall approve a development plan review application only if it makes all of the following findings:
A. The proposed plan is consistent with the general plan and any specific plans adopted for the area.
B. The proposed plan will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote harmonious development of the area.
For those proposed plans to be located in the C-5 Zone that are reviewed by the Planning Commission, the commission shall consider the factors set
forth in section 10-3-2021 of this chapter as part of the commission's determination regarding whether a project will promote harmonious development
of the area.
C. The nature, configuration, location, density, height and manner of operation of any commercial development proposed by the plan will not significantly
and adversely interfere with the use and enjoyment of residential properties in the vicinity of the subject property.
D. The proposed plan will not create any significantly adverse traffic impacts, traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or pedestrian safety
hazards.
E. The proposed plan will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare.
In approving a development plan application, the reviewing authority may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
With regard to development plans to be located in the C-5 Zone and to be reviewed by the Director of Planning and Community Development, the review
of the Director shall be ministerial and limited to whether such building conforms to the requirements of the C-5 Zone. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3105: DECISION AND APPEALS OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW APPLICATIONS:
The decision by the Planning Commission on a development plan application shall be by resolution. Such decision may be appealed to the City Council in
the manner provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this Code. The decision by the planning official shall be in writing and may be appealed to the
Planning Commission in the same manner as the appeal of a Planning Commission decision to the City Council.
In addition, the Planning Commission may order a review of a decision by the Planning Director in the same manner that the City Council may order the
review of a Planning Commission decision pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this Code. (Ord. 90-O-2100, eff. 9-13-1990; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff.
7-7-1995)
10-3-3106: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a development plan review approval, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be
commenced in accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-207 of this chapter, those projects located in any C-3 or C-5 Zone that: a) have rights pursuant to a
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 693/797
resolution granting development plan approval that was adopted prior to November 15, 1996, and b) are more particularly located in those areas subject to
the provisions of title 9, chapter 7, "Protection Of Subterranean Construction From Water Intrusion", of this Code, as originally adopted, may have the time
limit imposed pursuant to this section extended by as many as seven (7) years after the adoption of the initial final resolution granting development plan
approval. (Ord. 90-O-2100, eff. 9-13-1990; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 98-O-2305, eff. 8-21-1998; Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
10-3-3107: ROOFTOP USES:
A. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this title, and subject to architectural review pursuant to article 30 of this chapter, the
following rooftop uses may be permitted in accordance with the standards outlined in this section:
1. Rooftop uses in the C-3, C-R, C-3A, and C-3B Zones that exceed the height, story, and/or density limitations otherwise applicable to the
development. For the purposes of this subsection A1, rooftop uses shall include gymnasiums, lunchrooms and structures or uses ancillary to such
lunchrooms, unenclosed terraces that are ancillary to a gymnasium or lunchroom, and unenclosed architectural features that are not otherwise
excluded from the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter. Such rooftop uses may be permitted by the Planning
Commission provided that as to any such rooftop uses:
a. The Planning Commission grants a development plan review in accordance with the procedures and findings set forth in this article.
b. The additional height above the maximum height limit otherwise applicable to the development will not exceed fifteen feet (15'). Furthermore, in no
event shall the distance between the floor and ceiling of the gymnasium or lunchroom and structures or uses ancillary to such lunchroom exceed
fifteen feet (15').
c. The total floor area of the rooftop use shall not exceed the maximum allowable floor area otherwise applicable to the development by more than:
1) three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet; 2) fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the story immediately below the rooftop use; or 3) ten
percent (10%) of the total floor area of the development, whichever is less.
d. The total area of any unenclosed terraces that are ancillary to a rooftop use, or unenclosed architectural features shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total area of the story immediately below the rooftop use.
e. Unless otherwise authorized by the Planning Commission as part of the development plan review, no food service, other than vending machines,
shall be provided in connection with the rooftop use.
f. The subject structure provides not less than the minimum number of parking spaces required by this section as of the date when building permits
for the structure were issued. In addition, two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for any rooftop gymnasium and additional parking as may be
required pursuant to subsection A1l of this section shall be provided.
g. Unless otherwise authorized by the Planning Commission as part of the development plan review, only persons who work in the building or are
registered hotel guests shall be permitted to use the rooftop facilities.
h. No admittance or use fees shall be charged for the use of the rooftop facilities.
i. The rooftop uses permitted pursuant to this subsection A1 shall be set back from the front property line or from the required front setback line
immediately adjacent thereto, whichever is the more restrictive, so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to such line is not intersected. In addition, all
enclosed rooftop structures shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the street-facing facade of the story immediately below.
j. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A1i of this section, unenclosed architectural features approved pursuant to this section may intersect
a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of the nearest outside wall if the Planning Commission finds that such features are
architecturally compatible with the building and will not adversely impact the building's scale and massing.
k. Notwithstanding the provisions in the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter permitting certain elements to be located
above maximum height limits, only those elements required by law to project above the roof deck shall be permitted to exceed the fifteen foot (15')
height limit of the structure enclosing the rooftop use permitted herein.
l. The Planning Commission may modify the area limitations set forth in subsections A1c, item 2, A1c, item 3, and A1d of this section, provided that
additional parking is provided for such rooftop uses. The amount of additional parking required shall be established by the Planning Commission
as part of the development plan review.
m. A landscape plan is required to be submitted as part of the development plan review application for a rooftop use.
2. Rooftop uses in the City's commercial zones that do not exceed the height, story, and density limitations otherwise applicable to the development.
For the purposes of this subsection A2, rooftop uses shall include gymnasiums, lunchrooms and structures or uses ancillary to such lunchrooms, and
unenclosed terraces that are ancillary to a gymnasium or lunchroom located above the top story of the building. Such rooftop uses may be permitted
by the Planning Commission provided that as to any such rooftop uses:
a. The Planning Commission grants a development plan review in accordance with the procedures and findings set forth in this article.
b. The total floor area of the rooftop use shall not exceed: 1) three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet; 2) fifty percent (50%) of the total area
of the story immediately below the rooftop use; or 3) ten percent (10%) of the total floor area of the development, whichever is less.
c. The total area of any unenclosed terraces that are ancillary to a rooftop use, or unenclosed architectural features shall not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the total area of the story immediately below the rooftop use.
d. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, no food service, other than vending machines, shall be provided in
connection with the rooftop use.
e. The subject structure provides not less than the minimum number of parking spaces required by this Code as of the date when building permits for
the structure were issued. In addition, two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for any rooftop gymnasium and additional parking as may be
required pursuant to subsection A2i of this section.
f. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, only persons who work in the building or are registered hotel guests shall be
permitted to use the rooftop facilities.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 694/797
g. No admittance or use fees shall be charged for the use of the rooftop facilities.
h. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, the rooftop uses permitted pursuant to this subsection A2 shall be set back
from the front property line or from the required front setback line immediately adjacent thereto, whichever is the more restrictive, so that a forty
five degree (45°) angle to such line is not intersected.
i. The Planning Commission may modify the area limitations set forth in subsections A2b, item 2, A2b, item 3, and A2c of this section, provided that
additional parking is provided for such rooftop uses. The amount of additional parking required shall be established by the Planning Commission
as part of the development plan review.
j. A landscape plan is required to be submitted as part of the development plan review application for a rooftop use.
3. Rooftop uses in that portion of the C-3 Zone, known as the business triangle, bounded to the northeast by the alley parallel to and northwest of
Crescent Drive, to the southwest by the north side of Wilshire Boulevard and to the northwest by Santa Monica Boulevard north roadway, that
exceed height, story and/or density regulations otherwise applicable to the development. Such rooftop uses may be permitted by the Planning
Commission provided that as to any such rooftop uses:
a. The rooftop use is not an office, storage, or restaurant use.
b. The Planning Commission grants a development plan review in accordance with the procedures and findings set forth in this article.
c. In addition to the findings set forth in section 10-3-3104 of this chapter, the Planning Commission finds that the proposed rooftop use will be of
such limited intensity, frequency and/or duration so as not to significantly and adversely impact traffic and circulation in the surrounding area.
d. The additional height above the maximum height limit otherwise applicable to the development shall not exceed fifteen feet (15').
e. The floor area ratio of the building shall not exceed two to one (2:1). However, if the floor area ratio of the building exceeds two to one (2:1) prior to
the establishment of a rooftop use, then the rooftop use may be established if a portion of the existing building is removed or converted to a use
which is not calculated as "floor area" as defined in section 10-3-100 of this chapter so that there is no net increase in the existing floor area of the
building.
f. The combined area of the rooftop use and the area designated for mechanical equipment does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of
the story immediately below.
g. The additional structure shall be set back from the intersection of the roof deck and the face of any exterior wall of the floor immediately below that
faces a public right-of-way so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to the vertical plane of such exterior wall is not intersected.
4. Rooftop unenclosed terraces and unenclosed architectural features located in the C-3, C-R, C-3A and C-3B Zones that are: a) not ancillary to a
gymnasium or lunchroom; and b) that are not otherwise excluded from the definition of "height of building"; may be permitted by the Director of
Community Development, or may be forwarded by the Director to the Planning Commission for consideration, provided that as to any such
unenclosed rooftop uses:
a. The Director of Community Development or Planning Commission grants a development plan review in accordance with the procedures and
findings set forth in this article.
b. Unless otherwise authorized by the Planning Commission, the total area of the unenclosed terraces and unenclosed architectural features shall
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the story immediately below the unenclosed rooftop use.
c. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, no food service shall be provided in connection with the unenclosed terraces
and unenclosed architectural features.
d. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, only persons who work in the building or are registered hotel guests shall be
permitted to use the unenclosed terraces and unenclosed architectural features.
e. No admittance or use fees shall be charged for the use of the unenclosed terraces and unenclosed architectural features.
f. Unless otherwise authorized as part of the development plan review, the unenclosed rooftop uses permitted pursuant to this subsection A4 shall
have a seventy two inch (72") tall barrier, with the use of transparent material required above forty five inches (45") in height, for any building side
located within five feet (5') of a public street or facing any residentially zoned property.
g. Unenclosed architectural features permitted pursuant to this subsection A4 shall be set back from the front property line or from the required front
setback line immediately adjacent thereto, whichever is the more restrictive, so that a forty five degree (45°) angle to such line is not intersected.
h. A landscape plan is required to be submitted as part of the development plan review application for a rooftop use.
B. In approving an application for a rooftop use, the Planning Commission may impose such conditions as it deems appropriate, including, without
limitation, a condition that requires the subject property owner to record a covenant that a rooftop facility shall only be used for the specific use
proposed, and requiring the applicant annually to attest at the time of application for or renewal of its City business license that the rooftop facility is
only used for the specific use permitted. (Ord. 17-O-2733, eff. 6-16-2017)
10-3-3108: COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS:
Nothing required by this article shall be construed to supersede the requirements set forth in chapter 2, article 7 of this title regarding the conversion of the
form of ownership of an existing rental apartment building to a common interest development within the meaning and definitions of that article. (Ord. 06-O-
2497, eff. 4-6-2006; amd. Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
Article 32. Historic Preservation
10-3-3201: TITLE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 695/797
This article shall be known as the HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3202: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADDITION: Any expansion or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ALTERATION: Any physical modification or change to a building, structure, site, or object that may have an effect on character defining features of a
property. Alterations shall also include construction of additions or entirely new buildings and/or structures, but shall not include ordinary maintenance and
repair.
ARCHITECT: A person who is licensed as an architect in any competent jurisdiction, or who has received formal training as an architect from an accredited
educational institution, or who has otherwise demonstrated professional skill in the design and planning of buildings. The term "architect" shall include any
partnership, architectural firm, or other professional group comprised of such persons.
BUILDING: A structure that is created principally to house any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar construction,
including accessory structures, such as guesthouses, detached garages, and sheds. "Building" may also be used to refer to a historically and functionally
related unit, such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn.
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA): Collectively, Public Resources Code section 21000 et seq., and the state of California CEQA
guidelines, 14 California code of regulations 15000 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued to approve alteration, restoration, construction, removal, relocation in whole or in part, or
demolition of a designated landmark or property within a historic district.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: A certificate authorizing work described in an accompanying certificate of appropriateness because of a
finding of economic hardship pursuant to this article.
CERTIFICATE OF INELIGIBILITY: A certificate establishing that a property is not an eligible property and therefore is exempt from the provisions of this
article.
CHARACTER DEFINING FEATURE: A prominent or distinctive aspect, quality, detail, or characteristic of a property that contributes significantly to its
physical character and historical significance. Such features may include, but are not limited to, building shape, massing, projections (e.g., porches,
balconies, and bay windows), openings (e.g., doors, windows, and arches), distinguishing aspects, roof attributes, architectural details, materials,
moldings, sculptures, fountains, light fixtures, landscaping, and monuments.
CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS REGISTER OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES: A register containing those properties and geographical areas formally designated
by the city council as landmarks or historic districts pursuant to this article. The register shall also include contributing properties within historic districts.
The most recent version of the register shall be published on the city's official website, and a copy of it shall be available for review in the city clerk's office.
COMMISSION: The cultural heritage commission as defined in section 10-3-3207 of this chapter.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A property, including all buildings, structures, objects, and character defining features located on it, that adds or contributes
to the significance of a historic district and satisfies all of the requirements for designation under this article.
DEMOLITION OR DEMOLISH: Any act or process that destroys a property in part or in whole such that the historic character and character defining
features of the property are completely removed and cannot be repaired or replaced. The terms "demolition" or "demolish" shall include, but are not limited
to, the act of pulling down, destroying, removing, or razing a property, or commencing work thereof with the intent of completing the same.
DIRECTOR: The city's director of community development.
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: The inability of a property owner to make a fair beneficial use of the property or derive a fair economic return from the property in
its current form, as set forth in this article.
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY: A property for which there is prima facie evidence to support a finding that all of the applicable requirements for designation as a
landmark under this article can be met.
EXCEPTIONAL WORK: A remarkably superior example of architectural work that has been recognized as such by members of the architectural
community. At a minimum, the work's exceptional quality shall have been documented by at least one of the following: a) it was the subject of a major
architectural award; b) it was substantively discussed (i.e., not just mentioned) and photographically depicted in a monograph on a master architect's
career; or c) it was substantively discussed or photographically depicted in at least two (2) publications (e.g., a book, treatise, trade magazine article, film,
or set of photographs made available to the public by an institutional archive) authored by acknowledged experts in the field of architecture. A monograph
or publication made available to the public solely in electronic form and without any reasonable expectation of compensation to the author, or substantially
authored by the architect of the work, shall not count toward this minimum.
HISTORIC ASSESSMENT REPORT: A comprehensive report prepared by a qualified historic preservation consultant that assesses whether or not a
specific property or geographical area, as the case may be, satisfies all of the requirements for designation as a landmark or historic district. The report
shall include not only the requisite findings, but also all known facts and circumstances that either support or possibly refute those findings.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: A geographic area having a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or
character defining features united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development that has been designated pursuant to this article and is
listed on the local register.
HISTORIC PROPERTY: A property that has been designated as a landmark or contributing property pursuant to this article and is listed on the local
register.
ICONIC PROPERTY: A property that has been visited and photographed so often by residents and visitors to the city that it has become inextricably
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 696/797
associated with Beverly Hills in the popular culture and forms part of the city's identity to the world at large.
INTEGRITY: The ability of a property to convey its historical significance through its location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, relevant
association, and character defining features.
INVENTORY OF ELIGIBLE PROPERTIES: A list maintained by the city that contains all properties surveyed for historical or architectural significance and
determined by the commission to be eligible properties. In creating and maintaining the inventory, surveys of individual properties or of several properties
may be conducted, and any information obtained thereby shall be compiled in accordance with professional standards. The most recent version of the
inventory shall be published on the city's official website, and a copy of it shall be available for review in the city clerk's office.
LANDMARK: Any property, including any building, structure, object, place, landscaping, or natural feature located on it that has been designated as a
landmark pursuant to this article and is listed on the local register. In addition, any interior space or spaces of a landmark that is or was regularly open or
accessible to the general public, or to which the public is or was regularly invited, including, but not limited to, a lobby area, restaurant areas, theaters and
banks, may be included in the property's landmark designation.
LIST OF LOCAL MASTER ARCHITECTS: A list maintained by the city that includes master architects as defined in this article who have designed
properties in the city. The most recent version of the list shall be published on the city's official website, and a copy of it shall be available for review in the
city clerk's office.
LOCAL INVENTORY: The inventory of eligible properties.
LOCAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES OR LOCAL REGISTER: The city of Beverly Hills register of historic properties.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: See definition of Ordinary Maintenance And Repair.
MAJOR ARCHITECTURAL AWARD: An award given annually by an authoritative body in the field of architecture, and voted on by a jury comprised mainly
of distinguished architects, for excellence in the design of a building or for a lifetime of architectural achievement.
MASTER ARCHITECT: An architect of widely recognized greatness in the field of architecture whose individual genius influenced his or her age.
MILLS ACT: The California Government Code section 50280 et seq., as amended from time to time.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES: The official list of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in American history,
architecture, archaeology, and/or culture which is maintained by the secretary of the interior under the authority of the historic sites act of 1935, and the
national historic preservation act of 1966, as amended (16 USC 470 et seq., 36 CFR sections 60, 63).
NATURAL FEATURE: Any naturally occurring tree, plant, plant community, or geographical or geological site or feature.
NOMINATED PROPERTY: A property that has been nominated by the commission for listing on the local register as a landmark or a contributing property.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTY: A property within a designated historic district that is not a contributing property.
OBJECT: The term "object" is used to distinguish from buildings and structures those constructs that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in
scale and of simple construction. Although it may be, by nature or design, movable, an object is associated with a specific setting or environment.
Fountains and sculpture are examples of objects.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: Any work that meets the criteria established in subsection 10-3-3219B of this chapter.
OWNER: Any person(s), association, partnership, firm, corporation, or public entity identified as the holder of title on any property. For purposes of this
article, the term owner shall also refer to an appointed representative of an association, partnership, firm, corporation, or public entity which is a recorded
owner. Absent contrary evidence, the owner shown on the latest assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles shall be presumed to be the owner.
PERIOD OF SIGNIFICANCE: The span of time that a property or geographic area attained the character defining features that qualify it for designation as
a landmark or a historic district.
PERSON OF GREAT IMPORTANCE: A person whose activities had a substantial impact on the history of the nation, which impact can be demonstrated
through scholarly research and judgment. At a minimum, a person of great importance is someone whose name and exploits were widely known across
America during his/her lifetime, and whose widespread fame continues through to the present day. A person shall not be considered to be of great
importance by virtue of his/her position or title, race, gender, ethnicity, or religion.
PERSON OF GREAT LOCAL PROMINENCE: A person whose activities had such a substantial impact on the history of the city of Beverly Hills that a
public street or public park in the city was named after him or her.
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION: An evaluation by the director as to whether or not a property that is not on the local inventory is an eligible property.
PRESERVATION: The act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity, and/or materials of a property.
PROPERTY: The entirety of a site, including the buildings, structures, landscaping, objects, and other physical aspects of the location.
PROPERTY OF EXTRAORDINARY SIGNIFICANCE: A property having truly extraordinary significance in the field of architecture under applicable
evaluation criteria and context as defined in: "Criteria Consideration G: Properties That Have Achieved Significance Within The Last Fifty Years" in the
"National Register Bulletin: How To Apply The National Register Criteria For Evaluation".
PROPERTY WITHIN A HISTORIC DISTRICT: Refers to both contributing properties and noncontributing properties in a historic district.
QUALIFIED HISTORIC PRESERVATION CONSULTANT: A consultant that meets the secretary of the interior's professional qualifications standards, as
defined in 36 CFR 61, or its successor.
RECONSTRUCTION: The act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a building, structure, object, landscaping, or a
part thereof, as it appeared at a specified period of time prior to alteration or demolition.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 697/797
REHABILITATION: Any act or process of making a compatible use for a property through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions
or character defining features which convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values.
RELOCATION: The act or process of moving all or part of a property from one site to another site, or to a different location on the same site.
RESTORATION: The act or process of accurately refurbishing the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time
by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS: The "Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties With Guidelines
For Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, And Reconstructing Historic Buildings" found at 36 CFR 68.3, as amended from time to time.
STABILIZATION: The act or process of applying measures designed to reestablish a weather resistant enclosure or the structural stability of an unsafe or
deteriorated property while maintaining the essential form as it exists at present.
STATE HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE: Part 2.7 of the California Health And Safety Code, commencing with section 18950, and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, as amended from time to time.
STRUCTURE: The term "structure" includes both buildings and other functional constructions made for purposes other than housing human activity, such
as reservoirs and retaining walls.
SUBSTANTIAL INTEGRITY: Integrity that is considerable in importance, value, degree, amount, or extent, and that continues to exist, or would have
continued to exist, but for work done without appropriate permits after the enactment of this article.
SURVEY: A systematic and standardized process for identifying and gathering data on the city's potential historic properties which can be used to
determine whether any specific property is an eligible property that may be listed on the local inventory. A director's preliminary evaluation of a property
may also qualify as a survey for the purposes of this article. Surveys may be conducted by or on behalf of the city, or by a qualified historic preservation
consultant for a property owner; but in the latter case, the director shall have the discretion to approve or disapprove the adequacy of the survey results for
the purposes of this article. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015; amd. Ord. 16-O-2700, eff. 4-1-2016)
10-3-3203: INTENT, PURPOSE AND AUTHORIZATION:
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide the ability to acknowledge, honor, and encourage the continued maintenance and preservation of those
select properties in the city that, through exceptional architecture or a direct connection to important historical events, contribute to an understanding and
appreciation of the city's history. The standards and requirements in this article are intended to be flexible, taking into account financial feasibility on the
part of a property owner to meet the article's provisions. Further, it is the intent and purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare by:
A. Protecting the character of the city, and promoting greater awareness and understanding of the city's history, through the preservation and maintenance
of the city's historic properties;
B. Fostering civic pride and a sense of identity through the recognition of historical and architectural accomplishments of the city and its residents;
C. Educating the public about Beverly Hills' cultural, social, and architectural history;
D. Strengthening the city's economy by protecting and enhancing the city's attractions to residents, tourists, visitors, and others, thereby serving as a
stimulus and support to local business and industry;
E. Enhancing property values and making the city's historic properties eligible for financial benefits and incentives;
F. Acknowledging the critical role served by owners of the city's historic properties in furthering the goal of historic preservation pursuant to the city's
general plan;
G. Encouraging preservation and adaptive reuse of historic properties by allowing changes to them to accommodate new functions, and not to "freeze"
historic properties in time;
H. Identifying financial and other incentives that are intended to encourage owners to designate, maintain, reuse, rehabilitate, and improve historic
properties. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3204: ADMINISTRATIVE GUIDELINES:
The director is authorized to develop and make publicly available guidelines for the nomination, designation, and preservation of historic properties, and
such other supporting documents as the director deems necessary or desirable to implement this article. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3205: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued for any activity regulated by this article unless and until the proposed activity has been granted final approval or conditional
approval pursuant to the provisions of this article, and then the permit shall be issued in conformity with such approval or conditional approval. (Ord. 15-O-
2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 698/797
10-3-3206: MINIMUM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner, and every person in possession or control, of a historic property shall, to the maximum extent practicable, maintain and keep the property
and its character defining features in good repair, as defined in sections 5-7-3 and 5-7-4 of this code. In the event that a historic property constitutes a
public nuisance or is subject to vandalism, the city may issue any order it deems appropriate to prevent further vandalism or public nuisance pursuant to
sections 1-3-101 and 5-7-6 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3207: CULTURAL HERITAGE COMMISSION:
A. Establishment Of Commission: There is hereby established the cultural heritage commission. The commission shall have and exercise the powers and
perform the duties set forth in this article with respect to historic preservation.
B. Appointment And Qualifications: The commission shall be composed of five (5) members appointed by the city council, all of whom shall be residents of
the city. Members of the commission shall have the duties and functions set forth in this article.
The commissioners should have a demonstrated interest in, competence in, or knowledge of historic preservation. To the extent feasible and legally
permissible, at least two (2) of the commissioners should be professionals who meet the qualifications for certain professional disciplines, including
those outlined by the U.S. secretary of the interior, code of federal regulations, 36 CFR part 61. These professional disciplines include history,
architecture, architectural history, planning, prehistoric and historic archaeology, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation, and landscape
architecture, or related disciplines such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, or cultural geography, to the extent that these
professionals are available in the community. Of the five (5) members, at least one should be a registered architect, licensed contractor, or a California
real estate licensee.
C. Rules And Orders: The city council shall appoint the first chair and vice chair of the commission. Thereafter, the commission shall elect officers and
establish its own rules and regulations, which shall be consistent with the cultural heritage commission bylaws and this code. Copies of the
commission's bylaws shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and
transactions, and the city clerk shall be the repository for all such records.
D. Secretary Of The Commission: The director shall assign an employee of the community development department, other than the director, to be the
secretary of the commission, and assign duties to the employee which shall be in addition to the duties regularly prescribed for that employee.
The secretary shall attend commission meetings and keep a record of the proceedings and transactions of the commission, specifying the names of
the commissioners in attendance at each meeting and the ayes and noes upon all roll calls. The secretary shall, among other duties, post and publish
all orders, resolutions, and notices which the commission shall order to be posted and published.
E. Scheduled Meetings: The commission shall meet at least four (4) times per year. In the event the commission has more than one regular meeting per
quarter, the term "regular meeting" shall mean the first such meeting in any given quarter. The commission shall establish a time and place for regular
meetings to be held. Each meeting shall be noticed and held in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown act. The commission chairperson shall have the
authority to call and notice special meetings in a manner specified in the Ralph M. Brown act.
F. Quorum And Actions Of The Commission: A majority of the members of the commission must be present at any meeting to constitute a quorum. The
powers conferred upon the commission shall be exercised by resolution or motion and adopted by a majority vote of the members present and
recorded in the minutes with the ayes and noes. The action shall be attested to by the signature of the secretary of the commission.
G. Commission Authority In Development Review: When this article is applicable in the review of a project consisting of a development entitlement
pursuant to other articles of this title, the cultural heritage commission shall be authorized to review all development entitlement applications for the
project in its entirety unless any part of the development entitlement would require approval of the planning commission, in which case the planning
commission shall be the commission authorized to review all development entitlement applications for the project in its entirety, including application of
this article. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3208: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the duties of the cultural heritage commission shall be as follows:
A. Exercise the authority set forth in this article and as otherwise provided in this code;
B. Inspect, investigate, and recommend for designation by the city council landmarks and historic districts, and make any preliminary or supplemental
determinations or conclusions in order to implement this article;
C. Compile or cause to be compiled and maintained the local register listing and describing all designated historic properties within the city;
D. Compile or cause to be compiled and maintained the list of local master architects;
E. Review any survey, and compile or cause to be compiled and maintained the local inventory;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 699/797
F. Conduct studies and evaluations of applications or proposals seeking the designation of historic properties, make determinations and recommendations
as appropriate for consideration of such applications, and make any preliminary or supplemental determinations or conclusions, in order to implement
this article;
G. Develop designs for suitable signs, plaques, or other markers that may be placed, at private expense, on or near a designated historic property
indicating that the property has been designated as such;
H. Review and act upon applications for certificates of appropriateness and economic hardship, and, in connection therewith, advise the city council on the
significance of historic resources as defined by CEQA and recommend to the city council appropriate action in compliance with the city's adopted
CEQA guidelines;
I. Recommend, promulgate, and amend, from time to time, such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this article;
J. Review and make recommendations to the city council on Mills act contracts;
K. Provide recommendations to the city council regarding the utilization and promotion of incentives and grants from federal and state agencies, private
groups, and individuals, and regarding budgetary appropriations to advance the preservation of historic properties in the city;
L. Participate in, promote, and conduct public information, educational, and interpretive programs pertaining to historic properties, and provide public
participation in all aspects of the city's historic preservation program;
M. Coordinate with other local, county, state, and federal governments in the pursuit of the city's historic preservation goals;
N. Upon request by the city council or the planning commission, review and make recommendations to the planning commission on zoning and general
plan amendments related to preserving historic properties;
O. Develop a program to celebrate historic and eligible properties, and recognize outstanding maintenance, rehabilitation, and preservation of historic
properties;
P. Require that each commissioner attend at least one informational or educational meeting, seminar, workshop, or conference per year; and
Q. Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the city council. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3209: PRESERVATION INCENTIVES:
The city council may by resolution establish preservation incentives to encourage owners to designate, maintain, preserve, rehabilitate, and improve
historic properties. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3210: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INVENTORY OF ELIGIBLE PROPERTIES:
The inventory of eligible properties is hereby created. The commission shall maintain the local inventory and determine which properties are eligible
properties that may be listed on it, and shall periodically review, amend, and update the local inventory as appropriate. Properties listed on the local
inventory may be nominated for inclusion on the city's local register of historic properties as set forth in this article. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3211: ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CITY OF BEVERLY HILLS REGISTER OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES:
The city of Beverly Hills register of historic properties is hereby created. Properties listed on the local register may be identified on site with an exterior
marker or plaque displaying pertinent information about the property. A record of properties on the local register shall be kept by the city, and shall be
provided to the regional information center of the state office of historic preservation and other agencies as required. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3212: LANDMARK DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
An eligible property may be nominated and designated as a landmark if it satisfies the requirements set forth below.
A. A landmark must satisfy all of the following requirements:
1. It is at least forty five (45) years of age, or is a property of extraordinary significance;
2. It possesses high artistic or aesthetic value, and embodies the distinctive characteristics of an architectural style or architectural type or architectural
period;
3. It retains substantial integrity from its period of significance; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 700/797
4. It has continued historic value to the community such that its designation as a landmark is reasonable and necessary to promote and further the
purposes of this article.
B. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, a landmark must satisfy at least one of the following requirements:
1. It is listed on the national register of historic places;
2. It is an exceptional work by a master architect;
3. It is an exceptional work that was owned and occupied by a person of great importance, and was directly connected to a momentous event in the
person's endeavors or the history of the nation. For purposes of this subsection B3, personal events such as birth, death, marriage, social
interaction, and the like shall not be deemed to be momentous;
4. It is an exceptional property that was owned and occupied by a person of great local prominence;
5. It is an iconic property; or
6. The landmark designation procedure is initiated, or expressly agreed to, by the owner(s) of the property. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3213: HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION CRITERIA:
A geographic area may be nominated and designated as a historic district if the district satisfies all of the following requirements:
A. The district is comprised of contributing properties that are contiguous or grouped in close proximity, and that are located in a definable area and are
unified by theme, plan, or physical development;
B. The district reflects significant development patterns, including those associated with different eras of urban growth, particular transportation modes, or
distinctive examples of community planning;
C. No part of the district, and no property in the district, is located in an area of the city zoned for one-family development, including, but not limited to, any
area zoned R-1;
D. At least seventy percent (70%) of the properties in the district are contributing properties;
E. All of the contributing properties predominantly embody the distinctive elements of a single architectural style or architectural type or architectural
period;
F. Each contributing property retains substantial integrity from the district's period of significance; and
G. The district as a whole has continued historic value to the community such that its designation as a district is reasonable and necessary to promote and
further the goals of this article. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3214: STREET IMPROVEMENTS IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS:
Whenever streetscape improvements are proposed by the city in historic districts, the city shall consider the use of materials, landscaping, light standards,
and signage that are compatible with the area's historic and architectural character. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3215: LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEEDINGS:
A property or geographical area may be designated as a landmark or historic district, respectively, and added to the city's local register, after proceedings
are initiated by a property owner or the city, the property or geographical area is nominated for designation by the commission, and the property or
geographical area is designated as a landmark or historic district by the city council pursuant to the proceedings set forth in this section.
A. Initiation Of Proceedings: Proceedings for designation of a landmark or historic district may be initiated by the property owner (in the case of a proposed
landmark) or the owners of contributing properties (in the case of a historic district), by the commission, or by the city council.
1. Initiation By Property Owner(s): A property owner (in the case of a proposed landmark) or the owners of properties (in the case of a proposed
historic district) may initiate designation proceedings by filing a written application with the department of community development. The application
shall be completed on a form provided by the department, and shall include all required information and payment of applicable fees. When the
application is by owners of properties for designation of a historic district, the application shall include a petition in support of the application signed
by more than fifty percent (50%) of the property owners of legal lots within the proposed district, and shall also include a current list of names and
legal mailing addresses of all property owners in the proposed district.
Within thirty (30) days after the filing, the director shall review the application materials and determine whether the application is complete or whether
additional information is required. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the director shall promptly inform the applicant in writing of the
missing information. Within thirty (30) days after the submittal of the missing information, the director shall again review the application materials and
determine if the application is complete. The processing time lines and procedures set forth in this section shall commence on the next business day
after the application is deemed complete.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 701/797
a. In the case of a proposed landmark, if the property is not listed on the local inventory, then the application shall include sufficient information to
establish that the property is an eligible property. In the case of a proposed historic district, if less than seventy percent (70%) of the properties in
the geographical area are listed on the local inventory, then the application shall contain sufficient information to establish that all of the
requirements for a historic district can be met.
b. Although historic districts are not permitted in any area of the city zoned for one-family development, the director shall make available a form of
application whereby owners of multiple properties in such an area may jointly apply to have their properties considered for designation as
individual landmarks.
2. Initiation By Commission Or City Council: The commission or the city council, as the case may be, may initiate designation proceedings concerning a
proposed landmark by requesting that the matter be placed on its agenda at a noticed hearing.
a. The commission may initiate designation proceedings only with the agreement of the subject property's owner(s), or when the subject property
either: 1) is listed on the local inventory; 2) was designed by a person identified on the local list of master architects; 3) was owned and occupied
by a person of great importance; or 4) was owned and occupied by a person of great local prominence.
3. Preliminary Evaluation: Within fourteen (14) days after an application for designation is deemed complete, or after the commission or the city council,
as the case may be, initiates designation proceedings, the director shall prepare a written preliminary evaluation opining whether or not sufficient
evidence exists to support a finding that all of the applicable requirements for designation as a landmark or historic district, as the case may be, can
be met, and setting forth all of the facts known to the director in support of said opinion. The director shall promptly forward copies of the preliminary
evaluation to the city council, the commission, and the affected property owner(s).
4. Notice Of Preliminary Hearing: Upon completion of the preliminary evaluation, the director shall schedule a preliminary hearing before the
commission (in the case of designation proceedings initiated by a property owner or the commission) or before the city council (in the case of
designation proceedings initiated by the city council) at the reviewing body's next regularly held meeting to determine whether the proposed
landmark or proposed historic district, as the case may be, merits formal consideration for nomination by the commission; provided, however, that if
the next regularly scheduled meeting is set to occur less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days after completion of the preliminary
evaluation, the director shall schedule the preliminary hearing to occur within thirty (30) days after completion of the preliminary evaluation at another
meeting of the reviewing body. The director shall give written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing to all affected property
owners (i.e., the owner(s) of a proposed landmark or the owners of all properties in a proposed historic district, as the case may be) and their
designated agent(s) by first class, prepaid mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Any affected property owner that has not yet received
a copy of the preliminary evaluation report shall be given a copy with the notice of hearing.
5. Preliminary Hearing:
a. At a preliminary hearing initiated by application of a property owner, the commission shall determine whether sufficient evidence exists to conclude
that the subject property or geographical area satisfies all applicable designation criteria, and, if so, whether the property or area merits formal
consideration for nomination. If, based on the director's preliminary evaluation and any other evidence provided to the commission at or prior to the
hearing, the commission determines that sufficient evidence exists and the property or area merits formal consideration, it shall schedule a public
hearing before the commission within seventy five (75) days for the commission to consider nomination of a property, or within one hundred twenty
(120) days for the commission to consider nomination of an area. If the commission determines that sufficient evidence does not exist, or that the
property or area does not merit formal consideration, that shall be a final action of the commission, which is appealable pursuant to title 1, chapter
4, article 1 of this code or reviewable by the city council pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code. Any determination as to whether or not
the subject property or geographical area merits formal consideration for nomination shall be in writing, shall be filed by the commission secretary
with the director, and shall be provided to the owner(s) of all properties that are the subject of the application. At a preliminary hearing initiated by
the commission or the city council, the reviewing body shall determine whether sufficient evidence exists to conclude that the subject property is an
eligible property, and, if so, whether the property merits formal consideration for nomination. If, based on the director's preliminary evaluation and
any other evidence provided to the commission or the city council at or prior to the hearing, the commission or the city council, as the case may be,
determines that sufficient evidence exists and the property merits formal consideration, it shall schedule a public hearing before the commission
within seventy five (75) days for the commission to consider nomination. If the commission or the city council, as the case may be, determines that
sufficient evidence does not exist, or that the property or area does not merit formal consideration, that shall be a final action of the reviewing body;
if such action is by the commission, it is appealable pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code or reviewable by the city council pursuant to
title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code. Any determination as to whether or not the subject property merits formal consideration for nomination shall
be in writing, shall be filed by the commission secretary or the city clerk with the director, and shall be provided to the property owner(s).
B. Historic Assessment Report: Upon a determination that the subject property (in the case of a proposed landmark) or geographical area (in the case of a
proposed historic district) satisfies the applicable designation criteria and merits formal consideration for nomination by the commission, the director
shall cause to be prepared a written historic assessment report concerning the property or geographical area to be used at all future designation
proceedings. The report shall be completed no more than forty five (45) days after a determination that formal nomination consideration is merited for
an individual property, and no more than ninety (90) days after a determination that formal nomination consideration is merited for a geographical area,
and copies of the report shall be immediately provided to the owner(s) of the proposed landmark or of all properties in the proposed historic district, as
the case may be, by first class, prepaid mail. Copies of the report shall also be promptly provided to the designated agents of the property owner(s) by
first class, prepaid mail, and to the city council and the commission, which in any event shall occur not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing at
which the commission shall formally consider nomination. Failure to provide copies of the assessment report to the property owner(s) within the time
periods set forth in this subsection shall, upon the request of a property owner, require a continuance of the nomination hearing for a period of time not
to exceed the number of days of the delay; provided, however, that if copies of the report are not provided to the property owners(s) within sixty (60)
days after the commission's determination to formally consider nomination of a proposed landmark, or within one hundred five (105) days after the
commission's determination to formally consider nomination of a proposed historic district, then such a failure will be deemed to be a final decision by
the commission not to nominate the subject property or district.
1. If the subject property (in the case of a proposed landmark) or a property located in the geographical area (in the case of a proposed historic district)
is not readily visible from the public right of way, the owner(s) of the property shall grant the city's qualified historic preservation consultant access to
the exterior of the buildings and structures on the property for purposes of preparing the historic assessment report. Such access shall be granted
within fifteen (15) days after the commission or the city council determines that the proposed landmark or historic district merits formal consideration
for nomination; if access is not granted during that fifteen (15) day period, then the time periods set forth in this subsection shall be extended for as
long as access is denied after the expiration of the fifteen (15) day period.
C. Notice Of Nomination Hearing: Written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of a public hearing for the commission to formally consider
nominating a property or geographical area for designation as a landmark or historic district, as the case may be, shall be given by first class, prepaid
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 702/797
mail not less than fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing to the applicant, if any, and to all owner(s) of the affected properties and their respective
designated agent(s). The commission may also direct that other notice be provided as it deems appropriate.
D. Nomination Hearing: At the conclusion of a public hearing, or any continuation thereof, but in no case more than forty five (45) days after the date first
set for the hearing, the commission shall nominate, in whole or in part, or decline to nominate the subject property or geographical area for designation
as a landmark or historic district, as the case may be. The decision of the commission shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons
relied upon to reach the decision, and such decision shall be filed with the director. If the commission fails to take action on the matter within the
allotted forty five (45) days, such inaction shall be deemed a decision not to nominate, and it shall be the duty of the director to certify that as the
decision of the commission. Upon the commission's rendering of a decision regarding nomination of a property or district, the director shall give written
notification to the owner(s) of the subject property or owners of all properties in the proposed district.
E. Findings By The Commission: The commission shall base its decision on the city's historic assessment report, such other evidence as is introduced at
or prior to the nomination hearing, and the requirements for designation set forth in this article. If nominating a property for designation as a landmark,
the commission shall specify the significant elements or character defining features of the property. If nominating a historic district, the commission
shall identify all contributing properties in the proposed district along with the buildings, structures, objects, and character defining features located on
each, and shall also identify the district's boundary and unifying theme, plan, or physical development, and the contributing properties' common
architectural style or architectural type or architectural period. Properties, buildings, structures, and objects that happen to be located within a proposed
district but are not identified as contributing properties shall be deemed noncontributing properties.
F. Authority To Appeal: Only an owner of property subject to the designation proceedings shall have the authority to appeal a decision by the commission
pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The city council shall have the authority to call up such decisions for review
pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code. If the commission's decision not to nominate is not appealed to the city council or
called up for review within the applicable statutory time period, then the decision shall be deemed a final decision not to designate.
G. Hearing And Decision By The City Council: The city council shall consider the matter as soon as practicable after receiving the commission's
nomination of a property or area for designation, or after receiving a timely appeal of a commission's decision not to nominate, or after timely voting to
call up such a decision. The city council by written resolution may approve, reject, or give modified approval to the commission's action, but any
resolution to approve a nomination or reverse a decision not to nominate must be supported by four (4) members of the council if any owner of the
proposed landmark, or of a property in the proposed historic district, opposes designation; provided, however, that if conflicts of interest result in a
quorum comprised of only three (3) members of the council, then such a resolution may be supported by three (3) members of the council. If the city
council approves a nomination, or rejects a commission decision not to nominate, then the subject property(ies) shall be designated as a landmark or
historic district, as the case may be, and the city clerk shall notify the owner(s) of the landmark, or the owners of the properties in the historic district, of
the city council's action. If the city council fails to take final action on the matter within ninety (90) days after first acquiring jurisdiction over the matter
pursuant to this section, or within such additional time as the city and the property owner(s) may mutually agree to, such inaction shall be deemed a
final decision not to designate.
H. Historic Property Resolution: The resolution designating a landmark or historic district shall include:
1. The location of the landmark or the boundaries of the historic district, as the case may be;
2. For a historic district, a description of the district's boundary and unifying theme, plan, or physical development, and a list of the contributing
properties and their common architectural style or architectural type or architectural period;
3. A description of the period of significance of the landmark or historic district;
4. A description of the particular attributes that justify the designation and a list of the character defining features that should be preserved;
5. The reasons for designation; and
6. A set of general guidelines to establish standards for future proposed changes.
I. Recordation Of Resolution: A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder of the county of Los Angeles by the
city clerk immediately following its effective date. The city clerk shall also send a copy of said resolution to the director, the director of public works and
transportation, the building official, and the owner(s) and occupant(s) of the subject property or properties. The document to be recorded shall contain:
1. A legal description of the property or properties;
2. The date and substance of the designation;
3. A statement explaining that demolition, alteration, relocation, rehabilitation, stabilization, or reconstruction of the property is restricted; and
4. A reference to this section authorizing the recordation.
J. Effect Of Designation: Upon designation, and thereafter, the provisions of this article shall apply to the designated property, historic district, and
properties within the historic district. The owner(s) of said property(ies) shall maintain and preserve the property(ies) as required by section 10-3-3206
of this chapter.
K. Effect Of Nondesignation: When designation proceedings initiated by application of a property owner result in a nondesignation (i.e., a decision by the
commission not to formally consider a nomination or not to nominate, or a decision by the council not to designate) of a proposed landmark or historic
district, then no application concerning the same property (in the case of a proposed landmark) or substantially the same geographical area (in the
case of a proposed historic district) shall be considered by the city for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of the final action on the prior
application. When designation proceedings initiated by the commission or the city council result in a nondesignation of a proposed landmark, then the
city shall issue a certificate of ineligibility regarding the subject property as set forth in subsection 10-3-3221C of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 703/797
L. Withdrawal Of Application: An application for designation of a landmark or historic district may be withdrawn at any time prior to designation by the city
council. A withdrawal shall be made in writing by the original applicant(s) in the case of a proposed landmark, or by the owners of a majority of the
subject properties in the case of a proposed historic district. A withdrawn application shall be deemed void ab initio for purposes of the application of
this article, except that any fees paid to the city prior to the withdrawal shall not be repaid or reimbursed.
M. Effect Of Denial Of Request To Rescind Historic Designation: When an owner of a property designated as a landmark or contributing property files an
application to have that designation rescinded under section 10-3-3216 of this chapter, and when such request is denied by the city, no new application
to delete the same property(ies) from the local register may be filed or submitted for a period of two (2) years from the effective date of the denial.
N. Extension Of Time Periods: Any period of time to act specified in this section may be extended by the city council, the commission, or the director upon
request of the owner of the proposed landmark or, in the case of a proposed historic district, of a majority of the property owners that signed the petition
filed with the application for designation. Such a request shall be made in writing or on the record at a noticed hearing. In the absence of such a
request, if the city is unable to act within a period of time specified in this section, the city shall automatically receive a fourteen (14) day extension of
time in which to act; provided, however, that the city may only receive one such automatic extension during the course of the proceedings specified in
this section, and if the automatic extension results in a shorter notice period or period in which an owner of a subject property may act or prepare to act,
then the owner shall be granted an identical extension of time upon request. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3216: AMENDMENT OR RESCISSION OF LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
Once a landmark or historic district designation is made, it shall not be repealed by the city council unless it is determined at any time that:
A. Evidence used to establish the designation was erroneous, newly discovered evidence establishes that the designation was erroneous, the historic
assessment report used to make the designation omitted material evidence, or material procedural errors were made during the designation
proceedings; or
B. The landmark or historic district no longer meets the criteria for designation under section 10-3-3212 or 10-3-3213 of this chapter, respectively, due to
damage caused by natural disaster (e.g., flood, earthquake, etc.) or reasons otherwise outside of the control of the owner.
Changes of use, differences of opinion of subsequent city councils, desires of property owners, or general financial considerations shall not be
sufficient reasons to repeal a designation. The repeal of a landmark or historic district may be initiated by the commission, the city council, or an owner
of the subject property. The city council shall consider an application for repeal of a previously designated landmark or historic district utilizing the same
proceedings for designation set forth in section 10-3-3215 of this chapter. If a landmark or historic district designation is repealed, the city's register of
historic properties shall be updated accordingly. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3217: DEMOLITION, ALTERATION, OR RELOCATION OF PROPERTY WHILE DESIGNATION PROCEEDINGS ARE
PENDING; TEMPORARY PROTECTIONS:
Upon the initiation of designation proceedings, any alteration, restoration, reconstruction, relocation, rehabilitation, stabilization, or demolition, in whole or
in part, of a proposed landmark or a property located in a proposed historic district is prohibited, and no permits shall be issued by any city department,
board, or commission, including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit, a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map permit, a development review
permit, any administrative approval, design review approval, or architectural review approval. No building permit authorizing any alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, relocation, rehabilitation, stabilization, or demolition shall be granted while a property or historic district is being considered for nomination
by the commission or designation by the city council, or any appeal related thereto is pending. Pending permit applications may be processed, but no final
action shall be taken until after the conclusion of all designation proceedings and the expiration of all periods for appeal or city council review thereof.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may waive the hold on building permits if the director determines that proposed work would not alter any of the
character defining features of a subject property, or that the work would comply with the secretary of the interior's standards. The director may also issue
permits to mitigate or eliminate an imminent threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
If, in a final decision, the commission decides not to nominate a property or geographical area for designation as a landmark or historic district, as the case
may be, or the city council decides not to designate a nominated property or geographical area as a landmark or historic district, as the case may be, then,
after all periods for appeal or city council review have expired, the temporary prohibition on the issuance of a permit to alter, restore, reconstruct, relocate,
rehabilitate, stabilize, or demolish the proposed landmark, or the properties within the proposed historic district, shall terminate, and, upon the issuance of
such permits, alteration, restoration, reconstruction, relocation, rehabilitation, stabilization, or demolition may proceed. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3218: HOLD PERIOD FOR PERMITS TO ALTER CERTAIN BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND OBJECTS FORTY FIVE
YEARS OF AGE AND OLDER:
Any work involving a change in design, material, or appearance proposed on a property that is listed on the local inventory, or that is at least forty five (45)
years or older and was designed by a person identified on the city's list of master architects, or both, or that is otherwise determined to be an eligible
property by the director within the ten (10) day notice period required under section 9-1-107 of this code, section 102.6.4, shall be subject to a thirty (30)
day holding period prior to the issuance of any permits. Permit applications may be processed, however no final action shall be taken until after the thirty
(30) day period has ended, and the permit applicant shall pull the permit within thirty (30) days after the end of the thirty (30) day holding period. The
director may waive the thirty (30) day holding period if the director determines that the subject property is not an eligible property, or that the proposed
work would not alter any character defining features or would comply with the secretary of the interior's standards. Work proposed on historic properties
and properties within historic districts may require a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to section 10-3-3219 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-
19-2015)
10-3-3219: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 704/797
No person, owner, or other entity shall alter, restore, reconstruct, relocate, rehabilitate, stabilize, demolish, or change the exterior appearance of a
designated landmark or contributing property without first having applied for and been granted a certificate of appropriateness or certificate of economic
hardship, unless the work proposed qualifies as "ordinary maintenance and repair" as defined in this article. Furthermore, a certificate of appropriateness
or certificate of economic hardship may be required for alterations, demolition, new construction, and exterior changes in appearance of noncontributing
properties in a designated historic district, as provided below.
A. Applications: An owner of a historic property or a noncontributing property in a historic district may request a certificate of appropriateness by filing a
written application with the department of community development. The application shall be completed on a form provided by the department, and shall
include all required information and payment of applicable fees.
B. Ordinary Maintenance And Repair: A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for ordinary maintenance and repair of a designated landmark
or property within a historic district. Ordinary maintenance and repair shall mean work on a landmark property or property within a historic district that
meets all of the following conditions:
1. Does not, by law, require issuance of a permit;
2. Involves regular, customary, or usual care of an existing building, structure, object, or site, for the purposes of preserving said property and
maintaining it in a safe and sanitary condition; and
3. Does not involve a change of design, material, or appearance of the property.
C. Standards For Review Of Noncontributing Properties In A Historic District: Any construction work proposed on a noncontributing property shall be
reviewed to assure that the scale, massing, materials, and design of the work is compatible with the district.
Unless otherwise set forth in this article, a certificate of appropriateness shall be required prior to issuance of a permit for the following activities
involving noncontributing properties:
1. New construction, including new buildings, structures, and objects, and new ancillary features such as fences, gates and walls; and
2. Remodeling and additions visible from the public right of way.
An application for a certificate of appropriateness for work proposed on a noncontributing property shall be reviewed in the same manner as a
certificate of appropriateness for work proposed on a landmark or contributing property.
D. Administrative Review: A certificate of appropriateness may be issued by the director for work that meets the following conditions:
1. Requires a permit, and
2. Does not involve a change of design, material, appearance, or visibility of the character defining features of a designated landmark or property within
a historic district.
All proposed work on a landmark or contributing property shall comply with the secretary of the interior's standards. All proposed work on a
noncontributing property shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection C of this section.
If the director determines that the proposed work would not result in a significant change of design, material, appearance, or visibility of character
defining features, and: a) with respect to landmarks and contributing properties, would comply with the secretary of the interior's standards; or b) with
respect to noncontributing properties, would comply with the standards set forth in subsection C of this section, then the director shall issue the
certificate of appropriateness.
If the director determines that the proposed work might result in a significant change of design, material, appearance or visibility of character defining
features, or: a) with respect to landmarks or contributing properties, might not comply with the secretary of the interior's standards; or b) with respect
to noncontributing properties, might not comply with the standards in subsection C of this section, then the director shall refer the application for a
certificate of appropriateness to the commission for review.
If the director determines that the proposed work would result in a significant change of design, material, appearance or visibility of character defining
features, or: a) with respect to landmarks or contributing properties, would not comply with the secretary of the interior's standards; or b) with respect
to noncontributing properties, would not comply with the standards set forth in subsection C of this section, then the director may deny the application
for a certificate of appropriateness or refer the application to the commission for review.
3. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be acted upon by the director within twenty one (21) days of receipt of a complete application.
4. Work that may be approved pursuant to administrative review includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. In-kind replacement of historically faithful architectural features or building elements that are deteriorated or damaged beyond repair, or were
previously removed, including windows, doors, exterior siding, porches, cornices, balustrades, and stairs;
b. In-kind replacement of historically faithful built or cultivated site or landscape features that are deteriorated or damaged beyond repair, or were
previously removed, including gates, fences, walls, hedges, pergolas, gazebos, walkways, and planting beds;
c. Replacement or repair of roof covering materials, gutters, and downspouts, with no change in appearance;
d. Foundation work and repainting of bricks on the exterior of a structure, with no change in appearance;
e. Addition of new fences and walls;
f. Addition or replacement of awnings and building mounted signs;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 705/797
g. Landscape alterations, or removal or installation of tree and plant material not specifically designated or listed as character defining features of the
property or district;
h. New paving for driveways, walkways, and/or patios;
i. Repainting of exterior surfaces that were originally intended to be painted. No surfaces that were not intended to be painted shall be painted
including unpainted brick, concrete, or stone surfaces;
j. Installation of new exterior lighting;
k. Removal of additions to restore the original appearance of a building, structure, or object;
l. Electrical, plumbing, utility work, and other permits for mechanical and other building systems, including rooftop appurtenances not visible from the
public rights of way which result in no change in appearance to the property;
m. One-story residential additions, excluding attached garages, that are no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the size of the existing main residence
and have limited or no visibility to public rights of way; and
n. Other minor rehabilitation work as determined by the director.
E. Commission Review: When a certificate of appropriateness application is referred to the commission for review, a complete application shall be one that
includes a report from a qualified historic preservation consultant detailing the project's compliance with, and potential deviation from, the secretary of
the interior's standards in the case of landmarks or contributing properties, or subsection C of this article in the case of noncontributing properties.
When a certificate of appropriateness is requested for demolition or relocation of a landmark or contributing property, additional supporting materials
and justification may be required as specified in the city's administrative guidelines.
Upon receipt of a complete application, the commission shall issue or decline to issue the certificate of appropriateness within sixty (60) days. The time
limits in this section shall be extended by the director when necessary to comply with the provisions of CEQA, with the written consent of the owner, or
to allow city staff an additional period of time not exceeding thirty (30) days in which to analyze information submitted to the city at or near the end of
the sixty (60) day period in which to act on the application. A public hearing shall be scheduled and notice provided per this article and CEQA where
applicable. The time, place, and purpose of the public hearing on the proposed certificate of appropriateness shall be given by written notice sent via
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owner's designated representative at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.
The applicant for a certificate of appropriateness may submit such evidence to the commission as it deems appropriate at or prior to the hearing. At the
hearing, the commission shall consider this and any other relevant information, as well as the reasonable economic, environmental, and technical
feasibility of the proposed work, in determining whether to issue a certificate of appropriateness.
The commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the work:
1. Complies with the secretary of the interior's standards; or
2. Does not demonstrate strict compliance with the secretary of the interior's standards, but nonetheless protects and preserves the historic and
architectural qualities and the character defining features of a landmark or contributing property; or
3. Satisfies the requirements of subsection C of this section with respect to a noncontributing property; or
4. Meets the criteria established for alteration, restoration, reconstruction, relocation, rehabilitation, stabilization, or demolition of a landmark or
contributing property in the city's administrative guidelines.
F. Extension Of Time Periods: Any period of time to act specified in subsection D or E of this section may be extended by the commission or the director
upon request of the owner of the subject property. Such a request shall be made in writing or on the record at a noticed hearing.
G. Term: A certificate of appropriateness shall lapse and become void twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance, unless a building permit (if
required) has been issued and the rights granted by the permit or certificate have been exercised and are being pursued to completion. For purposes
of this subsection, the term "exercised" means substantial expenditures in good faith reliance upon the permit or certificate. The burden of proof in
showing substantial expenditures in good faith reliance upon the permit or certificate shall be placed upon the permit or certificate holder.
H. Extensions Of Certificates: So long as the approved plans have not been modified, a certificate of appropriateness may be extended for a period of up
to an additional twelve (12) months upon request by the owner and submittal of an appropriate application and payment of applicable fees. The director
may approve, conditionally approve, or deny any request for a time extension, or may refer the request to the commission, which may approve,
conditionally approve, or deny any request for a time extension based upon criteria established in the city's administrative guidelines.
I. Modifications: An application to modify an issued certificate of appropriateness, or a condition of approval imposed thereon, shall be heard and
considered in the same manner and by the same body as the originally reviewed application unless otherwise determined by the director. Payment of
applicable fees is required upon submitting an application for modification. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3220: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
The commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow demolition, alteration, or relocation of a designated landmark or contributing
property when it finds that denial of an enabling certificate of appropriateness would cause undue economic hardship for the property's owner(s). Any
landmark or contributing property that is otherwise subject to a specific plan shall not be eligible for a certificate of economic hardship under this section.
A. Applications: An owner of a historic property may request a certificate of economic hardship by filing a written application with the department of
community development. The application shall be completed on a form provided by the department, and shall include all required information and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 706/797
payment of applicable fees to process the application and fund a peer review, by one or more appropriate consultants selected by the city, of the
information submitted by the applicant. The application shall also include the following information:
1. The estimated market value of the property in its current condition.
2. The estimated market value of the property after completion of the proposed demolition, alteration, or relocation.
3. The estimated costs of the proposed demolition, alteration, or relocation.
4. A report from a licensed engineer or architect with expertise in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures on the property and
their suitability for rehabilitation.
5. If the property owner contends that there is a dangerous or unsafe condition on the property, a report from an expert consultant identifying the
condition, its cause, and all feasible rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction measures that may be required to abate the
condition.
6. The estimated costs of all feasible rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction measures that may be required to eliminate existing
structural deficiencies or unsafe conditions on the property.
7. The estimated market value of the property if the owner undertook all feasible rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction
measures that may be required to eliminate all existing structural deficiencies or unsafe conditions on the property.
8. For income producing properties located outside of areas of the city zoned for one-family development, information regarding annual gross income,
operating and maintenance expenses, tax deductions for depreciation, annual cash flow after debt service, current property value appraisals,
assessed property valuations, and real estate taxes.
9. An estimate of the potential economic benefits to the property owner of all development incentives and benefits readily available to the owner under
this article.
10. Any other information the director may reasonably require in order to determine the present market value of the property, including, but not limited
to:
a. All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or applicant in connection with the purchase, financing, or ownership of the
property;
b. The amount paid for the property if purchased within the previous thirty six (36) months, the date of purchase, and the party from whom
purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any, between the owner or applicant and the person from whom the property was
purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer; and
c. Any listing of the property for sale or rent, and prices asked, and offers received, if any within the previous two (2) years.
B. Public Hearing: Once the director determines that an application for a certificate of economic hardship and any applicable peer review(s) thereof are
complete, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission concerning the application to occur within sixty (60) days, at which the
commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. Such hearing may be held concurrently with any related application for a
certificate of appropriateness. The time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be given by written notice sent via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner or owner's designated representative at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. Findings: The commission shall not approve an application for a certificate of economic hardship unless it makes all of the following findings:
1. The current market value of the subject property is unconscionably less than the projected net value of the property after demolition, alteration, or
relocation, based on the estimated market value of the property after demolition, alteration, or relocation and the estimated costs of demolition,
alteration, or relocation; and
2. The projected net value of the subject property if all required rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction measures are undertaken,
based on the estimated market value of the property after rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction, the estimated costs of
rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, and/or reconstruction, and the estimated economic benefits of all development incentives and benefits readily
available under this article, is unconscionably less than the projected net value of the property after demolition, alteration, or relocation, based on the
estimated market value of the property after demolition, alteration, or relocation and the estimated costs of demolition, alteration, or relocation.
D. Conditions Of Approval: If the commission approves an application for a certificate of economic hardship, it may condition its approval as it deems
appropriate. Such conditions of approval may specifically include, but are not limited to, revocation of any previously granted historic incentive permit
concerning the subject property.
E. Copies Of Certificate: Upon approval, copies of the certificate of economic hardship shall be forwarded to the applicant, the building official, the director,
and any other department or agency upon request.
F. Effectiveness Of Certificate: No certificate of economic hardship shall become effective until the time to appeal its approval has expired.
G. Extensions Of Time Periods: Any period of time to act specified in this section may be extended by the commission or the director upon request of the
owner of the subject historic property. Such a request shall be made in writing or on the record at a noticed hearing. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3221: CERTIFICATE OF INELIGIBILITY:
Any owner of a property not listed on the local register may at any time file an application with the city requesting a determination that the subject property
is not an eligible property and therefore is exempt from the provisions of this article.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 707/797
A. Applications: A request for a certificate of ineligibility shall be made by filing a written application with the department of community development. The
application shall be completed on a form provided by the department, and shall include all required information and payment of applicable fees. Copies
of the application shall be provided promptly to members of the commission by the director to enable commissioners to provide information to the
director concerning the subject property where appropriate.
B. Administrative Procedure: Within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, the director shall review the application materials and determine
whether the application is complete or whether additional information is required. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the director shall
promptly inform the applicant in writing of the missing information. Within thirty (30) days after the submittal of the missing information, the director shall
again review the application materials and determine if the application is complete. The processing time lines and procedures set forth in this section
shall commence on the next business day after the application is deemed complete.
Within thirty (30) days after the application is deemed complete, the director shall prepare and serve on the property owner by first class, prepaid mail a
written preliminary evaluation stating whether or not the director finds that the subject property is an eligible property. If the director does not find that
the property is an eligible property, the director shall issue the requested certificate of ineligibility; but if the director believes that the property is an
eligible property, the director shall not issue the certificate. If the director fails to prepare and serve a preliminary evaluation regarding the subject
property within the allotted thirty (30) days, such failure will be deemed a finding of ineligibility, and the director shall issue the requested certificate of
ineligibility without further delay.
C. Hearing After Preliminary Evaluation: If the director declines to issue a requested certificate of ineligibility, the commission shall consider the matter de
novo at its next regularly held meeting; provided, however, that if the next regularly scheduled meeting is set to occur less than ten (10) days or more
than thirty (30) days after completion of the preliminary evaluation, the director shall schedule another meeting to occur within thirty (30) days after
completion of the application at which the commission shall hear the matter. The director shall give written notice of the date, time, place, and purpose
of the hearing to the applicant/appellant and any designated agent(s) by first class, prepaid mail not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. If,
based on the director's preliminary evaluation and any other evidence provided to the commission at or prior to the hearing, the commission
determines that the subject property is not an eligible property, it shall issue the requested certificate; but if the commission finds that the subject
property is an eligible property, it shall not issue a certificate.
D. Effect Of Certificate Of Ineligibility: A certificate of ineligibility bars the commission or the city council from initiating landmark designation proceedings
concerning the subject property, in whole or in part, for a period of seven (7) years from the date of issuance. While a certificate of ineligibility is in
effect, the subject property shall not be listed on the local inventory, and shall not be subject to the provisions of sections 10-3-3217 and 10-3-3218 of
this chapter.
E. Effect Of Nonissuance Of Certificate: A final determination not to issue a certificate of ineligibility bars the owner of the subject property, and any
successor in interest, from filing another application for a certificate of ineligibility concerning the same property for a period of five (5) years. Any such
final determination may also serve as a basis for the commission to list the subject property on the local inventory if it is not already so listed.
F. Extensions Of Time Periods: Any period of time to act specified in this section may be extended by the commission or the director upon request of the
owner of the subject property. Such a request shall be made in writing or on the record at a noticed hearing. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3222: APPEALS; FINALITY OF DECISIONS REGARDING CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS, CERTIFICATES OF
ECONOMIC HARDSHIP, AND CERTIFICATES OF INELIGIBILITY:
A. Authority To Appeal Decisions: Only the applicant for a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of economic hardship, or certificate of ineligibility, or an
owner of another property within a historic district in which the property that is the subject of the application is located, shall be entitled to file an appeal
of a decision regarding the certificate pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The city council shall have the authority to call up such
decisions for review pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code.
B. Finality Of Director Or Commission Decision: Any decision of the director or the commission regarding a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of
economic hardship, or certificate of ineligibility under this article shall become final if no appeal is submitted within the applicable appeal period and the
decision is not called up for review by the city council pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code.
C. Appeal Of Director Actions: A decision by the director pursuant to section 10-3-3219 of this chapter may be appealed to the commission within fifteen
(15) days from the date of the decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
D. Appeal Of Commission Actions: A decision by the commission pursuant to section 10-3-3219, 10-3-3220, or 10-3-3221 of this chapter may be appealed
to the city council within fifteen (15) days from the date of the decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. A
decision by the commission pursuant to any section of this article may be called up for city council review pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4,
article 2 of this code. The city council shall act within sixty (60) days after an appeal is filed or the matter is called up for review, as the case may be, or
within any additional period agreed to by the property owner or owners. Failure to act within the permitted time period shall be deemed a denial of the
appeal and approval of the commission's decision. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3223: HISTORIC PROPERTY DISCLOSURE:
A. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
BUYER: A transferee in a real property transaction, including a person who executes an offer to purchase real property from a seller through an agent,
or who seeks the services of an agent with the object of entering into a real property transaction. "Buyer" includes vendee or lessee.
LISTING AGENT: An agent who has obtained a listing of real property of the kind for which he or she is authorized by law to act as an agent for
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 708/797
compensation.
OFFER TO PURCHASE: A written contract executed by a buyer acting through a selling agent which becomes the contract for the sale of the real
property upon acceptance by the seller.
OWNER: Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title, or any other interest, in real property.
REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTION: A transaction for the sale of real property in which an agent is employed by one or more of the principals to act in
that transaction; includes a listing or an offer to purchase.
SALE: A transaction for the transfer of real property from the seller to the buyer, and includes exchanges of real property between the seller and buyer,
transactions for the creation of a real property sales contract within the meaning of California Civil Code section 2985, and transactions for the creation
of a leasehold exceeding one year's duration.
SELLING AGENT: A listing agent who acts alone, or an agent who acts in cooperation with a listing agent, and who sells or obtains a buyer for the real
property, or an agent who locates property for a buyer or who finds a buyer for a property for which no listing exists and presents an offer to purchase
to the seller.
B. If a property has been designated by the city of Beverly Hills as a landmark, is a property within a designated historic district, is listed on the local
inventory, or was designed by a person identified on the list of master architects, the owner or the selling agent of the property shall, in any real
property transaction, provide the buyer of the property with notice informing the buyer of the property's historic or potentially historic status. If a
preliminary title report indicates that the property was once owned and occupied by a person of great importance or a person of great local prominence,
the owner or selling agent shall provide the buyer with notice informing the buyer of that fact as well. The owner or the selling agent shall provide the
notice(s) to the buyer before expiration of any inspection contingency period, or in the absence of such contingency, at least ten (10) calendar days
before the first scheduled date for the transfer of title to occur. The director shall prepare a written form for owners and selling agents to use as a
means of facilitating the disclosures required pursuant to this section.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties and remedies specified in title 1, chapter 3 of this code. In
addition, a buyer who does not receive the notice required by subsection B of this section may bring a civil action for damages and any other remedies
available at law or in equity.
D. The disclosure requirements of this section shall not apply to real estate transactions subject to Civil Code section 1102.2 or any successor or amended
section.
E. The disclosure requirements of this section are in addition to any disclosure obligations a property owner or agent may have under California law. (Ord.
15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3224: LIMITED APPLICABILITY TO RENOVATIONS OF PROPERTIES REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH SECRETARY OF
INTERIOR STANDARDS:
Notwithstanding anything else set forth in this article, any designated landmark the renovation of which is required by legislation enacted by the city of
Beverly Hills prior to the adoption of this article to comply with the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation pursuant to 36 CFR 68.3(b) and related
guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings shall be exempt from the provisions in sections 10-3-3216, 10-3-3217, 10-3-3218, 10-3-3219, 10-3-3220, 10-
3-3221 and 10-3-3222 of this chapter; provided, however, that any such property shall be subject to all provisions of this article for demolition, and for off
site relocation of significant structures or significant landscaping.
Regardless of the contents of any resolution adopted under subsection 10-3-3215H of this chapter, the provisions of the legislative enactment imposed on
any property that is subject to this section shall control with respect to characteristics to be preserved and standards for future proposed changes. (Ord.
15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3225: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person who violates a requirement of this article or fails to obey an order issued by the commission and/or director, or fails to comply with a
condition of approval of any certificate or permit issued under this chapter, shall be subject to enforcement actions as set forth in title 1, chapter 3 of this
code.
B. In addition to all other remedies available to the city, any alteration, relocation, or demolition of a landmark or contributing property in violation of this
article is expressly declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as deemed appropriate by the city.
C. In addition to all other remedies, the city shall have the authority to impose a temporary moratorium on the development of a property for a period not to
exceed sixty (60) months from the date the city becomes aware of any alteration, relocation, or demolition in violation of this article, unless the owner
obtains permits to restore or reconstruct the property to its original condition prior to the violation and the work is consistent with the secretary of the
interior's standards. The purpose of the moratorium is to provide the city an opportunity to study and determine appropriate mitigation measures for the
alteration, relocation, or demolition of the historic property, and to ensure such measures are incorporated into any future development plans and
approvals for the subject property. Mitigation measures which may be determined to be appropriate by the director, the commission, or the city council
shall be imposed as a condition of any subsequent permit for development of the subject property.
D. The city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain a violation, or cause, where possible, the complete or partial restoration,
reconstruction, or replacement of any part of a historic property demolished, partially demolished, altered, partially altered, relocated, or partly relocated
in violation of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 709/797
E. Any person who demolishes, alters, relocates, rehabilitates, stabilizes, or reconstructs a designated landmark or property in a designated historic district
without the approval and issuance of a certificate required to be issued pursuant to this article may be required to restore the property to its appearance
prior to the violation to the extent such restoration is physically possible, under the guidance of the director. This civil remedy shall be in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any criminal penalties available.
F. In addition to any other remedies provided herein, any violation of this article may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. Remedies under this
article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies or penalties, whether civil or criminal. The remedies provided herein
are cumulative and not exclusive. In any such action, the city may seek as appropriate, one or both of the following remedies:
1. A temporary or permanent injunction, or both;
2. Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey that led to the establishment of the violation, and for
the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3226: PREEXISTING ENTITLEMENTS AND BUILDING PERMITS:
This article does not apply to construction, alteration, moving, or demolition of a property, building, structure, or object pursuant to valid entitlements
granted by the city prior to the effective date hereof, or started under a valid building permit issued prior to the effective date hereof, as such entitlements
or permits may be extended pursuant to provisions of this code and state laws. Once the work authorized by any such entitlement or building permit has
been completed the provisions of this article apply. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3227: FEES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish the fee(s) for an application to initiate nomination proceedings, and all other applications and submissions
made pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3228: WAIVER OF IN LIEU FEES:
Pursuant to the requirements, limitations, and procedures set forth in this section, the city council or the planning commission may allow the owner of a
designated historic property to purchase in lieu parking to serve a site area in excess of sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet of space, and may waive, in
whole or in part, the fees required by section 10-3-3310 of this chapter.
A. Required Uses: The city council or planning commission may only take action pursuant to this subsection if the historic property on the site area is the
subject of an adaptive reuse.
B. Findings Required: The city council or planning commission shall not take action pursuant to this section unless the city council or planning commission
finds that the proposed use will not unreasonably deplete parking resources in the in lieu parking district.
C. Reviewing Body: The city council shall review an application filed pursuant to this subsection unless that application accompanies an application that
otherwise requires review by the planning commission. If the application filed pursuant to this subsection accompanies an application that otherwise
requires review by the planning commission, then the planning commission shall be the reviewing body for the application filed pursuant to this section.
D. Procedure: An application filed pursuant to this section shall be submitted in writing to the director. Upon receipt of such application, a hearing regarding
the application shall be scheduled before the city council or the planning commission, as provided in subsection C of this section. Notice of the hearing
shall be mailed to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3229: CITY OWNED PROPERTIES; SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTIES:
A. The provisions of this article do not apply to city owned properties; however the city council may, in its discretion, add a city owned property to the local
register provided the property meets the criteria set forth in either section 10-3-3212 or 10-3-3213 of this chapter following any process it deems
appropriate.
B. The provisions of this article shall not apply to properties owned by a public school district, unless a school district files an application requesting
landmark or historic district designation of its property and the city designates the facility or facilities as a landmark or historic district. (Ord. 15-O-2682,
eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3230: DANGEROUS AND IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS PROPERTIES:
Nothing in this article shall prevent the reconstruction, alteration, repair, restoration, stabilization, rehabilitation, or demolition of a property, regardless of
designation or eligibility for designation, if the building official determines that the property creates an unsafe or dangerous condition that presents an
imminent threat to the health or welfare of the owner, the public, or an adjacent property, and further that the proposed action is necessary to mitigate the
unsafe or dangerous condition. In that event, the building official shall immediately notify the director in writing of the situation, and shall make reasonable
efforts to consult with the director to determine if there are feasible alternatives to the proposed action that will adequately protect against the determined
threat. Any action taken pursuant to this subsection shall not require a certificate of appropriateness, economic hardship, or ineligibility. (Ord. 15-O-2682,
eff. 11-19-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 710/797
Article 32.5. Historic Incentive Permit
10-3-3250: PURPOSE:
This article is intended to incentivize the protection of significant historic resources by providing a process by which owners of locally designated historic
landmarks may request waivers or deviations from certain development standards set forth in this code. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3251: APPLICABILITY:
The historic incentive permit shall be available only to:
A. Those properties that are designated as a local historic landmark in the city of Beverly Hills pursuant to the provisions set forth in article 32 of this
chapter, or
B. Any property that the cultural heritage commission or the city council has determined, at a preliminary hearing held pursuant to subsection 10-3-3215A5
of this chapter, merits formal consideration by the cultural heritage commission for nomination as a landmark; provided, however, that any historic
incentive permit issued by the planning commission pursuant to this subsection shall be expressly conditioned on the property's designation as a
landmark by the city council and inclusion on the city of Beverly Hills' local register of historic places. (Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3252: HISTORIC INCENTIVE PERMIT ISSUED:
In addition to any other provision of this code or ordinance of the city of Beverly Hills, waivers or deviations from any development standards set forth in
this code may be permitted through the issuance of a historic incentive permit approved pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-
2015)
10-3-3253: HISTORIC INCENTIVE PERMIT AUTHORITY:
Upon application by a property owner, in a form satisfactory to the director of community development, the reviewing authority may, if it makes the
necessary findings, issue a historic incentive permit to waive or deviate from any development standard set forth in this chapter, except that no waiver or
deviation shall be granted to: exceed the building height standards for the Trousdale Estates area of the city, as set forth in section 10-3-2605 of this
chapter; allow construction off the level pad in the Trousdale Estates area of the city, as set forth in section 10-3-2603 of this chapter; and/or allow grading
of sloped areas for the Trousdale Estates area of the city, as set forth in section 10-3-2604 of this chapter. No certificate of appropriateness shall be
required for any project for which a historic incentive permit is granted pursuant to the provisions of this article. Nothing in this section, however, shall be
construed to permit any waiver or deviation from land use requirements or restrictions set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 16-O-2700, eff. 4-1-2016)
10-3-3254: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
The planning commission shall be the reviewing authority for all historic incentive permit applications. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3255: PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE:
The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing concerning each application for a historic incentive permit.
Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines.
(Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3256: FINDINGS REQUIRED TO ISSUE A HISTORIC INCENTIVE PERMIT:
The reviewing authority shall not issue a historic incentive permit unless the reviewing authority makes the following findings:
A. The proposed project either:
1. Complies with the "Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties With Guidelines For Preserving, Rehabilitating,
Restoring, And Reconstructing Historic Buildings"; or
2. Does not demonstrate strict compliance with the "Secretary Of The Interior's Standards For The Treatment Of Historic Properties With Guidelines
For Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring, And Reconstructing Historic Buildings", but nonetheless protects and preserves the historic and
architectural qualities and the character defining features that make the property a landmark or contributing property; and
B. The proposed development will not have a substantial adverse impact on:
1. The scale, massing, or character of the streetscape,
2. The scale and massing of the property as viewed by neighboring properties,
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 711/797
3. Neighbors' access to light and air,
4. Neighbors' privacy,
5. The garden quality of the city, and
6. The public health, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3257: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting a historic incentive permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the
required findings. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3258: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision of the planning commission regarding a historic incentive permit, may appeal that decision to the
city council. The city council shall have the authority to call such decisions for review pursuant to the provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article 2 of this code.
(Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
10-3-3259: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a historic incentive permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 14-O-2670, eff. 1-2-2015)
Article 33. In Lieu Parking
10-3-3301: IN LIEU PARKING DISTRICTS:
A. This article establishes in lieu parking districts that include any commercially zoned property located in the following areas:
1. The area bounded by the centerlines of the following streets: Wilshire Boulevard, Santa Monica Boulevard north roadway, and Crescent Drive,
2. The area consisting of the properties that front on, or have a street side lot line adjacent to South Robertson Boulevard north of Whitworth Drive and
south of Wilshire Boulevard,
3. The area consisting of the properties that front on South Santa Monica Boulevard west of Wilshire Boulevard and east of Moreno Drive,
B. Those properties which are zoned for commercial use and which comply with all the requirements of this article may participate in the respective in lieu
parking districts and be permitted to satisfy all or part of the requirements for parking spaces by the payment to the city of an in lieu fee. The multiplefamily
residential-commercial parking zone (RMCP) shall be considered commercially zoned for the purposes of this section. (Ord. 15-O-2676, eff. 6-5-
2015)
10-3-3302: BULK AND SIZE LIMITS:
This article applies only to those properties which comply with the following bulk and size limits:
A. The site areas shall not exceed sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet in size.
B. The floor area ratio to the ground area of any building constructed on the site shall not exceed two to one (2:1).
C. The height of any building on the site area shall not exceed forty five feet (45') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter.
D. No building on the site area that was constructed after June 17, 1976, shall exceed three (3) stories in height. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd.
Ord. 77-O-1648, eff. 5-19-1977; Ord. 83-O-1888, eff. 5-5-1983; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 97-O-2278, eff. 5-9-1997)
10-3-3303: ELIGIBLE USES:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, eligibility to participate in the in-lieu parking district shall be restricted to the following uses:
A. General Retail Sales Commercial Activities: General retail sales commercial activities shall include the retail sale or rental from the premises, primarily
for personal or household use, of goods and general hardware but exclude the sale or rental of motor vehicles.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 712/797
B. Convenience Sales And Service Commercial Activities: Convenience sales and service commercial activities shall include the retail sale, from the
premises, of drugs and other frequently needed small personal convenience items, such as toiletries, tobacco, and magazines, as well as the provision
of personal convenience services which are typically needed frequently or recurrently, such as barber and beauty care, and include shoe shining and
laundry or dry cleaning pick up stations.
C. Food Sales And Service Commercial Activities: Food sales and service commercial activities shall include the retail sale, from the premises, of food or
beverages for home consumption, as well as the retail sale of prepared food or beverages for on premises consumption, but shall exclude auto
oriented short order eating places and eating establishments that do not primarily provide full table service to their customers.
D. Equipment Rental And Leasing Services: Equipment rental and leasing services shall include business equipment, medical equipment, sports
equipment, photography equipment, and furniture but shall exclude vehicular, construction, and heavy duty equipment and sanitation units.
E. Museum Uses: Museum uses owned and controlled by nonprofit, tax exempt entities.
F. Historic Places: Adaptive reuse of a building listed on the National Register of Historic Places. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-2206,
eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3304: EXCLUSIONS:
Any use of property located within the in-lieu parking district for commercial office use, including, but not limited to, legal, medical, dental, financial,
consultative, real estate, insurance, and administrative office purposes or manufacturing, repairs, reservations, banking, savings and loans, travel
agencies, financial services, communication services, research, wholesale sales, auto oriented short order eating places, eating establishments that do not
primarily provide full table service to their customers, construction sales and service and adult entertainment businesses, shall be specifically excluded
from participation in the in-lieu parking district, except as provided in section 10-3-3306 of this article. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-
2206, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 98-O-2301, eff. 7-2-1998)
10-3-3305: NONSPECIFIED USES:
Applications for in-lieu parking exemptions for uses which are not listed as eligible uses in section 10-3-3303 of this article and which are not excluded
from the in-lieu parking district in section 10-3-3304 of this article may be approved by the planning commission provided the commission determines that
the use for which eligibility is sought is a use that encourages retail trade in the in-lieu parking district and would generate additional retail sales either
through the use itself or because the use will attract and serve potential retail sales customers to the in-lieu parking district; that the use is compatible with
and will not be detrimental to retail business in the in-lieu parking district; and that the application complies with all the other requirements of this article.
(Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3306: COMBINED ELIGIBLE AND EXCLUDED USES:
A. Persons desiring to combine in an existing structure uses excluded by section 10-3-3304 of this article with uses permitted by section 10-3-3303 or 10-
3-3305 of this chapter, may apply to the planning commission for participation in the in lieu parking district.
B. The planning commission, after notice and a hearing as provided in section 10-3-3307 of this chapter, may approve an application for participation in the
in lieu parking district where a request has been submitted for combined uses provided that the commission determines that:
1. The entire ground floor of the structure is to be utilized for a use permitted by section 10-3-3303 or 10-3-3305 of this chapter; and
2. The floor area of the structure utilized for a use permitted by section 10-3-3303 or 10-3-3305 of this chapter exceeds that of the floor area of the
structure used for the excluded use; and
3. Eligibility for participation in the in lieu parking district is restricted only to the floor area of the structures used as set forth in section 10-3-3303 or 10-
3-3305 of this chapter; and
4. The excluded use of the structure is compatible with and will not be detrimental to retail business in the in lieu parking district; and
5. The application complies with all the other requirements of this article. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 83-O-1888, eff. 5-5-1983; Ord. 94-
O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3307: REVIEW OF IN LIEU PARKING APPLICATIONS:
Persons desiring to participate in the in lieu parking district established by this article shall submit an application for participation to the director of
community development. If the director determines that such application meets the requirements set forth in sections 10-3-3302 through 10-3-3306 of this
chapter, then the director shall schedule a hearing on that application before the planning commission, unless the application is solely for a restaurant use
and the number of in lieu parking spaces requested will result in a total number of in lieu parking spaces of ten (10) or fewer, in which case the director
shall have the authority to approve the request without conducting a hearing. Noticing of any hearing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of
this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. Furthermore, if the applicant has concurrently filed other applications which require a hearing before the
planning commission, then the hearing regarding the application for participation in the district shall be combined with such other hearing. Similarly, notice
of the application for participation in the district shall be combined with the notice of any other application that will be reviewed concurrently by the planning
commission. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 713/797
10-3-3308: STANDARD OF REVIEW:
The planning commission or director pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3-3307 of this chapter shall approve an application for participation in the in
lieu parking district only if the commission or director makes the following findings:
A. Participation in the in lieu parking district, as approved, will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote
harmonious development of the area.
B. Participation in the in lieu parking district, as approved, will not create any significantly adverse traffic safety impacts, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or
parking impacts.
C. Participation in the in lieu parking district will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
The commission or director may restrict participation in the in lieu parking district by requiring the provision of a minimum amount of on site parking if
the commission or director determines that such restriction is necessary to allow the commission or director to make the findings set forth in this
section. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3309: APPEALS:
Any decision of the director pursuant to this article may be appealed to the planning commission in a manner consistent with the procedures set forth in
title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. Any decision of the planning commission pursuant to this article may be appealed to the city council in the manner
provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3309.5: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting an in lieu parking approval, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
10-3-3310: IN LIEU FEE AMOUNT:
If the city approves an application for participation in the in lieu parking districts, then the applicant shall pay the fees set forth in this section.
A. New Construction And Reconstruction: For each parking space required due to the addition of floor area or due to reconstruction, the applicant shall
pay a twenty five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) fee if the subject property is located on Rodeo Drive, a twenty thousand dollar ($20,000.00) fee if the
subject property is located on Beverly Drive, and a fifteen thousand dollar ($15,000.00) fee if the subject property is located elsewhere within the in lieu
parking districts. These amounts may be adjusted annually by resolution of the city council.
B. Food Sales And Service Commercial Activities: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, and subject to the restrictions set forth in
this subsection, the applicant shall pay a reduced fee of six thousand seventy dollars ($6,070.00) for each parking space required by the expansion of:
1) a convenience sales and service commercial business which has been lawfully operated at the subject site for more than two (2) years, or 2) a food
sales use. The fee of six thousand seventy dollars ($6,070.00) represents thirty five percent (35%) of the estimated 1993 cost to construct a parking
space, exclusive of land value.
This amount may be adjusted annually by resolution of the city council. The reduced fee set forth in this subsection shall be applied to no more than
one expansion of a food sales use or convenience sales and service commercial business during the lifetime of a building unless such expansion
involves the purchase of less than fifteen (15) in lieu parking spaces. If the expansion involves the purchase of less than fifteen (15) in lieu parking
spaces then the reduced fees set forth in this subsection may be applied to the purchase of up to fifteen (15) in lieu spaces during the life of the
building.
C. Small Theaters: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, for each parking space required as a result of the establishment of a
theater within an existing building, the applicant shall pay a fee equal to fifty percent (50%) of the fee required under subsection A of this section
provided that the building contains at least one parking space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor area, the theater does not exceed twenty
five percent (25%) of the existing floor area of the building and the planning commission, after notice and a hearing as set forth in section 10-3-3307 of
this chapter, finds that such theater would complement existing retail uses in the in lieu parking districts by enhancing the pedestrian or retail attraction
of the in lieu parking districts. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 78-O-1701, eff. 8-31-1978; Ord. 83-O-1888, eff. 5-5-1983; Ord. 89-O-2053,
eff. 3-23-1989; Ord. 91-O-2112, eff. 3-22-1991; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994; Ord. 96-O-2264, eff. 8-16-1996)
10-3-3311: WAIVERS, ALTERNATIVE FEES, AND OTHER EXEMPTIONS:
A. In Lieu Parking: Pursuant to the requirements, limitations and procedures set forth in this section, the city council or the planning commission may allow
a property owner to purchase in lieu parking to serve a site area in excess of sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet and may waive, in whole or in part,
the fees required by section 10-3-3310 of this chapter.
1. Eligible Uses: The city council or planning commission may only take action pursuant to this subsection A with regard to site areas occupied by, or
fees imposed upon, the following uses:
a. Museum uses owned and controlled by a nonprofit, tax exempt entity.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 714/797
b. Adaptive reuses of a building listed on the city of Beverly Hills' local register of historic properties.
B. Payment: Pursuant to the requirements, limitations and procedures set forth in this section, and as an alternative to payment of the fees required by
section 10-3-3310 of this chapter, the city council or the planning commission may allow, within the in lieu parking districts, businesses to make annual
payments to utilize in lieu parking spaces instead of purchasing in lieu parking spaces. The annual payment shall be in the amount of fifty percent
(50%) of an annual payment calculated pursuant to subsection 10-3-3313B of this chapter, whether or not the site area exceeds sixteen thousand
(16,000) square feet. The option to make payments pursuant to this subsection B shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. Eligible Uses: The city council or planning commission may only take action pursuant to this subsection B with regard to site areas occupied by food
sales and service commercial activities as defined in subsection 10-3-3303C of this chapter.
2. New Construction: This subsection B shall not be applicable to new construction or the addition of floor area to an existing building, and shall only be
available for the conversion of existing commercial space to space designated for eating and bar purposes.
3. Maximum Number Of Spaces To Be Allocated Pursuant To Alternate Fee Program: The maximum number of in lieu parking spaces that may be
approved citywide pursuant to this subsection B shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) spaces.
4. Payment Of Fees: Payment of the in lieu parking fees shall be due annually on or before the anniversary of the in lieu parking approval, and shall be
paid in advance of the time period for which the in lieu parking spaces are utilized. Fees shall be based initially on the in lieu parking rates in effect at
the time of in lieu parking approval, shall continue in perpetuity for the life of the business, and shall be adjusted annually to account for increases in
the consumer price index. Such adjustment shall not exceed ten percent (10%) annually.
5. Transferability: Any in lieu parking granted pursuant to this subsection B is not transferable, and the privilege to use in lieu parking pursuant to this
section shall immediately terminate in the event that the business to which the in lieu parking spaces were granted vacates the premises or
discontinues its operations.
6. Sunset: The payment for in lieu parking spaces authorized by this subsection B is a pilot program. The city council or planning commission may take
action pursuant to this subsection B on applications filed on or before October 11, 2014, and timely applications may be processed to conclusion.
Unless the city council extends this subsection B, this subsection B shall be repealed as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on October
12, 2014.
C. Findings Required: The city council or planning commission shall not take action pursuant to this section unless the city council or planning commission
finds that:
1. Due to the nature of the proposed use, the proposed use will attract and serve potential retail sales customers to the in lieu parking districts; and
2. The proposed use will not unreasonably deplete parking resources in the in lieu parking districts.
D. Reviewing Body: The city council shall review an application filed pursuant to this section unless that application accompanies an application that
otherwise requires review by the planning commission. If the application filed pursuant to this section accompanies an application that otherwise
requires review by the planning commission, then the planning commission shall be the reviewing body for the application filed pursuant to this section.
E. Procedure: An application filed pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the director of planning and community development. Upon receipt of such
application, a hearing regarding the application shall be scheduled before the city council or the planning commission, as provided in subsection D of
this section. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. (Ord. 13-O-2644, eff. 10-11-2013; amd.
Ord. 15-O-2682, eff. 11-19-2015)
10-3-3312: PAYMENTS; DEPOSITS:
Funds collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited by the city in a special fund entitled "in-lieu parking district fund", which is hereby established.
Such fund shall be used exclusively for the purpose of acquiring, developing, operating, and maintaining off street parking facilities to serve the in-lieu
parking district. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 91-O-2112, eff. 3-22-1991; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3313: PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES:
Payment of in-lieu parking fees shall be made as follows:
A. Four (4) equal installments of twenty five percent (25%) of the in-lieu parking fees due shall be paid to the city within a four (4) year period. The first
installment shall be due prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the structure or, in the case where such fees are due by virtue of a
change or expansion of use which does not require a certificate of occupancy, before such change or expansion takes place. The remaining twenty five
percent (25%) installments shall be due and payable annually on the anniversary of the first installment. Interest shall not accrue on any unpaid
balance of such fees, however, the balance shall be adjusted annually to account for increases in the consumer price index. Such adjustment shall not
exceed ten percent (10%). If any portion of the unpaid balance is paid in advance of its due date, any such premature payment shall be credited with a
discount to the present monetary value of the payment otherwise due.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the payment of the required in-lieu parking fees by a lessee or sublessee, whose lease
term (including options) is fifteen years or less, for a restaurant use in an existing building may be made in ten (10) equal installments within a ten (10)
year period. The first installment shall be due prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the structure or, in the case where such fees are
due by virtue of a change or expansion of use which does not require a certificate of occupancy, before such change or expansion takes place. The
remaining ten percent (10%) installments shall be due and payable annually on the anniversary of the first installment. Interest shall not accrue on any
unpaid balance of such fees, however, the balance shall be adjusted annually to account for increases in the consumer price index. Such adjustment
shall not exceed ten percent (10%). If any portion of the unpaid balance is paid in advance of its due date, any such premature payment shall be
credited with a discount to the present monetary value of the payment otherwise due. This subsection shall not apply when the owner of the existing
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 715/797
building or any other lessor or sublessor thereof whose lease term (including options) is more than fifteen (15) years has a direct or indirect beneficial
interest in the lessee or sublessee conducting the restaurant use therein.
C. Any portion of the in-lieu parking fees which is not paid prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the change or expansion of use shall be
adequately secured. Such security shall be subject to approval by the city manager or his designee, and shall be one of the following types of security:
1. A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties;
2. A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the local agency, or money or negotiable
bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies;
3. An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds
necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit by such a financial institution; or
4. A note secured by a first deed of trust in real property; provided, further, the first deed of trust shall not exceed eighty five percent (85%) of the city's
appraisal value of the property. The applicant requesting such type of security shall pay to the city all costs associated with the appraisal of the
property and other city costs directly related to such type of security.
D. In the event that a lessee or sublessee making payments pursuant to this section ceases to occupy the leased premises prior to making payment of the
full in-lieu parking fee, no in-lieu fee credit may be transferred to the new occupant of the property unless the new use of the property is the same as
the prior use, the new use is not a change of use or an expansion thereof, and the new occupant agrees to assume the obligation to make the balance
of the payments. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 91-O-2112, eff. 3-22-1991; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3314: TRANSFERABILITY RESTRICTIONS:
In-lieu parking spaces paid for pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be assigned only to the property for which the building permit was issued and
shall not be assigned or transferred for use on any other property. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3315: REQUIREMENTS FOR ADDITIONAL PARKING SPACES:
Should the use of any property which is complying with the requirements for off street parking set forth in this chapter by the use of in-lieu parking be
considered for conversion to a new use, and the proposed new use requires additional off street parking spaces, the additional off street parking spaces
shall be provided by the owner, lessee or sublessee either by providing on site parking spaces, as required by this chapter, or by the purchase of in-lieu
parking spaces in compliance with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3316: OTHER CHARGES:
Payment pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not relieve any owner, developer, lessee or sublessee from any ad valorem tax or special district
assessment or from any charge which may be imposed for the use of parking spaces within any established municipal off street parking facility. (Ord. 76-
O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 83-O-1888, eff. 5-5-1983; Ord. 91-O-2112, eff. 3-22-1991; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3317: EFFECTIVE DATE OF APPROVAL:
Any decision regarding an application for participation in the in-lieu parking district shall not be effective until such time as the time for filing an appeal
regarding that approval has expired or, if an appeal has been filed, the decision shall not become effective until such time that the appeal has been finally
determined. In addition, no approval of an application for participation in the in-lieu parking district shall be effective until the owner of the subject site has
executed a covenant accepting the terms of the approval, in a form approved by the city attorney, which covenant shall run with the land and be recorded
with the county recorder by the city clerk. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-17-1976; amd. Ord. 83-O-1888, eff. 5-5-1983; Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
10-3-3318: PROHIBITED USES:
Any property which has been granted eligibility to participate in the in-lieu parking district shall not be used for any use other than a use that is permitted by
section 10-3-3303, 10-3-3305, or 10-3-3306 of this article, unless parking spaces are provided on site as required by this chapter. (Ord. 76-O-1608, eff. 6-
17-1976; amd. Ord. 94-O-2206, eff. 8-5-1994)
Article 34. Commercial-Retail Overlay Zone (C-R)
10-3-3401: PURPOSE AND PROCEDURE:
A. The purpose of the commercial-retail overlay zone (C-R) is to permit the use of land for the establishment of retail department stores. The regulations of
the commercial-retail overlay zone shall permit the development of such retail department stores under different regulations than govern other
commercial uses in the underlying commercial zone but which impose other requirements to ensure that any such use is in accordance with the
general plan and that the characteristics of any such use shall not be unreasonably incompatible with the types of uses permitted in adjacent areas.
B. In any commercial zone indicated upon the official zoning map where the zone symbol is followed by, and as part of such symbol, the parenthetically
enclosed letter R, thus (R), any development that exceeds the requirements governing the use of property in the underlying commercial zone, other
than by variance, shall be governed by the regulations of this article. The zone symbol shall constitute the underlying commercial zone, and the (R)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 716/797
suffix shall constitute the "overlay zone", (e.g., C-3(R)) indicating the additional provision that properties in such zone may be developed for retail
stores as set forth in this article. "Development", for the purposes of this article, shall include the alteration or enlargement of any existing building being
used as, or to be used as, a retail store in accordance with the provisions of this article, as well as the new construction or erection of such a building.
(Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3402: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article:
CONVENIENCE SERVICES: Those services, such as beauty shops, restaurants, and the like, which are customarily provided in a retail department store
in the city.
RETAIL STORE: A store which carries on as its principal business the selling of tangible commodities in small quantities directly to consumers. (Ord. 76-
O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3403: USES PERMITTED:
Any use permitted in the underlying commercial zone shall be permitted in the commercial-retail overlay zone subject to the regulations set forth in this
chapter applicable to the underlying commercial zone, except that when uses for retail store purposes are developed as permitted by the regulations set
forth in this article, the regulations of this article shall govern whenever such regulations are different than other regulations set forth in this chapter. (Ord.
76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3404: FLOOR USE:
A. Conditions: Where it is provided in this article that the principal use of each floor, story, or basement shall be for retail store purposes, such use shall be
for retail sales, except that those portions of floors used for mechanical equipment and those activities, such as storage and office space, necessary to
support such retail sales shall be permitted. In addition, convenience service activities shall be permitted provided:
1. The floor space required to provide such services does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of any floor, except that convenience service
activities shall not be permitted on the ground floor; and
2. The total floor space used for convenience services in the store does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total floor area in the store used for
retail sales; and
3. Any convenience service shall be approved by the planning commission as a convenience service customarily provided in a retail department store
located in the city, or, if not, such convenience service is compatible with the use of the premises as a retail department store and with adjacent
property.
B. Restrictions And Conditions: In granting such use of a floor for any convenience service not customarily provided in a retail department store in the city,
the planning commission may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to preserve the integrity and character of the
district, the utility and value of the adjacent property, and the general welfare of the neighborhood.
C. Appeals: The decision of the planning commission upon such application shall be final in the absence of an appeal to the council in the manner
provided in this chapter for appeals from the planning commission. (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3405: HEIGHT LIMIT OF RETAIL STORES:
The height limit of any building constructed, erected, altered, or enlarged shall be the same as in the underlying commercial zone, except that retail
department stores may exceed the height limitations of the underlying commercial zone provided all floors in the building are used principally for retail
store purposes as defined in section 10-3-3404 of this article; however, no building, structure, or improvement, or any part thereof, designed or intended to
be used for a retail store shall exceed one hundred feet (100') in height, measured as set forth in this chapter; or more than six (6) stories, whichever is
lesser. (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3406: SITE AREA:
For the purposes of this article, "site area" shall include only those portions of the site located in a commercial zone. (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3407: DENSITY:
The maximum floor area ratio permitted on any site area located in the commercial-retail overlay zone shall not exceed the floor area ratio permitted by the
provisions of section 10-3-2745 of this chapter, except that the maximum floor area ratio of 5.0 of the site area shall be permitted for a retail department
store under the following conditions:
A. Each floor of the building or structure shall be used primarily for "retail store" purposes as defined in this article.
B. If within the same block of the site area there is any property developed or zoned for residential use, and the distance between the closest property
lines of such residential property and the site area is within four (4) subdivided lots or less, or within one hundred sixty feet (160') or less, excluding the
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 717/797
width of any alley separating property located in the commercial-retail overlay zone from property used for parking, whichever distance is lesser, the
three (3) lots nearest the site area may be developed either as a park or for parking, as provided in this chapter; provided, however, no person shall be
permitted to reside in the said three (3) lot area at any time during the construction or use of any retail department store located on the adjacent
property.
C. All required parking spaces shall be located within the site area or within the permitted parking area described in subsection B of this section. The
separation of the parking spaces from the site by an alley shall be permissible. (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3408: PARKING FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES:
All parking facilities or structures constructed or erected in conjunction with commercial development as permitted pursuant to the provisions of subsection
10-3-3407B of this chapter on property adjacent to the site area shall conform to the following standards in addition to any other standards set forth in this
code:
A. Any parking structure constructed or erected on the lots south of the site area shall have at least two (2) complete levels of parking constructed below
the surface level before any portion of a parking structure may be constructed above the surface level.
B. The location of all ventilation systems and ducts shall be subject to the approval of the building official and shall be located so as to reduce air pollution
impacts and noise impacts on adjacent residential areas to a minimum.
C. Motor vehicle entrances and exits to and from any parking facility or structure shall be to a street and shall be designed and located so that vehicles
entering or exiting will not be directed into or from adjacent residential areas. The design and location of entrances and exits shall be approved by the
director of traffic and parking, and he may impose such conditions upon the approval of such design and location as will satisfy the objectives of this
subsection and as are necessary, to promote traffic movement and safety.
D. The setbacks required in section 10-3-3719 of this chapter for parking facilities and structures shall apply, except that side setbacks from adjacent
residential properties for facilities or structures built on three (3) or four (4) lots may be reduced one foot (1') for each foot that any alley separating
property in the commercial-retail overlay zone from the parking facility or structure is widened; provided however, the setback shall not be reduced
more than six feet (6'). (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3409: STREET SETBACKS:
A setback of five feet (5') from any street line shall be provided for any building or structure constructed pursuant to this article and located on any street
which is sixty feet (60') or less in width. (Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976)
10-3-3410: ALLEY REPLACEMENT AND WIDENING:
Article 35. Open Air Dining
10-3-3501: OPEN AIR DINING PERMITS:
A. No open air dining use shall be established in the public right of way or on private property unless an open air dining permit is approved pursuant to this
article.
B. Parking shall be provided for all open air dining uses pursuant to the provisions of section 10-3-2730 of this chapter.
C. An application for an open air dining permit shall be filed with the planning and community development department in a form prescribed by that
department.
D. If approved, an open air dining permit shall be valid for a period of five (5) years and may be renewed for one additional five (5) year period on the same
terms and conditions as set forth in the original approval.
E. The city council may establish by resolution fees for the review of such applications. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3502: OPEN AIR DINING IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY; REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any open air dining area proposed to be located in the public right of way shall comply with all of the following requirements:
1. A minimum distance of not less than a five foot (5') wide pedestrian travel aisle shall be maintained on the public right of way at all times; to assure
the required pedestrian travel aisle, all open air dining areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the edge of the curb and any fixed
sidewalk obstruction including, without limitation, curb lines, tree wells, street trees, parking meters, water hydrants, light poles, utility equipment
boxes, newspaper racks and bus benches.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 718/797
2. Umbrellas located in the open air dining area shall have a minimum seven foot (7') clearance from the ground to the lowest element of the umbrella
and shall be located completely within the open air dining areas permitted boundaries.
3. Portable heaters shall be located a minimum of three feet (3') from any combustible material and shall be located completely within the open air
dining areas permitted boundaries.
4. Unless a permanent structure is approved pursuant to the permit, all fixtures and furniture used in an open air dining area shall be removed from the
public right of way and stored out of public view during nonbusiness hours. At the discretion of the reviewing authority, open air dining areas with
more than twelve (12) chairs may be required to provide a permanent barrier delineating the usable open air dining area from the remaining area of
the public right of way.
5. Areas used for outdoor dining shall not extend beyond the building frontage for the associated restaurant space.
6. The material and design of the furniture and barrier, if any, shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to section 10-3-3007 of this chapter prior to
installation.
7. An encroachment permit allowing establishment of an open air dining area must be obtained from the public works department in a form satisfactory
to the city attorney.
8. Areas used for open air dining in the public right of way shall comply with all applicable provisions of the building code, including, but not limited to,
maintaining proper building egress and ingress at all times, observing maximum seating capacities, providing proper circulation, and providing
appropriate access to persons with disabilities.
B. An annual rental fee shall be imposed on the use or operation of open air dining areas located in the public right of way. The rental fee schedule shall
be set by resolution of the city council. In the event that a permit is suspended pursuant to section 10-3-3509 of this chapter, rental fees shall not be
required to be paid during the period of suspension. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3503: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
A. Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for an open air dining permit shall be the director of community development. If, in the opinion of the
director, an application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such application to the planning commission and the planning
commission shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the request.
B. The reviewing authority for an open air dining permit for an open air dining area serving more than twelve (12) persons located on private property
within one hundred seventy feet (170') of an R-1 or R-4 zone shall be the planning commission.
C. A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on all applications for which it is the reviewing authority. Public noticing shall be completed in
accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if the application for an open air dining permit accompanies an application for any other type of
discretionary approval from the planning commission or city council for the same site area, the planning commission or city council, as appropriate,
shall be the reviewing authority for the application and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the request. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011;
amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3504: NOTICE:
Notices in connection with the open air dining permit approval process shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public
notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3505: STANDARD OF REVIEW:
The reviewing authority shall approve an open air dining permit application if all of the following findings can be made:
A. The proposed open air dining use is consistent with the general plan and any specific plans adopted for the area.
B. The proposed open air dining use will not adversely affect existing and anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote the harmonious
development of the area.
C. The nature, configuration, location, density, and manner of operation of any open air dining use proposed will not significantly and adversely interfere
with the use and enjoyment of residential properties in the vicinity of the subject property.
D. The proposed open air dining use will not create any significant traffic impacts, traffic safety hazards, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, or pedestrian safety
hazards and will not impede the safe and orderly flow of pedestrians along the public right of way.
E. The proposed open air dining use will not create any significantly adverse parking impacts as a result of employee or patron parking demands.
F. The proposed open air dining use will not create any significantly adverse impacts on neighboring properties as a result of:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 719/797
1. The accumulation of garbage, trash or other waste;
2. Noise created by operation of the restaurant or by employees or visitors entering or exiting the restaurant;
3. Light and glare; or
4. Odors and noxious fumes.
G. The proposed open air dining use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3506: OPEN AIR DINING PERMIT; CONDITIONS:
In approving an open air dining permit, the reviewing authority may impose such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare, and to ensure that the proposed open air dining use is established and conducted in a manner which is consistent with this
article and the development standards for the underlying commercial zone. The conditions imposed by the reviewing authority may include, but shall not
be limited to:
A. The appropriate setback for the proposed open air dining use;
B. Pedestrian access and safety;
C. Parking requirements;
D. Barrier requirements;
E. The time limit on the permit. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3507: BONDING AND INSURANCE:
Upon issuance pursuant to this article of an open air dining permit for a dining area in the public right of way, the permittee shall post and at all times while
the permit is in existence, maintain a security bond and insurance.
A. The amount and form of the bond shall be designated by the reviewing authority at the time of approval of the open air dining permit, and shall be in an
amount which is determined to be sufficient for removal of the open air dining area in the event the permittee fails to comply with the conditions of the
permit. The form and content of the bond shall be satisfactory to the city attorney. The bond may be waived where it is determined that the potential for
any injury to the city from the existence of the open air dining area is minimal. Any security bond required by this section may be cash, or cash
equivalent security approved by the city attorney and the risk manager, or a bond in accordance with title 3, chapter 4 of this code.
B. The amount of insurance shall be designated by the city risk manager at the time of approval of the open air dining permit, and shall be in an amount
which is determined to be sufficient to adequately protect the city, persons, and property from injuries or damages which may be caused by the use or
operation of the open air dining area authorized by the permit. Insurance which is required under this section shall comply with the provisions of title 3,
chapter 4 of this code. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3508: DECISION AND APPEALS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision of the planning commission regarding an open air dining permit may appeal the decision to the city
council in the manner provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. Any decision of the director pursuant to this article may be appealed to the
planning commission in a manner consistent with the procedures set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
10-3-3509: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF OPEN AIR DINING PERMIT:
If the director of community development, with the advice of the city engineer, determines that evidence could be presented to the planning commission
which may support grounds for revocation or suspension of an open air dining permit, and the director believes that the planning commission may find that
such evidence is adequate to support revocation or suspension, then the director may initiate a revocation or suspension proceeding before the planning
commission.
Upon initiation of a revocation or suspension proceeding, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the possible revocation or
modification of the open air dining permit. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice required for issuance of the original
permit. The planning commission, after such hearing, may revoke or suspend the open air dining permit if the commission determines that:
A. The permittee has violated any condition imposed on the permit approval, or violated any provision of this code that governs, in whole or in part, the
activity for which the permit was granted or the land on which it is located; or
B. The permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; or
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 720/797
C. The operation of the open air dining use constitutes or creates a nuisance; or
D. The operation of the open air dining use violates any provision of article 19.5 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2615, eff. 12-16-2011)
Article 36. Minor Accommodations To Certain Development Standards
10-3-3600: ACCOMMODATIONS THAT MAY BE GRANTED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by a property owner in a form satisfactory to the director of planning and community
development, the reviewing authority may issue a minor accommodation to the following development standards as provided within this chapter:
A. Section 10-3-100, definition of "floor area", regarding floor area for ground floor commercial uses.
B. Subsection 10-3-1655A regarding restricted uses in pedestrian oriented areas.
C. Sections 10-3-2422, 10-3-2518, and 10-3-2618 regarding front yard paving in R-1 zones.
D. Section 10-3-2733 regarding off site parking.
E. Sections 10-3-1952 and 10-3-1953 regarding transitional setbacks.
F. Section 10-3-2416 regarding below grade driveways in the front yard setback.
G. Section 10-3-2020 regarding architectural features, building lines and open space requirements in the C-5 zone.
H. Repealed.
I. Subsections 10-3-2406C and 10-3-2506B regarding side setback extensions.
J. Sections 10-3-2413 and 10-3-2414 regarding the height of accessory structures.
K. Subsection 10-3-4101B regarding the addition of awnings, canopies and signs that encroach into a required yard of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use.
L. Subsection 10-3-1956C regarding general operational requirements in commercial-residential transition areas.
M. Subsection 10-3-2516C regarding fences in front and street side yards in the Hillside Area.
N. Subsection 10-3-1953B regarding walls required along rear and side property lines separating residential and nonresidential sites.
O. Subsection 10-3-2730.2K regarding protective devices in parking lots and other motor vehicle use areas.
P. Subsection 10-3-2730B16 regarding parking requirements for medical laboratories.
Q. Subsection 10-3-1953A regarding walls required along property lines abutting an alley separating residential and nonresidential uses.
R. Section 10-3-4506 regarding over the air reception devices.
S. Section 10-3-4515 regarding amateur radio station antenna facilities.
T. Subsections 10-3-2409N, 10-3-2509K, and 10-3-2610K regarding elevator encroachments into a side or rear setback in R-1 zones. (Ord. 89-O-2081,
eff. 12-7-1989; amd. Ord. 90-O-2107, eff. 12-21-1990; Ord. 90-O-2109, eff. 12-21-1990; Ord. 94-O-2193, eff. 3-4-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995;
Ord. 96-O-2266, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 96-O-2267, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 96-O-2270, eff. 11-27-1996; Ord. 96-O-2271, eff. 12-27-1996; Ord. 96-O-2272,
eff. 1-9-1997; Ord. 98-O-2293, eff. 4-17-1998; Ord. 99-O-2333, eff. 10-15-1999; Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002; Ord. 02-O-2395, eff. 4-5-2002; Ord. 03-
O-2431, eff. 11-21-2003; Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005; Ord. 09-O-2563, eff. 2-22-2009; Ord. 17-O-2723, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-3601: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 721/797
A. Unless specified, the reviewing authority for a minor accommodation shall be the director of community development. If, in the opinion of the director, an
application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such application to the planning commission and the planning commission
shall serve as the reviewing authority for such minor accommodation application and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested
minor accommodation.
B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the minor accommodation specified by subsection 10-3-3600C of this chapter, regarding front yard paving
as specified in subsection 10-3-2422I of this chapter for the Central Area of the city, the reviewing authority shall be the director of community
development. If in the opinion of the director an application merits review by the design review commission, the director may refer such application to
the design review commission. If the application for a minor accommodation pursuant to subsection 10-3-3600C of this chapter accompanies an
application for any other type of discretionary approval from the planning commission for the same project site, the planning commission shall be the
reviewing authority for the application for the minor accommodation and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested minor
accommodation.
If the application for a minor accommodation pursuant to subsection 10-3-3600C of this chapter accompanies an application for any other type of
discretionary approval from the city council for the same project site, the city council shall be the reviewing authority for the application for the minor
accommodation and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested minor accommodation. (Ord. 09-O-2566, eff. 6-27-2009)
10-3-3602: NOTICE:
A. Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3603: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
In granting a minor accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the
findings required for such accommodations. (Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3604: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding a minor accommodation by a reviewing authority other than the city council may appeal
to the city council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 89-O-2081, eff. 12-7-1989; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3605: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a minor accommodation approval, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be
commenced in accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-O-2411, eff. 11-22-2002)
Article 36.5. Overnight Stay Permits
10-3-3651: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An overnight stay permit is required for all specialty clinics, as defined in article 16 of this chapter, to permit patients to remain overnight in such specialty
clinics. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3652: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
The reviewing authority, as defined in section 10-3-3653 of this article, may only grant a request for an overnight stay permit if each of the following
findings can be made:
A. The building housing the specialty clinic provides adequate on site parking that complies with all applicable parking requirements of this code, and such
parking is provided at a rate of at least one space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of area for all existing buildings.
B. The on site parking provided is available free of charge for any employees using the specialty clinic between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or such other parking arrangements as the reviewing authority determines are necessary to ensure that the overnight stay
permit causes no impacts on adjacent streets.
C. The proposed hours of operation for the specialty clinic applying for the overnight stay permit will not adversely impact adjacent uses or the general
health, safety or public welfare.
D. Granting the request for an overnight stay permit would not lead to an over concentration of such overnight stays in the subject building.
E. Granting the request for an overnight stay permit would not result in adverse impacts to the pedestrian environment adjacent to or in the vicinity of the
site for the proposed overnight stay permit.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 722/797
F. The building housing the specialty clinic provides adequate patient drop off/pick up locations that comply with all applicable parking requirements of this
code, and granting the request for an overnight stay permit will not result in adverse impacts to traffic circulation on adjacent streets.
G. If the building housing the specialty clinic is located adjacent to a residential zone, the building provides adequate on site parking that, in addition to all
other requirements, is located such that overnight usage of said parking facilities will not adversely impact the adjacent residences. In making its
determination regarding the parking facilities provided, the reviewing authority may consider such factors as increased light and glare impacts on
adjacent residences, noise impacts, impacts which alter the character of the adjacent residential neighborhood, and any other factors the reviewing
authority believes are relevant to protecting the health, safety and general welfare of adjacent residents. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002; amd. Ord. 04-
O-2439, eff. 2-6-2004)
10-3-3653: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for an overnight stay permit shall be the director of planning and community development. If, in the
opinion of the director, an application merits review by the planning commission, the director may refer such application to the planning commission and
the planning commission shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested overnight stay permit.
If the application for an overnight stay permit accompanies an application for any other type of discretionary approval from the planning commission or city
council for the same site area, the planning commission or city council, as appropriate, shall be the reviewing authority for the application for an overnight
stay permit and shall conduct a noticed public hearing regarding the requested overnight stay permit. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3654: NOTICE:
Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3655: RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
The permittee shall comply with all restrictions set forth in section 10-3-1604.5D of this chapter. In addition, in granting an overnight stay permit, the
reviewing authority may impose such further restrictions or conditions as it deems necessary or proper to satisfy the findings required for such permits.
(Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3656: PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE:
Each overnight stay permit issued pursuant to this article shall be specific to the applicant to which the overnight stay permit is granted and shall not run
with the land. No overnight stay permit may be transferred, voluntarily or involuntarily, and any purported attempt to transfer an overnight stay permit shall
be null and void and of no effect. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3657: DURATION OF PERMIT:
A. Nonresidential Zones: Overnight stay permits issued pursuant to this article shall initially be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance. Any
overnight stay permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and all rights granted thereunder shall expire at that time, unless an application
for renewal of the overnight stay permit is submitted to the director of planning and community development ("director") not less than sixty (60) days
prior to the expiration of the permit. The renewal hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as the hearing for the initial overnight stay
permit application. For any specialty clinic not located adjacent to a residential zone, the director may permanently renew the overnight stay permit
after conducting the renewal hearing. Any specialty clinic permitting overnight stays which does not submit an application for renewal in accordance
with the provisions of this section shall immediately cease such practices upon the expiration of its initial overnight stay permit.
B. Residential Zones: Overnight stay permits issued to specialty clinics located adjacent to residential zones and all rights granted thereunder shall expire
one year from the date of initial issuance, unless an application for renewal of the overnight stay permit is submitted to the director of planning and
community development ("director") not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the permit. Overnight stay permits for specialty clinics located
adjacent to residential zones renewed pursuant to this section and all rights granted thereunder shall expire two (2) years from the date of renewal,
unless an application for subsequent renewal of the overnight stay permit is submitted to the director of planning and community development
("director") not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the permit. The renewal hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner
as the hearing for the initial overnight stay permit application. For any specialty clinic located adjacent to a residential zone, the director may renew the
overnight stay permit for up to a two (2) year period. Any specialty clinic permitting overnight stays which does not submit an application for renewal in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall immediately cease such practices upon the expiration of its initial overnight stay permit or any
renewal thereof. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002; amd. Ord. 04-O-2439, eff. 2-6-2004)
10-3-3658: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
If the director of planning and community development determines that evidence could be presented to the planning commission which may support
grounds for revocation or modification of an overnight stay permit, and the director believes that the planning commission may find that such evidence is
adequate to support revocation or modification of the overnight stay permit, then the director may initiate a revocation proceeding before the planning
commission.
Upon initiation of a revocation proceeding, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the possible revocation or modification of the
overnight stay permit. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice required for issuance of an overnight stay permit. The
planning commission, after such hearing, may revoke or modify the overnight stay permit if the commission determines that:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 723/797
A. The permittee has violated a condition of the overnight stay permit approval, or violated any provision of this code that governs, in part, the activity for
which the overnight stay permit was granted or the land on which it is located; or
B. The overnight stay permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; or
C. Operation of the overnight stay constitutes or creates a nuisance. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3659: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding an overnight stay permit by a reviewing authority other than the city council may appeal
the decision to the city council as provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3660: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A violation of any of provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine an imprisonment. Any person found to have violated any
provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate and distinct offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which such violation continues,
and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
10-3-3661: COMPLIANCE WITH LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any specialty clinic from complying with the licensing requirements established by the specialty clinic's
governing body. (Ord. 02-O-2390, eff. 2-8-2002)
Article 36.7. Reasonable Accommodation Procedures For Disabled Persons
10-3-3670: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure for disabled persons, or their representatives, to request a reasonable accommodation
from the city's zoning laws, building codes, and land use regulations, policies, and procedures to provide disabled persons with an opportunity to use
and enjoy housing equal to that of nondisabled persons.
B. Who May Apply: A request for a reasonable accommodation may be made by any disabled person, his/her representative, or a developer or provider of
housing for disabled persons, when the application of a zoning law, building code provision, or other land use regulation, policy, or practice acts as a
barrier to a disabled person's equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing.
C. What Can Be Requested: A request for a reasonable accommodation may include a modification to or exception from the rules, standards, or practices
for the siting, development, or use of housing or housing related facilities, in order to allow a disabled person an equal opportunity to use and enjoy
housing in accordance with the fair housing laws. Requests for a reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by this article.
(Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3671: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
A. Request: A request for a reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the community development director or the director's designee, unless it is
related to a discretionary land use application for the same site area that requires review by the planning commission, in which case the planning
commission shall be the reviewing authority. The community development director may, in his/her discretion, refer applications to the planning
commission for consideration.
B. Variance Not Required: Where the improvements or modifications approved through a request for a reasonable accommodation would otherwise
require a variance, a variance shall not be required. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3672: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
A. Director Review: The director, or designee, shall consider an application and issue a written determination. The director shall complete public noticing in
accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines, advising of the standards for issuing an accommodation, and inviting
written comments on the requested accommodation.
B. Planning Commission Review: The processing procedures for the discretionary land use application before the planning commission shall govern the
processing of the request for a reasonable accommodation. If the reasonable accommodation is referred to the planning commission by the director
and there is no other discretionary application, then the planning commission shall hold a public hearing within forty five (45) days after the application
is deemed complete and shall issue a written determination within sixty (60) calendar days after such public hearing. Noticing shall be completed in
accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 724/797
C. Ability To Require Additional Information: If the reviewing authority believes that additional information is necessary to reach a determination on any
request for a reasonable accommodation, then the reviewing authority may request further information from the applicant. The reviewing authority's
request shall specify in detail the requested information. In the event a request for further information is made, the applicable time period to issue a
written determination shall be stayed until the applicant fully responds to the request for information. If an individual needs assistance in submitting the
application for a reasonable accommodation, the city shall provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.
D. Extension Of Time Periods: The applicant and the city may agree at any time to extend the time period(s) set forth in this section. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff.
1-4-2013; amd. Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3673: APPLICATION SUBMITTAL:
Notwithstanding any other requirements of this article, a request for a reasonable accommodation shall be made on a form supplied by the community
development department and shall include the following information:
A. The applicant's or representative's name, mailing address, and daytime phone number;
B. The address of the property for which the request is being made;
C. The specific code section, regulation, procedure, or policy of the city from which relief is sought;
D. A site plan or illustrative drawing showing the proposed accommodation, if applicable;
E. An explanation of why the specified code section, regulation, procedure, or policy is denying, or will deny a disabled person equal opportunity to use
and enjoy the dwelling;
F. The basis for the claim that the fair housing laws apply to the applicant and evidence satisfactory to the city supporting the claim, which may include a
letter from a medical doctor or other licensed healthcare professional, a disabled license, or any other appropriate evidence;
G. A detailed explanation of why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary to afford the disabled person an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the
dwelling; and
H. Any other information required to make the findings required by section 10-3-3674 of this chapter, consistent with the fair housing laws.
I. A reasonable accommodation does not affect or negate an individual's obligation to comply with other applicable regulations that are not the subject of
the requested accommodation.
J. No application fee shall be required to process an application for a request for a reasonable accommodation pursuant to this article. However,
application fees shall be required for any concurrent development application and any other permits that may be required to construct or otherwise
implement the reasonable accommodation.
K. While a request for a reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the
request shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3674: FINDINGS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The reasonable accommodation shall be approved, with or without conditions, if the reviewing authority finds, based upon all of the evidence presented,
that all of the following findings can be made:
A. The dwelling that is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation will be occupied by a disabled person;
B. The requested accommodation is necessary to provide a disabled person with an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling;
C. The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city, as defined in the fair housing laws; and
D. The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration to the city's zoning or building laws, policies, and/or procedures, as defined in
the fair housing laws. In considering whether the accommodation would require such a fundamental alteration, the reviewing authority may consider,
among other factors:
1. Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood;
2. Whether the requested accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking;
3. Whether the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the city's general plan or an applicable specific
plan; and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 725/797
4. Whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of, and distance between, facilities that are
similar in nature or operation. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3675: DECISION:
The reviewing authority's written decision shall set forth the findings and any conditions of approval. The decision and notice of the right to appeal shall be
mailed to the applicant, and to any person having provided written comment on the application.
The approval of a reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes
of this article or the general plan, or are appropriate to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
The reviewing authority may approve an alternative reasonable accommodation that provides the applicant an opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling
equivalent to that provided by the specific accommodation requested by the applicant, where such alternative accommodation would reduce impacts to
neighboring properties or the surrounding area.
The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be final, unless appealed or ordered for council review in the manner set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of
this code.
Prior to the issuance of any permits related to an approved reasonable accommodation, the applicant, or property owner if different, shall record a
covenant in the county recorder's office, on a form approved by the city attorney, acknowledging and agreeing to comply with the terms and conditions of
the approved reasonable accommodation.
A reasonable accommodation is granted to an individual(s) and shall not run with the land, unless the director of community development finds, at the time
of approval of the accommodation, that the modification is physically integrated with the structure and cannot feasibly be removed or altered. (Ord. 12-O-
2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3676: EXPIRATION AND DISCONTINUANCE:
A. Expiration: Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this article shall expire within twelve (12) months from the
effective date of the approval, or at an alternative time specified in the approval, unless:
1. A building permit has been issued and construction has commenced; or
2. The right granted by the accommodation has been exercised; or
3. A time extension has been granted by the community development director.
B. Discontinuance: A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive
days. In addition, if the disabled person for whom the reasonable accommodation was granted vacates the residence, the reasonable accommodation
shall remain in effect only if: 1) the community development director determined pursuant to section 10-3-3675 of this chapter that the reasonable
accommodation shall run with the land, or 2) another disabled person who requires the accommodation to have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy
the dwelling now occupies the dwelling. The director may request that the person seeking to retain the accommodation provide documentation that the
occupants are disabled persons and the existing accommodation is necessary for them to have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling.
Failure to provide such documentation within ten (10) days of the date of a request by the city shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the city of
a previously approved reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
10-3-3677: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
A. If the director determines that evidence could be presented to the planning commission that may support grounds for revocation or modification of an
approved reasonable accommodation, and the director believes that the planning commission may find that such evidence is adequate to support
revocation or modification of the reasonable accommodation, then the director may initiate a revocation proceeding before the planning commission.
B. Upon initiation of a revocation proceeding, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the possible revocation or modification of the
reasonable accommodation. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice required to be provided in section 10-3-3672 of
this chapter. The planning commission, after such hearing, may revoke or modify the reasonable accommodation if the planning commission
determines that:
1. There has been a change in the disabled person's use of the property or need for the reasonable accommodation that negates the basis for the
approval of the reasonable accommodation; or
2. The application, or other information presented to the city in conjunction with the request for a reasonable accommodation, included false
information; or
3. Any of the conditions or terms of such approval are violated, or any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith.
C. Upon revocation of the reasonable accommodation, the property shall be brought into compliance with any zoning regulation or other laws, policies, or
procedures from which a deviation was granted in order to allow the reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 12-O-2634, eff. 1-4-2013)
Article 37. Variances
10-3-3700: AUTHORIZED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 726/797
Variances from the provisions of this chapter with respect to particular property may be granted in the discretion of the granting authority provided:
A. Because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, the strict application
of the provisions of this chapter is found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zone
classification; and
B. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated.
The granting of a variance shall not be construed as an amendment to this code and shall not cause the maps which are a part of this chapter to be
changed. (1962 Code § 10-821; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3701: AUTHORITY TO GRANT:
The board of zoning adjustments is hereby authorized to grant variances in accordance with the provisions of this article. (1962 Code § 10-822; amd. Ord.
95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3702: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for variances in all cases shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the Zoning Administrator on a form prescribed by him and shall
contain the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. Evidence that the applicant is the owner, purchaser under contract, or lessee of the subject property;
C. The legal description of the subject property, together with the street address thereof, or, if there is no street address, a description of the premises
involved;
D. A statement in detail setting forth the manner in which the requirements of section 10-3-3700 of this article are applicable to the subject property; and
E. Such other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Eight (8) copies of white background prints of a map drawn to a scale specified by the Zoning Administrator showing the location of the subject
property and the location of all highways, streets and alleys and all lots and parcels of land within a distance of five hundred feet (500') from the
exterior boundaries of the subject property; and
2. A certified list and two (2) conformed copies thereof containing the names and addresses of the owners of all lots and parcels of land, or portions
thereof, within a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the exterior boundaries of the subject property as shown on the last adopted tax roll of the
County. (1962 Code § 10-823; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3703: FILING FEE:
Applications for variances shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of seventy five dollars ($75.00), no part of which shall be returnable to the
applicant. (1962 Code § 10-824; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3704: HEARINGS:
Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director shall refer the project to the Planning Commission for a hearing at the next feasible regular meeting,
unless an extension of time is consented to by the applicant. (Ord. 19-O-2785, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-3705: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
The Zoning Administrator shall cause notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing to be given in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the
City's public notice guidelines. The failure of the person addressed to receive a notice shall not affect the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Adjustments to
proceed with the hearing. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3706: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
At the time and place fixed for the hearing, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall hear such relevant evidence as may be presented, either for or against
the application, in accordance with such rules of procedure as may be established by the Board of Zoning Adjustments; provided, however, at the time and
place fixed for the hearing or continued hearing, the hearing may be continued or further continued for a period of not to exceed five (5) weeks at any one
time, and no further notice of such continued hearing need be given. (1962 Code § 10-827; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 727/797
10-3-3707: CONDITIONS:
In granting a variance there shall be imposed such conditions and restrictions as are required by subsection 10-3-3700B of this chapter, and there may be
imposed such other conditions and restrictions as may be found to be appropriate or necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. (1962 Code
§ 10-828; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3708: DECISIONS:
Based upon the application, such investigations as may be made by appropriate departments of the City, and such relevant evidence as may be presented
at the hearing, the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall issue a decision in writing, with reasonable promptness after the hearing is concluded, setting forth
its findings and conclusions. (1962 Code § 10-829; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3709: NOTICE OF DECISIONS:
Within five (5) days after the issuance of a decision by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, the Zoning Administrator shall cause a copy of the decision to be
mailed, through the United States mail, postage prepaid, to each of the following persons:
A. The applicant, using the address set forth in the application;
B. Each person affected by the decision who previously filed with the zoning administrator a written request therefor, using the address set forth in such
written request; and
C. Each member of the council.
The failure of the person addressed to receive a copy of the decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any decision. (1962 Code § 10-830;
amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3710: EFFECTIVE DATE OF VARIANCES:
Any variance decision by the board of zoning adjustments shall become effective on the thirtieth day after the decision, unless appealed to the council or
an order for review is issued by the council. (1962 Code § 10-831; amd. Ord. 72-O-1452, eff. 12-21-1972; Ord. 85-O-1948, eff. 3-21-1985; Ord. 95-O-
2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3711: APPEALS TO THE COUNCIL:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by a decision of the board of zoning adjustments in granting or denying a variance may appeal to the council as
provided in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The zoning administrator shall cause notice of the council hearing in accordance with article 2.5 of this
chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3712: TIME OF EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a variance, the exercise of rights granted in such variance shall be commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the adoption of such resolution, all conditions imposed shall be diligently complied with, and all construction authorized shall be
diligently prosecuted until completion. (1962 Code § 10-839; amd. Ord. 1156, eff. 8-23-1962; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3713: EXTENSIONS OF TIME TO EXERCISE RIGHTS:
The time limits contained in this chapter or in any resolution granting a variance may be extended by the board of zoning adjustments provided an
application therefor is made before the expiration of the time limits. Any such extension may be appealed to the council as provided in section 10-3-3711 of
this chapter. (Ord. 1156, eff. 8-23-1962; amd. Ord. 85-O-1948, eff. 3-21-1985; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3714: ABANDONMENT OF RIGHTS:
The failure to exercise any right granted by a variance within the time limits provided, or the discontinuance of the exercise of any right heretofore or
hereafter granted by a variance for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, shall constitute an abandonment of such variance, and such rights shall
lapse, and the property affected thereby shall be subject to all the provisions and regulations of this chapter applicable to the zone in which such property
is classified by this chapter at the time of such abandonment. (1962 Code § 10-840; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3715: RESUBMISSION OF APPLICATION:
In the event a variance has been denied wholly or in part, no new application requesting the matter denied shall be filed for a period of six (6) months after
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 728/797
the effective date of such denial, except upon the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions. (1962 Code § 10-841; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239,
eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3716: REVOCATION:
The board of zoning adjustments, after a hearing, may revoke a variance for cause, including, but not limited to, the failure to comply with any condition
contained in the variance or the violation of any of the provisions of this code by the owner or any lawful occupant of the premises for which the variance is
granted. (1962 Code § 10-842; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3717: REVOCATION; NOTICE OF HEARING:
The zoning administrator shall cause notice of the time, place, and purpose of a hearing to revoke a variance, or a hearing for the review of a decision to
revoke a variance, to be given in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. The failure of the person addressed to
receive the notice shall not affect the jurisdiction of the board of zoning adjustments to proceed with the hearing. The procedures set forth in this article
relative to hearings and appeals shall be applicable to the revocation of a variance. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3718: EMERGENCY POWERS OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator, during the pendency of an application for a variance, if he finds an emergency to exist, including, but not limited to, the failure of
the applicant to make a timely application for reasons beyond his control, may grant a temporary variance from the provisions of this chapter. Such
temporary variance shall expire not later than the date the application is withdrawn or a decision thereon becomes final. (1962 Code § 10-844; amd. Ord.
95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3719: PARKING; TRANSITIONAL USE:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, commercial off street automobile parking shall be permitted as a transitional use upon property in the
multiple residential zone (R-4) subject to each and all of the following conditions:
A. Such site area shall have a side common property line, other than a rear property line, the whole of which adjoins, or is separated only by an alley from,
property located in the commercial zone (C-3).
B. Such use shall extend not more than four (4) subdivided lots into a residential zone.
C. 1. There shall be provided minimum setbacks of five feet (5') from any front property line and of not less than twenty feet (20') plus ten percent (10%) of
the site width in excess of fifty feet (50') from any side common residential property line, but such setback need not exceed thirty five feet (35');
provided, however, for parking structures built on one or two (2) lots, the setback from the front property line shall be not less than ten feet (10'). Any
parking structure erected or constructed adjacent to an area designated on the zoning map as commercial-retail overlay zone (C-R) which is separated
only by an alley from property located in such zone shall be set back so that the alley may be widened to a width of not less than twenty feet (20');
provided, however, the side setbacks from adjacent residential properties may be reduced as set forth in subsection 10-3-3408D of this chapter.
2. No setback need be provided adjacent to an alley or for parking facilities which are completely subsurfaced and covered. All setback areas shall be
improved in landscaping in a type, amount, arrangement, and manner satisfactory to the architectural commission and shall be maintained, as
provided, in an attractive and clean condition.
3. Setback areas from a side common residential property line shall be improved as provided in this section, and an easement therefor shall be
dedicated to the city for park, alley, and public utility purposes. The city may require that a portion or all of such setback area be improved as an alley
in accordance with plans and specifications for alley paving and improvements on file in the office of the public services division. When required,
such alley shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width and shall be located as close as practicable to the portion of the parking site developed for
parking.
4. Setback areas required by this section on properties separated from properties by an alley from property located in the commercial-retail overlay
zone (C-R) shall be improved as an alley in accordance with plans and specifications for alley paving and improvements on file in the office of the
public services division, and an easement therefor shall be dedicated to the city for alley and public utility purposes.
D. A detailed plot plan, showing the exterior boundaries of the entire site, the location of existing and proposed improvements, driveways, bumper guards,
walls, fences, signs, landscaping, type of surfacing and other details of development, shall be submitted and approved by the architectural commission,
the planning official, and the public works administrator.
E. A report by a traffic consultant who is a member of the Institute Of Traffic Engineers, containing an analysis of internal and external effects shall be
submitted in connection with the information required by subsection D of this section.
F. No portion of the parking area shall be used for the sale or servicing of automobiles, the sale or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for any
purpose other than that of automobile parking. Such use shall not include the storage of automobiles in connection with a used or new car business.
G. Where parking is provided other than within a structure, proper barriers acceptable to the architectural commission shall be provided in order to fully
screen the parking from the horizontal view of the street and adjacent properties and to comply with the noise abatement provisions of this code. Such
barriers shall include, but not be limited to, solid masonry walls and landscaped earth berms or other devices at least six feet (6') in height, except that
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 729/797
on structures located on properties separated by an alley from the commercial-retail overlay zone (C-R), such barriers shall be solid masonry walls.
Barriers shall not be required for the side of any lot which faces the commercial lot which the parking area serves.
H. Where parking is provided in a structure, such structure shall be limited in height to thirty five feet (35') measured from the high point of the natural
grade at the perimeter of the structure to the top of the topmost parking surface or the roof of the structure, whichever is higher. Where the property
used for parking has a common property line with property zoned for residential uses or is separated by an alley or park from property zoned for
residential uses, structures shall be provided with wall enclosures facing such property zoned for residential uses and shall be of solid masonry
construction with no openings and shall extend from the ground level to six feet (6') above the topmost parking surfaces of the structure. On any side of
the parking structure where a solid wall is not required, parking within such a structure shall be shielded from view, except for necessary access, by
incombustible walls which shall extend at least six feet (6') in height above the parking surface at the ground level and at least fifty four inches (54") in
height above the parking surface on all levels above the ground level, except that such walls shall not be required on any ground level that faces the
commercial lot that the parking structure serves. (1962 Code § 10-806; amd. Ord. 69-O-1340, eff. 3-20-1969; Ord. 76-O-1596, eff. 2-19-1976; Ord. 79-
O-1721, eff. 2-15-1979; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3720: VARIANCE; GIBRALTER SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION:
A. Granting Of Variance: Upon its written request, dated on or about June 20, 1957, and upon the suggestion of the council sitting as a planning
commission, and after public hearings as provided by law, a variance hereby is granted to Gibralter Savings and Loan Association to use lots 16
through 21, inclusive, of tract 10599 in the city, as per map book 161, page 17, records in the office of the county recorder, for the purpose of
constructing thereon an office building containing a total floor area of approximately one hundred sixteen thousand forty seven (116,047) square feet on
the described site, said lots 16 through 21, inclusive, containing approximately forty three thousand five hundred eighteen (43,518) square feet, having
a total floor area to site ratio of approximately 2.68 to one (2.68:1) with off street parking furnished on the site equaling approximately sixty two percent
(62%) of the gross floor area or eighty five percent (85%) of the net rentable area, or a total parking area of approximately seventy two thousand one
hundred thirty seven (72,137) square feet.
B. Conditions: Such variance is granted upon the following conditions which shall be strictly observed:
1. Setbacks: All portions of the structure above the second floor shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of at least ten percent (10%) of the width
of the building site but not less than five feet (5'); provided, however, no such setback need be more than twenty feet (20') from the side lot line.
2. Light Angle: The structure shall be designed so as to maintain an average light angle of not more than fifty degrees (50°) measured from the
centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, an average light angle of not more than seventy degrees (70°) from the centerline of the alley easement in the rear
of the site, and an average light angle of not more than seventy degrees (70°) from the centerline of Oakhurst Drive and Doheny Drive.
In determining the average light angle a portion of the structure may be perpendicular to the lot line to the full height of the structure provided another
portion is set back sufficiently so that the above light angle is not exceeded. The building official may permit adjustments of not to exceed ten percent
(10%) of the stated light angle to prevent unreasonable hardship in design and arrangement.
3. Roof Structures: Except for roof signs which are prohibited under the Uniform Building Code or other sections of this code, penthouses and other
roof structures shall be governed by the provisions of the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter and by the provisions of
the Uniform Building Code, and when in conflict, the later shall govern.
4. Signs: No sign shall be constructed, erected, or maintained on top of any penthouse or above the top story of the structure or above one hundred
twenty five feet (125'), whichever is less, except on the side of a penthouse.
5. Height Of Structure: The total height of the structure on any portion of the site above described shall not exceed eight (8) stories or one hundred
twenty five feet (125'), whichever is less, as measured by this code, except for the construction of a penthouse as permitted by this code or the
Uniform Building Code.
6. Loading And Parking Space: Loading spaces shall be provided in connection with the proposed structure and on the described site in accordance
with the provisions of article 27 of this chapter and automobile parking spaces shall be provided in connection with the proposed structure and on the
described site, which parking spaces, in addition to the required loading spaces, shall equal at least eighty percent (80%) of the total floor area of the
principal structure. Required parking spaces may be provided underground, on the surface or above the ground within the height limit in feet in the
same structure or on the described building site. Such automobile parking spaces shall be accessible with adequate ingress and egress.
C. Compliance With Other Laws: Except as herein expressly modified, the use of such lots and the construction of the building shall comply with all rules,
regulations, and laws in effect at the time of the construction and use. (1962 Code § 10-810; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3721: VARIANCE; UNION BANK BUILDING:
A. Granting Of Variance: Upon its written request as owner of lots 1 through 5, inclusive, tract 6649, through Sidney Eisenshtat, dated January 6, 1958,
and upon the suggestion of the council sitting as a planning commission and after public hearings as provided by law, a variance hereby is granted as
requested on behalf of Wilshire-Beverly Associates, owners of the described property, to use lots 1 through 5, inclusive, tract 6649, in the city, as per
map book 70, page 54, records of the county recorder, for the purpose of constructing thereon an office building containing a total floor area of
approximately ninety six thousand (96,000) square feet on the described site, lots 1 through 5, inclusive, containing approximately thirty three thousand
seven hundred fifty (33,750) square feet having a total floor area to site area ratio of less than 3.00 to one, with off street parking furnished on the site
in the amount of approximately seventy six thousand nine hundred fifty four (76,954) square feet, off street parking equaling eighty percent (80%) of the
gross floor area of the structure. The structure shall consist generally of a one-story and mezzanine store building on the west one hundred sixty three
feet (163'), more or less, of the site and a tower over a first floor and mezzanine on the east eighty seven feet (87'), more or less, of the site.
B. Conditions: Such variance is granted upon the following conditions to be strictly observed:
1. Setbacks: The structure above the first floor shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of a least ten percent (10%) of the width of the building site
but not less than five feet (5'), provided no such setback need be more than twenty feet (20') from the side yard lot line; and provided, further, that no
such setback need be maintained next to a street or alley unless necessary to maintain the following light angles.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 730/797
2. Light Angles: The structure shall be so designed so as to maintain an average light angle of not more than fifty degrees (50°) measured from the
centerline of Wilshire Boulevard, not more than sixty degrees (60°) from the centerline of Beverly Drive, not more than fifty degrees (50°) from the
centerline of El Camino and not more than seventy degrees (70°) from the centerline of the alley adjacent to the rear of the structure extending from
Beverly Drive to El Camino. In determining the average light angle, a portion of the structure may be perpendicular to the lot line to the full height of
the structure, provided another portion is set back sufficiently so that the above light angle is not exceeded. The city building official may permit
adjustments of not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the stated light angle to prevent unreasonable hardship in design and arrangement.
3. Roof Structures: Except for roof signs which are prohibited under the Uniform Building Code or other sections of this code, penthouses and other
roof structures shall be governed by the provisions of the definition of "height of building" in section 10-3-100 of this chapter and by the provisions of
the building code, and when in conflict, the latter shall govern.
4. Signs: No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained on top of any penthouse, or above the top story of the structure, or above one hundred
twenty five feet (125'), whichever is less, except on the side of a penthouse.
5. Height Of Structure: The total height of the structure on any portion of the site described in subsection A of this section shall not exceed eight (8)
stories or one hundred twenty five feet (125'), whichever is less, as measured by this code, except for the construction of a penthouse as permitted
by this code or the building code.
6. Loading And Parking Spaces: Loading spaces shall be provided in connection with the proposed structure and on the described site in accordance
with the provisions of article 27 of this chapter, and automobile parking spaces shall be provided in connection with the proposed structure and on
the described site, which parking spaces, in addition to the required loading spaces, shall equal at least eighty percent (80%) of the total floor area of
the principal structure. Required parking spaces may be provided underground, on the surface, or above the ground within the height limit in feet in
the same structure or on the described building site. Such automobile parking spaces shall be accessible with adequate ingress and egress.
C. Compliance With Other Laws: Except as expressly modified by this section, the use of such lots and the construction of the building shall comply with
all rules, regulations, and laws in effect at the time of the construction and use. (1962 Code § 10-811; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
Article 38. Conditional Use Permits
10-3-3800: AUTHORIZED:
Pursuant to an application and hearing procedure as provided in article 37 of this chapter for granting a variance, the planning commission may authorize
conditional uses as specified in this code if the planning commission finds that the proposed location of any such use will not be detrimental to adjacent
property or to the public welfare.
Conditionally permitted uses shall be designated and listed in this code under the zone in which they are permitted. Additionally, a list of all uses which
may require a conditional use permit shall be maintained in the office of the department of planning and community development and shall be available to
the public free of charge. Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661,
eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3801: EXEMPTIONS AND REDUCTIONS:
The height and area requirements set forth in other provisions of this chapter shall not apply to conditional uses for which a conditional use permit
application is submitted and later granted.
In addition, the parking and loading space requirements set forth in other provisions of this chapter may be reduced by the planning commission for the
uses specified in this section upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to the commission that the parking and loading spaces required by other
provisions of this chapter exceed the demand for parking and loading spaces that will be generated by the proposed use. Pursuant to this section, the
planning commission may reduce parking and loading space requirements for any of the following uses in conjunction with the granting of a conditional
use permit:
A. Childcare uses other than family daycare homes,
B. Religious institution located in the C-5 zone provided all of the following criteria are met:
1. The use of the subject site is limited to religious institutional uses.
2. Except as otherwise permitted by the conditional use permit, no social events shall be allowed at the subject site. For the purposes of this section,
"social events" shall include: a) celebrations associated with weddings and other life cycle events; b) fundraising events not involving a religious
service, such as bingo games or auctions; c) gatherings of more than five (5) persons to foster interaction among congregation members or among
congregation members and other members of the community, including, but not limited to, events such as dances, discussions, study groups or
lectures.
3. The applicant submits evidence satisfactory to the planning commission that establishes that the proposed use will have no traffic or parking related
impacts on adjacent streets or land uses as a result of the requested reduction in the parking and/or loading requirements. Such evidence may
include, but not be limited to, a traffic and parking utilization study prepared by a certified traffic engineer.
C. Educational institutions which fulfill the state compulsory education requirements of its pupils and which are registered with the state of California
pursuant to California Education Code section 33190, or its successor, and educational institutions located in nonresidential zones providing continuing
education and vocational training programs that are accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency listed by the United States department of
education.
D. Hotel restaurants that may be established pursuant to a conditional use permit.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 731/797
E. Automobile dealerships. In addition to the foregoing, as part of the conditional use permit process for the establishment of a new or expanded
automobile dealership, the planning commission may permit:
1. The required parking to be provided in a tandem and/or compact configuration provided that at least half of the overall parking supply is devoted to
the storage of new automobiles.
2. The exclusion of above grade parking and circulation areas and up to half of below grade areas devoted solely to vehicle service from the definition
of "floor area" as set forth in section 10-3-100 of this chapter, provided that the building housing the automobile dealership does not exceed forty five
feet (45') in height measured pursuant to section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
The planning commission may require a conditional use permit applicant to provide the commission with any information that the commission
believes would be useful for the purpose of determining the parking and loading demand of a proposed use, the impacts of that use, or the
appropriate conditions to be imposed on that use. (1962 Code § 10-415; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 95-O-2247, eff. 11-10-1995; Ord.
96-O-2256, eff. 4-5-1996; Ord. 99-O-2331, eff. 8-20-1999; Ord. 03-O-2421, eff. 2-7-2003; Ord. 12-O-2619, eff. 2-24-2012)
10-3-3800.1: CONVENIENCE STORE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
Where authorized in the zone, the city may permit convenience stores as a conditional use in the same manner that it would process an application for a
conditional use permit pursuant to this article. The city may impose any conditions on a convenience store conditional use permit that are necessary to
preserve the public health, safety, or welfare, or to mitigate any potential adverse impacts resulting from the establishment of a convenience store
including impacts associated with congregation. The city shall not approve a conditional use permit for a convenience store unless it makes all of the
following findings:
A. The proposed use will contribute to and enhance the character of the neighborhood and location, and will promote harmonious development in the
area, and will contribute positively to the branding and image of the city;
B. The proposed use will have adequate buffering between the use and residential areas, schools, parks, and locations where children gather, and will not
adversely interfere with the use and enjoyment of residential properties in the vicinity of the proposed development;
C. The proposed use will not result in detrimental impacts to existing or anticipated residential or commercial development in the vicinity of the project with
regard to traffic levels, traffic safety, pedestrian-vehicle conflicts, pedestrian safety hazards, parking demand, parking design, and loading or manner of
operation;
D. The proposed use will not create excessive noise, unpleasant odors, noxious fumes, excessive lighting, increased litter, or substantial interference with
neighboring properties or uses due to the activities associated with the proposed use or its hours of operation;
E. The proposed use will not create an overconcentration of convenience stores in the vicinity. (Ord. 12-O-2625, eff. 8-3-2012)
10-3-3802: RESTRICTIONS:
In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may impose such conditions on the permit as the commission deems necessary or proper to
protect adjacent property and the public welfare from potential adverse impacts related to the approved use. Such conditions may include, without
limitation, conditions that limit the height or area of buildings and structures that would otherwise be permitted by the provisions of this title and conditions
that require an applicant to provide parking and loading spaces in excess of the parking and loading spaces otherwise required by this code. (Ord. 95-O-
2247, eff. 11-10-1995)
10-3-3803: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION:
If the director of planning and community development determines that evidence could be presented to the planning commission which may support
grounds for revocation or modification of a conditional use permit, and the director believes that the planning commission may find that such evidence is
adequate to support revocation or modification of the conditional use permit, then the director may initiate a revocation proceeding before the planning
commission.
Upon initiation of a revocation proceeding, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the possible revocation or modification of the
conditional use permit. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice required for issuance of the conditional use permit. The
planning commission, after such hearing, may revoke or modify the conditional use permit if the commission determines that:
A. The permittee has violated a condition of the conditional use permit approval, or violated any provision of this code that governs, in part, the operation of
the conditionally permitted activity or the land on which it is located; or
B. The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; or
C. Operation of the conditional use constitutes or creates a nuisance. (1962 Code § 10-415; amd. Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-
1995; Ord. 95-O-2247, eff. 11-10-1995)
10-3-3804: APPEALS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 732/797
Any decision made by the planning commission pursuant to this article may be appealed to the city council in the manner provided in title 1, chapter 4,
article 1 of this code. (1962 Code § 10-415; amd. Ord. 85-O-1948, eff. 3-21-1985; Ord. 94-O-2212, eff. 9-9-1994; Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995; Ord. 95-
O-2247, eff. 11-10-1995)
10-3-3805: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting a conditional use permit, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-2723, eff. 2-10-2017)
10-3-3806: Time Limits For A Discontinued Conditionally Permitted Use:
A. If a use, which requires a conditional use permit, has been discontinued for a period of five (5) years, the use shall not be reestablished unless a new
conditional use permit is granted pursuant to the provisions set forth in this article. For purposes of determining whether a use has been discontinued,
the property owner shall have the burden of proof in demonstrating a continuation of the use.
1. Exceptions:
a. Owners of properties impacted by circumstances that are out of the property owner's control, including, but not limited to, government regulations,
the presence of hazardous substances on the property that must be removed in order for the property to be developed with the approved use, or
an extended statewide economic downturn, may request an extension of the five (5) year period from the planning commission. The planning
commission must make the following finding in order to grant an extension:
(1) The conditionally permitted use is not substantially adverse to the public health and safety of the neighborhoods adjacent to the property.
b. Residential uses.
c. Medical uses. Such uses shall be governed by section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter.
d. Reestablishment of a conditionally permitted use may occur after the passage of five (5) years, provided that a complete application for either a
planning entitlement or building permit associated with such reestablishment has been filed prior to expiration of the five (5) year time limit,
provided the application is subsequently approved by the city. (Ord. 16-O-2702, eff. 5-20-2016)
Article 39. Amendments
10-3-3900: PROPERTY USES DEFINED:
"Property uses", as used in this article, shall mean and include the use of buildings, structures, and land, the regulation of location, height, bulk, number of
stories, and size of buildings and structures, the size of yards, courts, and open spaces, the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or
structure, the establishment of building setback lines, and the creation of civic districts. (1962 Code § 10-852; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3901: INITIATION:
Boundaries of the zones established by this chapter, or the classification of property uses therein, may be amended, reclassified, and altered whenever the
public necessity, convenience, and general welfare require. Such changes may be initiated by:
A. The verified petition of the owners of property proposed to be so changed or reclassified;
B. Motion of the council; or
C. Motion of the planning commission.
Whenever the owner of any land or building desires a reclassification of his property, he shall file with the zoning administrator a petition duly verified by
him requesting an amendment, supplement, or change of the regulations prescribed for such property. (1962 Code § 10-851; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff.
7-7-1995)
10-3-3902: NOTICE AND HEARING BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
Upon the filing of such verified petition, or adoption of such motion, the planning commission shall hold a hearing thereon as provided in sections 10-3-
3704 and 10-3-3705 of this chapter. Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord.
14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3903: PETITIONS:
The zoning administrator shall prescribe the form of application for changes of zone boundaries or classifications. He shall prepare and provide blanks for
such purposes and shall prescribe the type of information to be provided in the application by the petitioner. No petition shall be received unless it complies
with such requirements. If signatures of persons other than the owners of property making the application are required or offered in support of or in
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 733/797
opposition to the application, they may be received as evidence of notice having been served upon them of the pending application, or as evidence of their
opinion on the pending issue, but they shall in no case infringe upon the free exercise of the powers vested in the city.
Petitions or applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be numbered consecutively in the order of their filing and shall become a part of
the permanent official records of the planning commission, and there shall be attached thereto and permanently filed therewith copies of all notices and
actions with affidavits of posting, mailing, or publication pertaining thereto. (1962 Code § 10-853; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3904: FILING FEES:
A fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid upon the filing of each application or petition for change or amendment for the purpose
of defraying the expenses of postage, posting, advertising, and other costs incidental to the proceedings prescribed in this article. (1962 Code § 10-854;
amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3905: SETTING OF HEARINGS:
All proposals for amending zone boundaries or classifications or property uses shall be set for public hearing by the zoning administrator not less than ten
(10) days nor more than forty (40) days from the time of the filing of such verified petition or the making of such motion. (1962 Code § 10-855; amd. Ord.
95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3906: INVESTIGATIONS:
The planning commission may cause to be made by its own members or by the zoning administrator such investigations of facts bearing upon any
application set for hearing, including an analysis of precedent cases, as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure action on each case
consistent with the purposes of this chapter and with previous amendments or variances. (1962 Code § 10-856; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3907: CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARINGS:
Public hearings by the planning commission shall be conducted before a quorum of the planning commission. The planning commission may establish its
own rules for the conduct of public hearings, and the member of the planning commission presiding at such hearing is hereby empowered to administer
oaths to any person testifying before it.
A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing and the names of persons testifying shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent
files of the case.
If, for any reason, testimony of any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the day set for such hearing, the planning commissioner presiding
at such public hearing may, before the adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place to and at which such hearing will be
continued, and such announcement shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance and without recourse to the form of public notice as provided for in
the first instance. (1962 Code § 10-857; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3908: DECISION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION:
If, from the facts presented at the public hearing, or by investigation by or at the instance of the planning commission, the planning commission finds that
the public interest, health, safety, morals, peace, comfort, convenience, or general welfare requires the reclassification of the property involved or the
reclassification of any portion of the property, the planning commission shall so recommend to the council.
The recommendation of the planning commission to the council shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the findings and determinations of the planning
commission on the matter involved. A decision shall be rendered within a reasonable time, and a recommendation shall be filed with the council within
seven (7) days after the decision is rendered by the planning commission. (1962 Code § 10-858; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3909: NOTICE OF ACTION:
Notice of an action taken on an amendment application shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the city's public notice
guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-3910: COUNCIL HEARINGS:
The action of the planning commission in the legislative matter of amending zone boundaries or use classifications or other matters established by this
chapter shall be advisory only. The council, after receipt of the report and recommendation from the planning commission, shall hold a final hearing
thereon. The manner of setting the hearing, giving the notice, and conducting the hearing shall be the same as prescribed for hearings by the planning
commission. The determination by the council shall be final and conclusive, and the council shall, by ordinance, effect any such reclassification,
amendment, or addition. (1962 Code § 10-860; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10-3-3911: DENIAL BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION; APPEALS:
If an application for an amendment is denied by the planning commission, an appeal may be taken to and conducted by the council in the same manner as
an appeal from the denial of a variance, and, if no such appeal is taken, such denial shall be final. The decision of the council on appeals shall be final.
(1962 Code § 10-861; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 734/797
10-3-3912: INITIATIVE ACTION BY COUNCIL AND PLANNING COMMISSION FOR REZONING:
The council may, by minute order, request the planning commission to consider the rezoning of any property, or the planning commission may, of its own
initiative, consider such a change. In either case the planning commission shall proceed as though an application for a change had been filed with the
zoning administrator as provided in section 10-3-3901 of this chapter; provided, however, written notices need not be mailed if such notice is deemed
impracticable by the planning commission. (1962 Code § 10-862; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
Article 40. General Plan
10-3-4000: OPEN SPACE ZONING REGULATIONS; GENERAL PLAN:
In accordance with the provisions of the planning and zoning law, as contained in the Government Code of the state, and in accordance with the open
space element of the general plan of the city, the following areas are hereby designated as open space land:
Public open spaces:
Parks
Beverly Gardens
Coldwater Canyon
Greystone
La Cienega
Maltz Park
Oakhurst Oaks
Reeves Park
Rexford Rest
Roxbury
Tatum Wells
Willow Wells
Will Rogers
Schools
Beverly Hills High School
Beverly Vista
El Rodeo
Hawthorne
Horace Mann
Miscellaneous
145 North La Cienega Boulevard
Burton Way (median strip)
Sunset Boulevard (median strip)
Sunset Reservoir
Water Reservoir - 3C
Water Reservoir - no. 7
(Ord. 73-O-1477, eff. 6-19-1973; amd. Ord. 95-O-2239, eff. 7-7-1995)
Article 41. Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
10-3-4100: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS:
A. Single-Family Residential Developments: Except as otherwise provided by applicable local, state or federal law, any alteration to a nonconforming
building in a single-family development shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Remodels: A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the combined area of all the exterior walls and roof of a legally nonconforming building or structure
may be replaced or reconstructed in any five (5) year period. For the purpose of this section, roof area shall be calculated as the horizontal area
covering the floor area. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the combined area of all the exterior walls and roof are replaced or reconstructed, then the
building shall be treated as a newly constructed building for the purposes of this chapter and shall be reconstructed so that the entire building
conforms with the development standards of this chapter. For the purpose of this section, a portion of a wall or roof is considered replaced or
reconstructed when the framing has been replaced or reconstructed.
2. Additions: Nothing in this section shall restrict the construction of an addition to a legally nonconforming building provided that such addition
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
B. All Development Other Than Single-Family Residential Development: Except as otherwise provided by applicable local, state or federal law, any
alteration to a legally nonconforming building in any development other than a single-family development shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Remodels: If, within a five (5) year period, a nonconforming building is altered, renovated, repaired, or remodeled, and the cumulative cost of such
alteration, renovation, repair or remodel equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the building, then the building shall be
treated as a newly constructed building for the purposes of this chapter and shall be reconstructed so that the entire building conforms with the
development standards of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 735/797
a. Calculation Of Costs: The building official shall calculate the cost of replacement as well as the cost of alterations, renovations, repairs and
remodels. When the building official determines that such calculation requires a degree of specialized knowledge, skill, or experience beyond that
possessed by any employee of the city, or when there are differences of opinions between city staff and the project applicant with respect to such
calculation, the building official may employ an independent, third party consultant or consultants to calculate the replacement cost or the cost of
alterations, renovations, repairs or remodels. The project applicant or the property owner, or their respective agent(s), shall pay to the city all direct
and indirect costs incurred by the city to retain said consultants and shall maintain a cash deposit with the city at all times in an amount sufficient to
cover such costs.
2. Additions: Nothing in this section shall restrict the construction of an addition to a legally nonconforming building provided that such addition
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Exception For Life Safety Repairs/Upgrades: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any repairs or upgrades, regardless of whether those
repairs or upgrades exceed the fifty percent (50%) threshold set forth in subsections A and B of this section, which the building official determines are
necessary, for safety reasons, to bring the nonconforming structure into compliance with the requirements of title 9 of this code or any applicable
governmental regulations. (Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997; amd. Ord. 06-O-2498, eff. 3-24-2006)
10-3-4101: NONCONFORMING USES:
A nonconforming use may be continued, without alteration or expansion, although such use no longer conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Conversion To Conforming Use: A nonconforming use, or any portion of the nonconforming use, may be converted to a use that conforms to the
provisions of this chapter.
1. A nonconforming use may not be resumed once that use is converted to a conforming use.
2. No portion of a building may be occupied by a nonconforming use once that portion of the building is occupied by a conforming use.
B. Expansion Of Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use shall not be expanded. However, a building occupied by a nonconforming use may be
enlarged provided that the enlargement meets the then current development standards and the area of the enlargement is utilized solely by conforming
uses.
1. Minor Accommodation: Pursuant to the provisions of article 36 of this chapter, a minor accommodation permit may be issued to allow an awning,
canopy or sign to be added to a building located in a residential zone and occupied by a nonconforming use and to allow such awning, canopy or
sign to encroach into a required yard if: a) the use is nonconforming solely because the use lacks a conditional use permit, b) the addition will not
add floor area to the buildings, c) the sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area unless the planning commission or the city council acts as
the reviewing authority for the minor accommodation, and d) the reviewing authority determines that the awning, canopy or sign will not substantially
and adversely affect the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
C. Time Limits For A Discontinued Nonconforming Use: If a nonconforming use of a building or land has been discontinued for a period of five (5) years,
the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished. Subsequent use of the building and/or land shall conform to the regulations of the zone in which the
land is located. For the purposes of determining whether a use has been discontinued, the property owner shall have the burden of proof in
demonstrating a continuation of use.
1. Exceptions:
a. Owners of properties impacted by circumstances that are out of the property owner's control, including, but not limited to, government regulations,
the presence of hazardous substances on the property that must be removed in order for the property to be developed with the approved use, or
an extended statewide economic downturn, may request an extension of the five (5) year period from the planning commission. The planning
commission must make the following finding in order to grant an extension:
(1) The nonconforming use is not substantially adverse to the public health and safety of the neighborhoods adjacent to the property.
b. Residential uses.
c. Medical uses. Such uses shall be governed by section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter.
d. Reestablishment of a nonconforming use may occur after the passage of five (5) years, provided that a complete application for either a planning
entitlement or building permit associated with such reestablishment has been filed prior to expiration of the five (5) year time limit, provided the
application is subsequently approved by the city. (Ord. 96-O-2272, eff. 1-9-1997; amd. Ord. 02-O-2391, eff. 3-8-2002; Ord. 16-O-2702, eff. 5-20-
2016)
10-3-4102: NONCONFORMING PARKING:
Any building that is nonconforming due to insufficient parking may be enlarged, or may be occupied by a use, other than a medical use, which requires
additional parking, if sufficient parking is provided for such enlargement or use and the enlargement or use complies with all other provisions of this code.
Additionally, notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-3-4100 of this chapter, a building that is nonconforming due to insufficient parking need not
conform to the parking requirements of this chapter unless seventy five percent (75%) of the structure has been altered, renovated, repaired, or remodeled
within a period of less than five (5) years. The percentage of alteration, renovation, repair or remodel, shall be determined by the ratio of the total surface
area removed or demolished to the surface area in existence prior to the removal or demolition. The surface area elements to be included in the
determination are: floors, roofs, exterior walls, including door and window openings, basement walls, and foundation walls. Each element shall be
considered to have only one surface. An existing building that is nonconforming due to insufficient parking may not be occupied by additional medical uses
unless the building has parking for the additional medical uses that meets the parking requirements in section 10-3-2730 of this chapter and the medical
uses are permitted pursuant to section 10-3-1620.1 of this chapter or a medical overlay zone. (Ord. 11-O-2602, eff. 2-11-2011)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 736/797
Article 42. Demolition Of Structures
10-3-4201: RESTRICTIONS ON DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS:
A. Except as provided in section 10-3-4202 of this chapter, no permit shall be issued to allow the demolition of a building, or any portion of a building, or
the removal of a building or any portion of a building from a site, unless:
1. A building permit is also issued at the same time to authorize construction of a replacement building or to restore a partially demolished building to a
habitable condition;
2. Architectural commission approval has been granted for an alternative use of the property that does not require a building permit; or
3. A landscaping, fencing and maintenance plan, other than a plan requiring architectural commission approval, in a form acceptable to the director of
building and safety has been submitted in accordance with the requirements of this section.
B. In addition to requirements set forth in subsection A of this section, as a condition of issuance of a permit for the demolition of a building, the applicant
shall be required to post a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the director of building and safety, or other security satisfactory to the director of
building and safety, to guarantee:
1. The safe completion of the demolition;
2. The restoration of the site into a safe condition; and
3. The provision of landscaping, fencing and maintenance of the property in accordance with the plan described in subsection A3 of this section or,
where no plan is required, the provision of landscaping, fencing and maintenance sufficient, in the opinion of the director of building and safety, to
maintain and protect the safety, street scape and overall appearance of the site and the areas adjacent to the site.
C. Any landscaping, fencing and maintenance plan submitted to the city pursuant to subsection A3 of this section shall be approved by the director of
building and safety if, in the opinion of the director, the plan is sufficient to maintain and protect the safety, street scape and overall appearance of the
site and the areas adjacent to the site. The plan shall include fencing in accordance with and to the extent required under section 10-3-4203 of this
article or any successor section. The plan shall further include a provision that requires the applicant to install the fencing and landscaping within thirty
(30) days of completion of the demolition or removal of the building from the site. As a condition of any approval of the plan by the director, the plan
must be accompanied by an agreement, approved by the city attorney, wherein the applicant covenants and agrees to landscape, fence and maintain
the property in accordance with the plan and the provisions of this code and to provide the security required herein.
D. As a further condition of issuance of a permit for the demolition of a building or a portion of any building, applicants shall submit to the department of
building and safety a color eight inch by ten inch (8" x 10") photograph of the building taken from a perspective and sufficient distance that, in the
opinion of the director of building and safety, is adequate to depict the entire building. A quality photograph on thirty five (35) millimeter or greater film
stock, accompanied by the photo negative, is required. (Ord. 99-O-2326, eff. 4-30-1999)
10-3-4201.1: LIMITATIONS ON THE DEMOLITION OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS:
A. Restriction: A permit or other entitlement which would allow any person to demolish any R-4 building may be issued only until such time as there have
been issued in any one calendar year permits or other entitlements to demolish or convert such that an aggregate maximum of one percent (1.0%) of
the existing multi-family residential rental stock as of January 1 of that calendar year could be demolished or converted. A permit or other entitlement to
demolish shall not be issued if the total number of apartment units subject to such permits or entitlements which have been issued in that year would
exceed the foregoing limitation upon issuance of that permit or entitlement. The actual physical number of apartment units that may be demolished in
any given year shall be determined annually by the director of community development or his or her designee and shall be made available in the
department of community development.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in applying the annual limitation established by this section, a permit or other entitlement to demolish may be issued for
a specific project to permit demolition of an existing R-4 building or buildings even if such demolition would exceed the foregoing limitation for the
current calendar year, provided that at least fifty percent (50%) of the R-4 units in the project to be demolished can be accommodated under the
remaining annual limitation for said calendar year, and further provided that granting the permit or other entitlement to demolish the R-4 units in the
project will not cause the annual limitation established by this section to be exceeded by more than fifty (50) units for said calendar year.
B. Recycle Provision: If the building official determines that a demolition permit has expired and the building for which that demolition permit was issued
has not been demolished, the total number of apartment units in that building which would have been subject to demolition shall be added to the
number available for the year in which the demolition permit expires. A new permit or other entitlement to demolish shall not be issued to any person
for demolition of such building for a period of three (3) months following expiration of the original permit.
C. Waiting List: If an applicant for a permit or entitlement to demolish an R-4 building is denied such permit or entitlement because of the provisions of this
section, such applicant shall be placed on a waiting list. Applicants on the waiting list shall have priority over all other applicants for available permits or
entitlements, with order of priority determined by the date the city determines that the original application is complete. An applicant on the waiting list
shall be notified by the director of community development of the first available time which such permit or entitlement could be issued. Such applicant
shall have two (2) weeks from the date of such notice to notify the director of his or her intent to accept such permit or entitlement. Failure to respond to
the notice of the director within such time shall be deemed to be notice of intent of such applicant not to accept such permit or entitlement, and such
applicant's name shall be removed from the waiting list. Upon receipt of notice of intent not to accept such permit or entitlement, or if two (2) weeks
have passed from the date of the notice of availability without a response from such applicant, the director shall notify the next applicant on the waiting
list to whom such permit or entitlement could be issued.
D. Exemption: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any of the following situations:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 737/797
1. Demolition of the building has been mandated by law; or
2. Demolition of the building is required to comply with the provisions of subsection 4-5-511B of this code; or
3. Demolition of the building is necessary to accommodate construction of new multi-family residential rental housing units.
The number of apartment units mandated by court order to be demolished shall be counted for the purposes of this section in the year such units are
ordered to be demolished by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 06-O-2497, eff. 4-6-2006)
10-3-4202: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the requirements set forth in section 10-3-4201 of this article shall not apply to the following:
1. The demolition or relocation of any accessory structure or accessory building in any one-family residential zone;
2. The demolition or relocation of any publicly owned building;
3. Improvements confined to the interior of a building;
4. The storefront remodel of a commercial building, if plans for the storefront remodel have been approved by the director of building and safety for
submittal to the architectural commission, and the applicant has posted a bond in a form and amount satisfactory to the director of building and
safety, or other security satisfactory to the director of building and safety, to guarantee the safe completion of the demolition, the restoration of the
site into a safe condition, and the completion of the storefront in a manner that, in the opinion of the director of building and safety, is sufficient to
maintain and protect the safety, streetscape and overall appearance of the site and the areas adjacent to the site;
5. The demolition of any building where one or more of the following exceptions applies:
a. Prior to the issuance of the demolition permit, the director of building and safety determines that an exception is necessary because it is compelled
by public safety due to an imminent hazardous condition requiring immediate demolition of the building;
b. Prior to the issuance of the demolition permit, and pursuant to an application and noticed public hearing under this section, the planning
commission grants an exception based upon a finding that a proposed interim use, other than a use requiring a building permit, satisfies a public
need, and bonding satisfactory to the city, or other adequate security acceptable to the city, is provided to ensure the safe completion of the
demolition and the construction of the proposed interim use of the site approved by the planning commission;
c. Prior to the issuance of the demolition permit, a determination is made by an appropriate government body or agency that there are hazardous
materials on or beneath the surface of the subject property which require, as part of a remedial plan approved by an appropriate government body
or agency, the demolition of the building before any permit and/or financing to improve the property can be obtained. Any applicant seeking to rely
upon this exception shall, as a condition of the issuance of a demolition permit, be required to submit a landscaping, fencing and maintenance plan
acceptable to the director of building and safety in accordance with the requirements of section 10-3-4201 of this article for such a plan, including,
without limitation, the provision of bonding or other adequate security for the execution of the plan as specified in that section. (Ord. 99-O-2326,
eff. 4-30-1999)
10-3-4203: FENCING OF VACANT LOTS:
All vacant properties that become vacant on or after the effective date of this article, shall, in addition to any landscaping requirements imposed under this
article, be surrounded by a minimum six foot (6') high chainlink fence or adjacent to the property boundaries, or other alternative fencing acceptable to the
director of building and safety that is adequate to protect the public safety and welfare, unless the director of building and safety determines that the
installation of such fencing will be detrimental to the public safety and welfare. Any fencing required under this section may additionally require screening if
the director of building and safety finds it necessary in order to protect the safety, streetscape and overall appearance of the site. (Ord. 99-O-2326, eff. 4-
30-1999)
Article 43. Home Occupations
10-3-4300: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
MANUFACTURING: Encompasses all manufacturing uses as described in section 10-3-1605 of this chapter.
RESIDENT: A person who is the owner of record, a named lessee pursuant to a written rental agreement or a permanent occupant of a dwelling unit who
has and continues to reside in the dwelling unit as that person's primary residence at all times during which the home occupation occurs.
RESTAURANT: The preparation and service of food and/or beverage for compensation. For the purposes of this article, "preparation" shall include the
reheating and service of food for compensation and consumption on site.
SIGN: As that term is defined in section 10-4-104 of this title. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-4301: PERMISSIBLE HOME OCCUPATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, permit, carry on or conduct, either directly or indirectly, any home occupation except in conformance with
the requirements of section 10-3-4303 of this article. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 738/797
10-3-4302: PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATION ACTIVITIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no person shall engage in, permit, carry on, or conduct any of the following activities as a home
occupation at any time in a residential zone:
A. Repair, servicing, alteration, assembly, upholstery, or construction of any automobile or other motor vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code;
B. Any hotel use or any other transient lodging use for compensation or benefit of any kind, including, but not limited to, the operation of bed and breakfast
inns, hostels, hotels, or any similar operation;
C. Restaurant, excluding a restaurant or caterer that delivers goods or services to a residential site, has a principal place of business outside of any
residential zone, and conducts no administrative or processing function within a residential zone;
D. Caterer, unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the director of building and safety approving any equipment to be installed and operated in
connection with the catering business;
E. Rental of any residence, or any portion thereof, for events or activities such as parties, banquets, auctions, or similar activities, except in connection
with nonprofit and/or charity functions, provided such nonprofit or charity functions are limited to one time per quarter not to exceed four (4) times in any
twelve (12) month period;
F. All activities regulated under title 4, chapter 2 of this code;
G. Activities regulated under title 4, chapter 3 and chapter 4, article 5 of this code except as authorized by permit under title 4 of this code and consistent
with the provisions of this article;
H. Any activity that would produce biohazardous or medical waste, as those terms are defined in the California Health and Safety Code, or involves the
storage of materials in a manner that would result in a change in the occupancy classification of a residential structure under the city's building code,
mechanical code, fire code or plumbing code, or that would otherwise violate any building or fire code or other law;
I. Conduct any use, other than a residential use, prohibited in the C-3 zone;
J. Conduct any use conditionally permitted in the C-3 zone;
K. Manufacturing, excluding activities or occupation such as: 1) artists, authors or composers; 2) dressmakers, seamstresses, or tailors; and 3) home
crafts, including, without limitation, model making, rug weaving, quilting, needle work, jewelry making, woodworking, and other similar activities which
are consistent with the primary use of the dwelling as a residence, provide that such activities are limited to the use of tools and equipment commonly
available for personal residential use. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-4303: HOME OCCUPATION REQUIREMENTS:
All home occupations shall comply at all times with all of the following requirements:
A. Operators: The operator of the home occupation shall be a resident of the dwelling in which the home occupation is located.
B. Use Of The Residential Site: All home occupations in a single residential dwelling unit, individually and in the aggregate, shall be conducted in a manner
that is incidental to the residential use of said dwelling unit and does not change the principal character or use of the dwelling. Materials connected with
a home occupation shall not be stored in a manner that would result in a change in the occupancy classification of a residential structure under the
city's building code, mechanical code, fire code or plumbing code, or that would otherwise violate any building or fire code or other law. Materials
connected with a home occupation shall not be stored at any residential site outside of a lawful enclosed structure. The home occupation(s) shall not
result in excess use of utilities and public facilities, including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, water, and sanitary sewer facilities, beyond that which is
normally provided for the residential use of the dwelling unit. All home occupations shall comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws,
ordinances, and statutes, including, but not limited to, obtaining all necessary permits from the Los Angeles County health department.
C. Appearance Of Residential Site: No sign identifying or related to the home occupation shall be placed in a residential zone, including, without limitation,
in the public right of way. All home occupations shall be conducted in a manner that is consistent with the residential character of the site and is not
visually apparent from outside the site or from the public right of way.
D. Equipment: No equipment shall be operated outside of a lawful enclosed structure or in a manner as to cause a nuisance or material likelihood of injury
to any persons or property in the vicinity of the site. No equipment or materials shall be maintained on the site that would result in a change in the
occupancy classification of a residential structure under the city's building code, mechanical code, fire code or plumbing code, or that otherwise violates
any law. Nor shall any equipment be operated in connection with the home occupation that would result in excess use of utilities and public facilities,
including, but not limited to, electricity, gas, water, and sanitary sewer facilities, beyond that which is normally provided for the residential use of the
dwelling unit.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 739/797
E. Vehicular Use: Vehicles associated with the home occupation, including any vehicle operated by an employee, consultant to, or client of the home
occupation, shall at all times be lawfully parked off street when the vehicle's operator is at the site. Said off street parking shall be in addition to any
parking required for the residential use of the property and no parked cars associated with the home occupation use shall displace or impede the use of
such required parking spaces. Nothing in this section shall supersede the requirements of section 10-3-1102 of this chapter with respect to a home
occupation located in a residence in the R-1.8X zone. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles not owned, leased or
rented by the operator of the home occupation, with the exception of deliveries by postal or courier services. The operator of the home occupation may
use one commercial vehicle in connection with the home occupation so long as that vehicle is owned, leased or rented by the operator of the home
occupation, does not exceed one ton capacity, and is parked so that any vehicle signage is not visible from the public right of way. There shall be no
parking or storing of commercial vehicles on the street at any time in connection with the home occupation, and any permissible commercial vehicle
associated with a home occupation and parked at the site shall be parked behind the front setback. As used herein, the term "commercial vehicles"
shall be defined as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code.
F. Deliveries: No deliveries or pick ups or series of deliveries or pick ups to or from the site shall materially or unreasonably disturb any person's quiet
enjoyment of his or her property at any time or alter the residential character of the site. The number of round trip vehicle trips generated by a home
occupation within any one hour, whether made by employees, patrons, clients or other visitors of the home occupation, and the number of round trip
vehicle trips per day generated by the home occupation, whether made by employees, patrons, clients or other visitors of the home occupation, shall
not materially or unreasonably disturb any person's quiet enjoyment of his or her property at any time or alter the residential character of the site.
G. General Nuisance: No home occupation may be operated in a manner that materially alters the residential character of the adjacent neighborhood or
materially or unreasonably degrades the quality of life of adjacent neighbors or disturbs another person's quiet enjoyment of his or her property as a
result of traffic, parking, noise, vibration, odor, generation of refuse, glare, electronic interference, safety, hazardous waste, visual impact, or any other
reason. All home occupations shall comply with all provisions of title 5, chapter 1, article 1 of this code, regarding general noise regulations. (Ord. 01-O-
2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-4304: COMPLIANCE WITH BUSINESS TAX FEES:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person from complying with the requirements of title 3, chapter 1, article 2 of this code concerning
business tax fees. (Ord. 01-O-2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
10-3-4305: AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE:
The operator of the home occupation shall agree in writing that:
A. The operator has read and fully understands the requirements of this article; and
B. The subject home occupation will, at all times, comply with all requirements of this article and all applicable federal, state, and local laws. (Ord. 01-O-
2383, eff. 11-2-2001)
Article 44. R-1 Design Review
10-3-4401: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The council finds that the scale and massing of buildings in the Central R-1 zone is of concern to the community at large. Beverly Hills residential
neighborhoods have traditionally been renowned for their beauty, quality, and value and provide the city's residents with an unparalleled quality of life. The
characteristics are the product of generous setbacks, gracious architecture, and careful attention to detail. However, since the late 1980s emerging trends
have led some owners and developers in residential areas to disregard prevailing styles and neighborhood character in an effort to maximize development
and density. The council finds that this trend has led to homes that greatly overpower the general local "lot to house size" ratio ("mansionization"). The
mansionization of the city's residential neighborhoods poses a serious danger that such overbuilding will degrade and depreciate the character, image,
beauty, and reputation of the city's residential neighborhoods with adverse consequences for the quality of life of all residents. The bulk and mass of such
homes, as well as their general appearances, affect the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for residential purposes and, by so doing,
impair the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impair the stability in value of both improved and unimproved real property in such
areas, prevent the most appropriate development of such areas, produce undesirable conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare
of the inhabitants of the city, and destroy the proper relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal
services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this article to prevent these and other harmful effects of such overbuilding in residential neighborhoods and,
thus, to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community, to promote the public convenience and prosperity, to
conserve the value of and to encourage the most appropriate development within the city's residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004;
amd. Ord. 05-O-2487, eff. 11-7-2005; Ord. 06-O-2494, eff. 2-17-2006)
10-3-4402: DESIGN REVIEW COMMISSION:
A design review commission is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city. At least one of the members
shall be a licensed residential architect. If one qualified residential architect cannot be found, the council may appoint a landscape architect to fill the
professional position on the design review commission. In the event no person who is a resident of the city is eligible for appointment in the designated
field, the council may waive the residency requirement. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
10-3-4403: APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE:
The members of the design review commission shall be appointed by the council as provided in section 2-2-105 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 740/797
2015)
10-3-4404: DUTIES:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the duties of the design review commission shall be as follows:
A. Exercise the authority set forth in this article and as otherwise provided in this code;
B. In carrying out its duties pursuant to this code:
1. Review and authorize the overall conceptual design of proposed single-family residences in the Central Area of the city, recognizing that some minor
design details will change when construction drawings are prepared and during field construction;
2. Balance the desire for efficient application processing with the desire to ensure high quality architectural and landscape designs;
3. Assist applicants in achieving their design objectives, recognize individual homeowner interests and allow for a diversity of designs, while ensuring
overall compatibility to the neighborhood; and
4. Focus greater attention to overall design themes and less to ornamental design features, hardware, balcony railings, and other secondary features;
C. Develop educational material that aid project applicants in achieving high quality design standards and provide guidance to applicants and
homeowners;
D. Recommend and amend policies as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this article;
E. Participate in, promote, and conduct public informational and educational programs pertaining to single-family urban design;
F. Develop a program to celebrate exemplary single-family residences; and
G. Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the city council. (Ord. 15-O-2673, eff. 3-6-2015)
10-3-4405: RULES:
The design review commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10-3-4406: SECRETARY:
The director of planning and community development shall serve as the official secretary to the design review commission. The records of all proceedings
and the basis for all findings shall be available to the council and to the public. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10-3-4407: MEETINGS:
The design review commission shall meet at intervals at least twice each month on regularly scheduled dates. Additional meetings shall be arranged in
order to process applications within the time required by this code. Special meetings shall be called in accordance with the provisions of section 54956 of
the Government Code of the state. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10-3-4408: DESIGN REVIEW REQUIRED:
A. Design Review Tracks: No single-family residence located in a Central R-1 zone shall be erected, constructed, altered or remodeled unless the
elevations and plans for the exterior portions and areas visible from the street have been first reviewed and approved by the director of planning and
community development (the "director") or the design review commission, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The R-1
design review required by this article shall fall into the following two (2) tracks:
1. Track 1; Character Based Review: Under track 1, proposed residential development will be reviewed to determine whether it substantially adheres to
a pure architectural style as outlined in a style catalogue adopted by resolution of the council. The materials and elements listed as associated with a
particular style may be substituted for equivalent or like materials, equal in quality and appearance as those outlined in the style catalogue, so long
as they do not detract from the architectural style to be represented. The style catalogue may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
council and will be maintained by the director. Track 1 reviews will be limited to a determination of consistency with the approved style catalogue. If
the required review determines that the proposed development adheres to an architecturally pure style and meets all of the applicable development
standards set forth in this chapter, the development may be granted a building permit without further design review.
2. Track 2; All Other R-1 Review: All other single-family residential development that is subject to the provisions of this article and that does not meet
the criteria for a track 1 review must submit to a full R-1 design review in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Exemption: The provisions of this article shall not apply to any single-family residence located in a Central R-1 zone described in subsection 10-3-
2426B of this chapter. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004; amd. Ord. 05-O-2472, eff. 6-17-2005)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 741/797
10-3-4409: REVIEWING AUTHORITY:
The reviewing authority for the R-1 design review required by this article shall be as follows:
A. Track 1; Character Based Guide: Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for a track 1 review shall be the director or his or her designee. If,
in the opinion of the director, an application merits review by the design review commission, the director may refer such application to the design review
commission and the design review commission shall serve as the reviewing authority and shall conduct a noticed hearing regarding the request for
track 1 R-1 design review approval in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Track 2; All Other Review: The reviewing authority for track 2 review shall be the design review commission. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004; amd. Ord.
05-O-2472, eff. 6-17-2005)
10-3-4410: APPLICATION:
Applications for R-1 design review shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the director and shall contain the following information:
A. The name, phone number and address of the applicant.
B. For applications to the director (track 1 reviews), a complete set of plans prepared by a licensed architect containing such information specified in
subsection D or E of this section, as appropriate, as the director deems necessary and such additional information as may be required by the director in
his or her sole discretion.
C. For hearings before the design review commission (track 2 or appeals of decisions of the director), eight (8) sets of plans containing the information
specified in subsection D or E of this section, as appropriate.
D. If the review is for a remodel:
1. A site plan drawn in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3012 of this chapter;
2. A roof plan;
3. A floor plan;
4. Window and door sizes;
5. Elevations of all sides of the residence;
6. Plans detailing all significant architectural features;
7. A conceptual landscape plan;
8. Color and material sample boards;
9. Window examples;
10. Street elevation(s) and color rendering;
11. Photographs of surrounding development.
E. If the review is for a new residence:
1. A site plan drawn in accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3012 of this chapter;
2. A roof plan;
3. A floor plan;
4. Window and door sizes;
5. Elevations of all sides of the residence;
6. Plans detailing all significant architectural features;
7. A conceptual landscape plan;
8. Color and material sample boards;
9. Window examples;
10. Street elevation(s) and color rendering;
11. Photographs of surrounding development. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004; amd. Ord. 05-O-2472, eff. 6-17-2005)
10-3-4411: FILING FEES:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 742/797
Applications for R-1 design review shall be accompanied by a filing fee established from time to time by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-
21-2004)
10-3-4412: TRACK DETERMINATION; CONCEPT REVIEW:
Upon receipt of a complete application, the Director shall first determine which track the review shall proceed under. If the Director determines that the
proposed development qualifies for a track 1 review, the Director shall conduct a review of the plans to determine whether they comply with the
requirements of the style catalogue. If the Director determines that the proposed development requires a track 2 review, the Director shall refer the project
to the Design Review Commission at the next feasible regular meeting for a hearing, unless an extension of time is consented to by the applicant. (Ord.
19-O-2785, eff. 8-16-2019)
10-3-4413: NOTICE OF HEARINGS:
Noticing shall be completed in accordance with article 2.5 of this chapter and the City's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-3-4414: CONDUCT OF HEARINGS:
At the time and place fixed for the hearing, the Design Review Commission shall hear such relevant evidence as may be presented, either for or against
the application, in accordance with such rules of procedure as may be established by the Design Review Commission; provided, however, at the time and
place fixed for the hearing or continued hearing, the hearing may be continued or further continued for a period of not to exceed fifteen (15) business days
at any one time unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant, and no further notice of such continued hearing need be given. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-
2004)
10-3-4415: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
The Design Review Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the issuance of a building permit in any matter subject to its
jurisdiction after considering whether the proposed development complies with the following criteria:
A. The proposed development's design exhibits an internally compatible design scheme;
B. The proposed development's design appropriately minimizes the appearance of scale and mass and enhances the garden like quality of the city and
appropriately maximizes the use of required open space within the proposed architectural style;
C. The proposed development will enhance the appearance of the neighborhood;
D. The proposed development is designed to balance the reasonable expectation of development for the owner with the reasonable expectation of privacy
of neighbors; and
E. The proposed development respects prevailing site design patterns, carefully analyzing the characteristics of the surrounding group of homes, and
integrates appropriate features that will ensure harmony between old and new.
If the criteria set forth in this section are met, the application shall be approved. When the proposed development does not comply with the criteria set
forth in this section, the reviewing authority may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to bring the proposed development into conformity with
the provisions of this article. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10-3-4416: NOTICE OF DECISIONS:
A. Written Decision Required: The action taken by the reviewing authority shall be reduced to writing with reasonable promptness after the hearing is
concluded, setting forth its findings and conclusions. All decisions of the design review commission shall be set forth in a resolution signed by chair of
the commission. If an application is disapproved, the written decision shall detail in its findings the criterion or criteria that were not met by the proposed
development.
B. Notice Of Decision: Within five (5) days after the issuance of a decision by the reviewing authority, the director shall cause a copy of the decision to be
mailed, through the United States mail, postage prepaid, to each of the following persons:
1. The applicant, using the address set forth in the application; and
2. Each person affected by the decision who previously filed with the director a written request therefor, using the address set forth in such written
request.
The failure of the person addressed to receive a copy of the decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any decision.
C. Effective Date Of Decision: A decision or order of the design review commission or the director shall not become effective until the expiration of fourteen
(14) calendar days after the date upon which a ruling of the design review commission or the director has been made. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 743/797
10-3-4417: APPEALS:
A. Only the applicant may appeal a decision of the director pursuant to this article. The applicant may appeal the decision of the director to the design
review commission. A written appeal petition on a form prescribed by the director shall be filed with the director within fourteen (14) calendar days after
the date of the decision being appealed. In the event the last day of the filing period falls on a nonbusiness day, the appeal period shall be extended to
include the next business day. The timely filing of the appeal petition is jurisdictional. The fee schedule for appeal petitions shall be approved by the
council and maintained on file by the director of finance administration.
B. The applicant or any aggrieved person may appeal any decision of the design review commission to the planning commission in accordance with the
procedure outlined in subsection A of this section. The decision by the planning commission on an R-1 design review application shall be rendered by
resolution. Such decision may be appealed to the council in the manner provided by title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
C. Any appeal taken pursuant to this section shall be limited to specific findings the aggrieved party finds objectionable. The appeal petition shall contain a
statement of the facts upon which the appeal is taken and shall clearly state which findings the appellant is contesting. The hearing before the appellate
body shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures in this article for a track 2 review. The hearing conducted before the appellate body shall
not be a de novo hearing of the entire application but shall be limited to those findings challenged in the appeal. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004; amd.
Ord. 05-O-2472, eff. 6-17-2005)
10-3-4418: TIME FOR EXERCISE OF RIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution granting an R-1 design review approval, the exercise of rights granted in such approval shall be commenced in
accordance with the time limits imposed by section 10-3-207 of this chapter. (Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
10-3-4419: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions of this article shall become effective and be in full force and operation at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. on May 21, 2004.
(Ord. 04-O-2444, eff. 5-21-2004)
Article 45. Radio And Television Antennas And Wireless Telecommunications
Antenna Facilities
10-3-4500: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city council finds, determines and declares as follows:
A. The purpose of the regulatory provisions set forth in this article is to establish development standards for the installation and maintenance of antennas
and wireless antenna facilities within specified areas of the city. These standards are intended to ensure that the design and location of those antennas
and facilities are consistent with previously adopted policies of the city, including the city's master telecommunications plan, to promote the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city's residents, and to enhance the aesthetic quality and appearance of the city by
maintaining architectural and structural integrity and by protecting views and vistas from obtrusive and unsightly accessory uses and facilities.
B. In adopting and implementing the regulatory provisions of this article, it is the intent of the city council to further the objectives specified in subsection A
of this section without unnecessarily burdening the federal interests in ensuring access to satellite services, in promoting fair and effective competition
among competing communications service providers, and in eliminating local restrictions and regulations that, with regard to antennas, preclude
reception of an acceptable signal quality or unreasonably delay, prevent, or increase the cost of installation, maintenance, or use of those antennas.
C. With regard to the regulatory requirements set forth in sections 10-3-4506 and 10-3-4504 of this article that relate to a minor accommodation and to a
building permit, respectively, the city council expressly finds and determines that they are necessary, desirable, and in the best interests of the
community in order to protect public safety. The city council further finds and determines that these regulatory requirements are applicable to the
proposed installation of satellite earth station antennas or fixed wireless antenna facilities that are not permitted accessory uses and that, because of
legitimate safety related concerns, do not meet the criteria for exemption from local regulation established by the federal communications commission
("FCC") under the telecommunications act of 1996.
D. The regulatory provisions set forth in this article are not applicable to any of the following:
1. City owned antennas or antenna facilities, including those used for emergency communications and public safety purposes, that are located or
proposed to be located on either publicly owned or privately owned property.
2. Privately owned over the air reception devices that are located or proposed to be located on city owned property or within the public rights of way;
provided, however, that owners of such devices must obtain a right of way use permit pursuant to title 8, chapter 7 of this code or an encroachment
permit pursuant to title 8, chapter 3 of this code and comply with all applicable requirements that relate to the use of the public rights of way. (Ord.
05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4501: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms and phrases have the meanings set forth below:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 744/797
AMATEUR RADIO STATION ANTENNA: Any antenna, and its accompanying support structure, that is used solely for the purpose of transmitting and
receiving radio signals in connection with the operation of an amateur radio station in accordance with licenses issued by the FCC.
ANTENNA, ANTENNA ARRAY, WIRELESS ANTENNA ARRAY OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, poles,
panels, discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omnidirectional antennas (whip),
directional antennas (panel), and parabolic antennas (disc), but excluding any support structure as defined herein.
COLOCATION: The use of a common wireless antenna facility, or a common site, by two (2) or more providers of wireless services, or by one provider of
wireless services for more than one type of telecommunications technology.
FCC: The federal communications commission.
FIXED WIRELESS ANTENNA FACILITY: An unstaffed facility for the transmission or reception of wireless telecommunications services, commonly
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation, and an equipment facility or subterranean vault
to house accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals, shelters, and similar protective structures.
FIXED WIRELESS SERVICES: Any personal wireless services as defined in the federal telecommunications act of 1996, including federally licensed
wireless telecommunications services consisting of cellular services, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobile radio services (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may be developed in the future.
MAST: A support structure that is constructed for the specific purpose of elevating a satellite earth station antenna in order to receive broadcast signals of
an acceptable quality.
MINOR ACCOMMODATION: The application and review process that is provided for in article 36 of this chapter.
PROJECT REVIEW: The review by the director of planning and community development or, upon referral, by the planning commission, of an application
for a minor accommodation authorizing the siting of any category of over the air reception or transmission devices regulated by part I of this article.
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY: The public streets, roads, lanes, courts, ways, alleys, boulevards, and places, including all public utility easements and public
service easements in, on or appurtenant to such rights of way, as the same now or may hereafter exist, that are under the city's jurisdiction and within the
city's regulatory authority.
SATELLITE EARTH STATION ANTENNA: A parabolic or dish shaped antenna or other apparatus or device that is designed for the purpose of receiving or
transmitting signals for voice, video, or data.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE, OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure that is
designed and constructed for the specific purpose of supporting an antenna array and that may consist of a monopole, a mast, a self-supporting lattice
tower, a guywire support tower, or other similar structures.
WIRELESS ANTENNA FACILITY OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA FACILITY: An unstaffed facility for the transmission or reception
of wireless telecommunications services, commonly consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to achieve the necessary
elevation, and an equipment facility or subterranean vault to house accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals, shelters, and similar
protective structures.
WIRELESS SERVICES OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES: Any personal wireless services as defined in the federal
telecommunications act of 1996, including federally licensed wireless telecommunications services consisting of cellular services, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio services (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may be developed in the future. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4502: MANDATORY COMPLIANCE WITH CODE REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to complying with all applicable safety related development standards set forth in section 10-3-4505 of this part, the installation of all over the air
reception devices must comply with all applicable building codes, fire codes, and electrical codes. In particular, electrical service must be properly
grounded, and rated fire walls may not be penetrated. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4503: DEVICES OF ONE METER OR LESS:
The following over the air reception devices may be installed as permitted accessory uses in land use zones where residential and nonresidential uses are
authorized without project review and without obtaining a building permit:
A. An antenna located in any land use zone that is designed for the following purposes and that meets the specified dimensions and height limitations:
1. An antenna that is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct to home satellite services, provided that such antenna is
one meter (1 m) (39.37") or less in diameter and is either building mounted or ground mounted and elevated by a mast.
2. An antenna that is designed to receive video programming services by means of multipoint distribution services, including multichannel multipoint
distribution services, and such antenna is one meter (1 m) (39.37") or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is either building mounted or
ground mounted and elevated by a mast.
3. Antennas referenced in subsection A1 or A2 of this section, whether building mounted or ground mounted, may not exceed the height limitation for
satellite dish antennas that is applicable to the land use zone involved, as specified in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
B. An antenna located in any land use zone, which antenna is designed solely to receive television broadcast signals, and such antenna, whether building
mounted or ground mounted, is limited to that height which is reasonably necessary to ensure the reception of television broadcast signals of an
acceptable quality. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 745/797
10-3-4504: DEVICES GREATER THAN ONE METER:
A. The following over the air reception devices may be installed in any land use zone where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted,
provided that a building permit is first obtained, and provided further that the installation complies with all applicable safety related development
standards set forth in section 10-3-4505 of this part:
1. A satellite earth station antenna that is designed to receive video programming services, and the diameter or diagonal measurement of that antenna
exceeds one meter (1 m) (39.37") but does not exceed two meters (2 m) (78.74"). Such antenna may be either building mounted or ground mounted
and elevated by a mast, but it may not exceed the height limitation for satellite dish antennas that is applicable to the land use zone involved, as
specified in section 10-3-100 of this chapter.
B. A fee may be imposed by the city for the issuance of any building permit that is required under this section.
C. The city council finds and determines that the building permit requirement imposed by this section is in the public interest and is justified by the following
facts and circumstances:
1. Satellite earth station antennas that exceed one meter (1 m) in diameter or diagonal measurement but do not exceed two meters (2 m) may
reasonably be expected to be of a size, weight, and bulk substantially in excess of the smaller satellite earth station antennas that are permitted
accessory uses under subsection A of this section, and therefore generate legitimate safety concerns of a greater magnitude.
2. Satellite earth station antennas having a diameter or diagonal measurement between one meter (1 m) and two meters (2 m) that are proposed to be
located in commercial or industrial land use zones have the potential to adversely affect the public safety, due to the concentration of substantial
numbers of employees and customers in commercial and industrial buildings.
D. The city council further finds and determines that the building permit requirement imposed by this section is no more burdensome than is necessary to
enable the city to achieve the following safety related objectives and thereby reduce the potential for bodily injury, death, and property damage:
1. To verify the proper mounting of these larger antennas on buildings or masts within commercial and industrial land use zones in order to reduce
potential safety hazards resulting from faulty installations, including detachments attributable to windstorms, earthquakes, or other natural causes.
2. To minimize the potential for fire related hazards by verifying compliance with all applicable requirements of the city's electrical code, including those
pertaining to wiring and electrical connections, grounding, and clearance from adjacent power lines.
3. To ensure that the installation is completed in compliance with all applicable building code and fire code requirements, particularly in those
circumstances where fire rated walls or the roof of a structure will be subject to drilling or alteration.
4. To ensure that no antenna, nor any of its component parts or accessory facilities, encroaches into the public rights of way, thereby compromising
public safety.
5. To ensure that a licensed structural or civil engineer certifies engineering calculations for all footings that may be required for the installation of a
ground mounted antenna. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4505: SAFETY RELATED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. The safety related development standards set forth in this section apply in all land use zones to the siting, construction, and operation of over the air
reception devices consisting of the following:
1. Satellite earth station antennas that are permitted accessory uses under subsection 10-3-4503A of this part;
2. Satellite earth station antennas that are subject to a building permit under section 10-3-4504 of this part; and
3. Satellite earth station antennas that, because of their nonconformity with the size limitations specified in sections 10-3-4503 and 10-3-4504 of this
part, are subject to both project review and to the issuance of building permits.
B. The safety related development standards are specified as follows:
1. No satellite earth station antenna may be installed in any land use zone if it will impede normal vehicular or pedestrian circulation, ingress to, or
egress from any building, structure, or parking facility.
2. Any mast that will be used to elevate a satellite earth station antenna must be constructed of noncombustible and corrosive resistant materials.
3. All satellite earth station antennas must be installed with adequate ground wire to protect against a direct strike of lightning. The ground wire must be
of a type approved by the electrical code for grounding masts and lightning arrestors.
4. All satellite earth station antennas must be separated from adjacent power lines by such vertical and horizontal distance as is required by the
electrical code and by other applicable laws and regulations.
5. Any mast that will be used to elevate a satellite earth station antenna must be secured by a separate safety wire in a direction away from adjacent
power lines or other potential hazards.
6. To the extent feasible, all cables, wires, or similar electrical transmission devices that connect with a satellite earth station antenna must be placed
underground.
7. All connectors on a satellite earth station antenna, and on any mast to be used for elevation, must be capable of sustaining a wind load of the
magnitude specified in the building code.
8. No satellite earth station antenna, nor any of its component parts or accessory facilities, may encroach into the public rights of way.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 746/797
9. All satellite earth station antennas must be maintained in good repair, in a neat and clean condition, and in compliance with all applicable building,
fire, and electrical codes.
C. In addition to the safety related development standards set forth in subsection B of this section, the following development standards apply to the siting,
construction, and operation of satellite earth station antennas in all land use zones where single-family and multi-family residential uses are authorized:
1. The diameter of a satellite earth station antenna that is subject to project review may not exceed ten feet (10').
2. A ground mounted satellite earth station antenna that is subject to project review must be located in the rear yard and in compliance with the setback
requirements that is applicable to the primary structure.
3. A building mounted satellite earth station antenna that is subject to project review must be located on that building so as not to be visible from the
street.
4. A building permit must be obtained for any satellite earth station antenna, whether ground mounted or building mounted, that is subject to project
review.
D. In addition to the safety related development standards set forth in subsection B of this section, the following development standards apply to the siting,
construction, and operation of satellite earth station antennas in all land use zones where nonresidential uses are authorized:
1. A ground mounted satellite earth station antenna that is subject to project review must be located in compliance with any applicable setback
requirement.
2. No ground mounted satellite earth station antenna that is subject to project review may be located in the area between the front property line and the
main building or structure. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4506: MINOR ACCOMMODATION REQUIRED:
A. Minor Accommodation Required: Under any of the following circumstances, an application for a minor accommodation must be submitted in accordance
with article 36 of this chapter and, if the application is approved, a building permit must be obtained:
1. The proposed satellite earth station antenna will exceed the applicable height limitation(s).
2. The diameter or diagonal measurement of the proposed satellite earth station antenna will exceed the maximum limitation specified in subsection
10-3-4503A of this article, as it applies to antennas in land use zones other than commercial and industrial, or it will exceed the maximum limitation
specified in subsection 10-3-4504A of this article, as it applies to antennas in commercial or industrial land use zones.
3. The proposed satellite earth station antenna will not comply with the applicable setback requirement set forth in subsection 10-3-4505C2 or D1 of
this article.
4. The proposed satellite earth station antenna will not comply with the locational requirement set forth in subsection 10-3-4505C3 of this article.
B. Review Criteria: In considering an application for a minor accommodation relating to the siting of a satellite earth station antenna, the reviewing
authority will consider the following factors, as may be applicable:
1. Whether the requested variation is necessary to enable the applicant to receive signals of an acceptable quality.
2. Whether the satellite earth station antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape.
3. Whether the satellite earth station antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on an adjacent property owner's access to light and air or on the
adjacent property owner's privacy.
4. Whether the satellite earth station antenna will have a substantial adverse impact on the garden quality of the city.
C. Application: In addition to the requirements for a minor accommodation set forth in article 36 of this chapter, the application must include the following:
1. Construction drawings that show the proposed method of installation and the manufacturer's specifications, including equipment specifications that
are mandated by the FCC.
2. A plot plan showing the proposed location on the site of the satellite earth station antenna, its distance from other structures on the site, and its
distance from the closest structures on adjacent properties.
3. Engineering data evidencing that the satellite earth station antenna will be in compliance with all structural requirements of the building code. (Ord.
05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4507: PLACEMENT GUIDELINES:
The Director of Planning and Community Development or his or her designee may prepare and disseminate information concerning the placement and
installation of satellite earth station antennas in accordance with voluntary guidelines that will help to achieve the City's safety related objectives and to
promote reasonable aesthetic objectives in order to maintain property values. This information may include, without limitation, the following:
A. Installers of satellite earth station antennas who are licensed to conduct business within the City.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 747/797
B. Federal regulations promulgated by the FCC that preempt governmental and nongovernmental restrictions on antenna users who occupy residential
units, including residential units subject to homeowner association CC&Rs and residential units within multiple-dwelling complexes, whether owner
occupied or tenant occupied.
C. The availability to existing or prospective antenna users of "no fee" safety related inspections by the City.
D. Guidelines relating to the preferred placement of satellite earth station antennas in order to reduce or eliminate their visibility from adjacent public
streets, including the use of screening materials, such as walls, fences, earth berms, or landscaping, or the addition of new architectural elements that
are compatible with the design of adjacent buildings.
E. Guidelines relating to preferred neutral finished colors of satellite earth station antennas, which colors are determined to blend with surrounding
dominant colors, or to camouflage an antenna, and are neither bright, reflective, nor metallic. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4508: FACILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
A. All wireless antenna facilities proposed in the public rights-of-way in any land use zone must, unless exempt under paramount State or Federal law,
comply with all applicable provisions of title 8, chapter 7 of this Code.
B. Notwithstanding any provisions in title 8, chapter 7 of this Code to the contrary, all small wireless facilities as defined by the FCC in 47 CFR section
1.60002(l), as may be amended or superseded, are subject to requirements of the "City Wide Policy Regarding Permitting Requirements and
Development Standards for Small Wireless Facilities" adopted by City Council resolution, and all such small wireless facilities must comply with that
policy. (Ord. 19-O-2779, eff. 5-17-2019)
10-3-4509: CITY OWNED LAND, BUILDINGS, AND RIGHTS OF WAY:
A. The regulatory provisions of this part do not apply to the siting of wireless antenna facilities on or within City owned land or buildings. The proposed
siting of these facilities on all City owned property will require a license or lease agreement with the City, which license or lease agreement must be
approved by the City Council.
B. Except as noted in section 10-3-4508 of this part, the regulatory provisions of this section do not apply to the siting of wireless antenna facilities, or to
the siting of radio equipment used by a telecommunications service provider in operating a wireless, microcellular digital radio communications
network, upon existing aboveground poles or similar appurtenances located within the public rights-of-way. Applications for the placement of such
antenna facilities or radio equipment upon existing aboveground poles or similar structures located within the public rights-of-way will be submitted to
the City Engineer on a form provided by the City Engineer, along with an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.
Unless exempt under paramount State or Federal law, any authorized use of existing poles or similar structures located within the public rights-of-way
will be subject to a permit to be issued by the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee.
C. Except as provided in section 10-3-4508 of this part, the regulatory provisions of this section do not apply to the siting of wireless antenna facilities, or to
the siting of radio equipment used by a telecommunications service provider in operating a wireless, microcellular digital radio communications
network, upon new aboveground poles or similar structures that are proposed to be installed within the public rights-of-way. Applications for the
placement of such antenna facilities or radio equipment upon new aboveground poles or similar structures that are proposed to be installed within the
public rights-of-way will be submitted to the City engineer on a form provided by the city engineer, along with an application fee in an amount
established by resolution of the city council. Authorization for the installation of any new aboveground pole or similar structure for the operation of an
antenna facility or radio equipment must comply with the provisions of title 8, chapter 7 of this code and will be subject to a license, lease, or franchise
agreement with the city, as may be applicable and authorized by law, which license, lease, or franchise agreement must be approved by the city
council.
D. Every permit, license, lease, or franchise agreement that is authorized by the city under the provisions of this section may contain a requirement that
the telecommunications service provider, or the property owner, submit documentation that the electromagnetic fields (EMFs) from the proposed
antenna facilities or radio equipment will be within the limits approved by the FCC, and that a report be submitted annually evidencing the fact that the
EMFs continue to be within approved FCC limits. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4510: REVIEW REQUIRED:
A. Type Of Review: Subject to the exceptions set forth in section 10-3-4509 of this part, the regulatory provisions of this section are applicable to the siting
of wireless antenna facilities on all land and buildings located within all land use zones where those facilities are authorized under this code. The siting
and construction of wireless antenna facilities in all nonresidential land use zones where those facilities are authorized is subject to architectural review,
as provided for in article 30 of this chapter. The siting and construction of wireless antenna facilities in all residential land use zones where those
facilities are authorized is subject to a conditional use permit as provided for in article 38 of this chapter.
B. Application Requirements: In addition to the requirements set forth in articles 30 and 38 of this chapter, the application for architectural review or for a
conditional use permit required by this article must include the following:
1. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all existing improvements on the site, the proposed location of the wireless antenna facility, the height of any
existing or proposed new support structure, accessory equipment facility, guywires, above and below ground wiring and connection cables, existing
or proposed easements on the property, the height aboveground of any panels, microwave dishes, or whip antennas, and the distance between the
antenna facility and any existing or proposed accessory equipment facility.
2. A description of the maximum potential of the proposed wireless antenna site to accommodate the installation of additional antennas.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 748/797
3. A location map showing existing wireless antenna sites within the city that are owned or operated by the applicant and any proposed sites in the city
that may be required for future area coverage.
4. Documentation that the electromagnetic fields (EMFs) from the proposed wireless facility, both individually and cumulatively, will be within the limits
approved by the FCC. As a condition of approval of any permit or other entitlement, the reviewing authority may require the annual submission of a
report prepared by a qualified person evidencing the fact that EMFs continue to be within approved FCC limits.
5. A statement concerning the minimum distance from the proposed wireless antenna facility that is required to ensure that no person will be exposed
to any harmful effects attributable to EMFs.
6. Evidence of any required licenses and approvals to provide wireless services in the city.
7. The property owner's written consent to the proposed siting of the wireless antenna facility and acknowledgment of its obligations under this article.
8. A radio coverage map of the area proposed to be served. If the applicant is proposing a new support structure, then a written statement, including all
facts in support thereof, from a licensed radio engineer attesting to the need for such structure, as described in the application, to be located at the
applied for location.
C. Review Criteria: In addition to consideration of the criteria for architectural review and a conditional use permit in articles 30 and 38, respectively, of this
chapter the reviewing authority must consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a permit or other entitlement for a wireless antenna
facility:
1. Height of the proposed facility.
2. The nature and proximity of existing uses on adjacent properties.
3. Surrounding topography.
4. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
5. Design of the proposed facility, with particular reference to design features that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, such
as a camouflaged facility, a facility screened by natural or artificial vegetation, or a facility located or colocated on an existing building or an existing
support structure.
6. Proposed ingress and egress.
7. Availability of suitable existing buildings or support structures, as set forth in section 10-3-4511 of this part. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4511: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES:
All wireless facilities subject to the provisions of this article shall comply with the following development standards:
A. Antenna arrays on wireless antenna facilities that are proposed to be sited on an existing building or support structure must be integrated with the
architectural design and coloring of that existing building or support structure.
B. The siting of new support structures is subject to the following additional requirement:
1. No new support structure in a residential land use zone will be permitted unless the reviewing authority makes the additional finding that, based upon
evidence submitted by the applicant, no existing nonresidential building or support structure can reasonably accommodate the proposed wireless
antenna facility. Evidence supporting this finding will be reviewed by the reviewing authority and may consist of any of the following:
a. No existing nonresidential buildings or support structures are located within the geographic area proposed to be served by the applicant's facility.
b. Existing nonresidential buildings or support structures are not of sufficient height or structural strength to meet the applicant's operational or
engineering requirements.
c. The applicant's proposed facility in a nonresidential land use zone would create electromagnetic interference with another facility on an existing
structure, or the existing antenna array on an existing building or support structure would create interference with the applicant's proposed antenna
array.
d. The costs, fees, or contractual provisions required by a property owner, or by an incumbent wireless service provider, in order to colocate a new
antenna array on an existing nonresidential building or support structure, or to adapt an existing nonresidential building or support structure for the
location of the new antenna array, are unreasonable.
e. There are other limiting factors that render existing nonresidential buildings and support structures unsuitable for use by the applicant.
C. If a new support structure for a facility will be visible from adjacent residential properties or from major arterial streets, the reviewing authority may
require that the support structure be screened or camouflaged to mitigate adverse visual impacts.
D. All accessory equipment for any wireless facility subject to the provisions of this article shall be fully enclosed within a cabinet, pedestal, shelter, or other
similar protective structure.
E. If a proposed facility will be visible from a residential area or an arterial street, any required fencing must be of a decorative material satisfactory to the
director of planning and community development.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 749/797
F. A new, freestanding support structure must be separated from a building on the same site by a distance that is at least equal to the height of that
support structure, unless that building houses equipment accessory to that support structure.
G. A new support structure that is to be located near a residential use or the boundary of a residential zoning district must be set back from the nearest
residential lot line or boundary a distance that is at least equal to the height of that support structure.
H. The exterior of a new support structure must have a noncorrosive, nonmetallic finish that is not conducive to reflection or glare. The support structure,
the antenna array, and the accessory equipment facility must all be of a neutral color.
I. Buildings and support structures may not be illuminated unless specifically required by the federal aviation administration or other governmental
agencies.
J. No off premises or on premises signs may be placed by a wireless service provider on a building or support structure to which a wireless antenna facility
is attached except as required by the appropriate governmental authority to provide public safety related emergency contact information. (Ord. 05-O-
2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4512: MAINTENANCE AND CESSATION OF USE:
The following requirements apply to wireless antenna facilities that are authorized by permit or other entitlement and that are located on existing buildings
or support structures and on new support structures:
A. The site must be maintained in a condition free of trash, debris, and refuse in accordance with section 5-7-3 of this code. All graffiti and posters must be
promptly removed in accordance with the provisions of title 5, chapter 9 of this code.
B. If a support structure, or an antenna array affixed to a building or to a support structure, becomes inoperable or ceases to be used for a period of six (6)
consecutive months, the permittee or the property owner must give written notice of such inoperability or nonuse to the director of community
development. The antenna array and, if applicable, the support structure, must be removed within a ninety (90) day period. If that removal does not
occur, the city may remove the antenna array and, if applicable, the support structure, at the expense of the permittee or the owner; provided, however,
that if other antenna arrays owned or operated by other service providers are affixed to the same support structure, then only the antenna array that
has become inoperable or has ceased to be used is required to be removed, and the support structure may remain in place until all service providers
cease to use it. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4513: LOCAL EMERGENCY OR DISASTER SITUATIONS; TEMPORARY INSTALLATIONS:
The city manager, as the director of emergency services designated in section 2-4-105 of this code, is authorized in the event of a local emergency or
disaster to accommodate all providers of wireless services whose antenna facilities can be deployed immediately within the city for the purpose of
implementing the city of Beverly Hills emergency plan, coordinating the emergency and disaster functions of the city, and protecting life and property. The
temporary deployment of such wireless antenna facilities may be authorized at such locations, and for such period of time, as will afford maximum
protection for the public health, welfare, and safety. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005; amd. Ord. 07-O-2521, eff. 8-10-2007)
10-3-4514: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Nothing contained in this part may be deemed to exempt from the requirement of a building permit the installation of an amateur radio station antenna that,
because of its limited height, is not required to obtain a minor accommodation under the provisions of subsection 10-3-4515A of this part. (Ord. 05-O-2461,
eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4515: MINOR ACCOMMODATION REQUIRED:
A. Minor Accommodation Required: The proposed installation of an amateur radio station antenna, whether ground mounted or building mounted, in any
land use zone, which antenna will extend more than fifteen feet (15') above the highest point of the roofline of a building or structure on the proposed
site, must be preceded by an application for a minor accommodation in accordance with article 36 of this chapter, and, if the application is approved, a
building permit must be obtained.
B. Application Requirements: In addition to the requirements set forth in article 36 of this chapter, the application for a minor accommodation must include
the following:
1. Construction drawings that show the proposed method of installation and the manufacturer's specifications.
2. A plot plan showing the proposed location and dimensions of the amateur radio station antenna.
3. Engineering data evidencing that the amateur radio station antenna will be in compliance with all structural requirements of the building code.
4. Copies of all licenses issued to the applicant by the FCC to engage in amateur radio service operations and to use the site as an amateur radio
station.
C. Review Criteria: In considering the application for a minor accommodation for a proposed amateur radio station antenna, the reviewing authority must
consider the following factors:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 750/797
1. Whether the proposed height of the amateur radio station antenna is the minimum height that is technically required to enable the applicant to
engage in amateur radio service operations of the nature contemplated.
2. Proximity of the proposed amateur radio station antenna to inhabited buildings and structures.
3. The nature of existing uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
4. Surrounding topography, tree coverage, and foliage, and their effect on the proposed height of the amateur radio station antenna.
5. Design of the proposed amateur radio station antenna, with particular reference to design features that provide for retraction of the antenna when not
in use and design features that may reduce or eliminate visual obtrusiveness, particularly in residential zones.
D. Guidelines For Denial Or Conditioning Application: In making any determination during the minor accommodation approval process to deny or to
condition the application for an amateur radio station antenna, the reviewing authority must adhere to the following guidelines:
1. The imposition of conditions or restrictions relating to the placement, screening, or height of a proposed amateur radio station antenna, which
conditions or restrictions are based upon protection of the public health, welfare, and safety, aesthetic considerations, or the preservation of property
values, must be considered on a case by case basis, taking into account the unique features of the proposed site, the factors specified in subsection
C of this section, and the reasonable accommodation required under subsection D2 of this section.
2. The minor accommodation approval process must be conducted so as to: a) reasonably accommodate the paramount federal interest in promoting
amateur radio communications as voluntary, noncommercial communications services, particularly with respect to emergency communications; and
b) impose the minimum practical restrictions, limitations, and conditions in order to achieve the city's legitimate regulatory objectives. (Ord. 05-O-
2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4516: WAIVERS:
Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, the reviewing authority may, in conjunction with the granting of a conditional use permit, grant a waiver
from the restrictions and limitations imposed by this article upon the siting of satellite earth station antennas and wireless antenna facilities. The reviewing
authority may grant a request for a waiver only if the applicant submits evidence satisfying the following requirements:
A. The applicant submits evidence satisfactory to the reviewing authority that location of the satellite earth station antenna or the wireless antenna facility
in the manner required by this article would: 1) obstruct the antenna's reception window or otherwise interfere with reception, and such obstruction or
interference involves factors beyond the applicant's control; or 2) the cost of meeting the requirements of this article is excessive in relation to the cost
of the proposed antenna or antenna facility.
B. The applicant submits a certification, signed by a registered structural or civil engineer, that the proposed installation will be in compliance with all
applicable requirements of the building code, including load distributions upon any proposed mast or other support structure. (Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-
18-2005)
10-3-4517: NONCONFORMING ANTENNA:
Any antenna constructed in violation of this article, or in violation of any prior ordinance or regulation, is subject to immediate abatement. (Ord. 05-O-2461,
eff. 3-18-2005)
10-3-4518: ENFORCEMENT:
A. All satellite earth station antennas, amateur radio station antennas, and wireless antenna facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the city to
determine whether they are in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article.
B. If any condition is discovered that may result in a danger to life or property, the city will give written notice to the permittee or to the property owner, or
both, at their last known address, describing the dangerous condition and demanding that the same be corrected within the period of time specified in
that notice.
C. Failure to comply with any applicable provision of this article, or with conditions that may be imposed in connection with a minor accommodation, or
architectural review, or a conditional use permit, will constitute a public nuisance as well as grounds for revocation of the permit or other entitlement.
(Ord. 05-O-2461, eff. 3-18-2005)
Footnote 1: Cal. Code Of Regs., title 24, part 8.
Footnote 2: Gov. C. § 54950 et seq.
Article 46. Disaster Reconstruction Permit
10-3-4600: PURPOSE:
This article establishes a program to facilitate reconstruction of commercial and residential areas after a disaster. This article does not amend or allow
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 751/797
exemptions from the city's technical codes, including, without limitation, the city's building, fire, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing codes. (Ord. 15-O-
2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4601: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, in the event of a disaster for which the mayor or the city council has declared or ratified a state of
emergency, the zoning regulations set forth in this article shall apply. Additionally, any provision of this chapter which does not conflict with the provisions
of this article shall continue to apply. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4602: DEFINITIONS:
AGGREGATE FLOOR AREA: The sum of the floor areas of all independent living quarters of a structure.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT OR FOOTPRINT: That portion of a site covered by a building.
DISASTER: Any fire, flood, storm, earthquake or other occurrence for which the mayor or the city council has declared or ratified a state of emergency.
HEIGHT ENVELOPE: The outline of a building indicating the height of the building at each point within the building footprint.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING: Any building designed for human habitation that is legally divided into two (2) or more independent living
quarters.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: A building designed for human habitation or a building accessory to a building designed for human habitation.
THEN CURRENT: At the time a disaster reconstruction permit under this article is applied for. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4603: DISASTER RECONSTRUCTION PERMIT:
The owner of any building which has been damaged by a disaster to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value may obtain a
permit to repair or reconstruct such building in accordance with the standards contained in this article. A building shall be considered damaged to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value if the cost to repair the building exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacing the
damaged structure with a new structure of the same size, construction material and occupancy on the same site, as determined by the director of
community development. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4604: TIME LIMITS FOR PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. After a disaster, applications for a permit to repair or reconstruct a building located in a nonresidential, multiple-family residential, or RMCP zone
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the community development department within two (2) years after the date that the mayor
or the city council declared or ratified a state of emergency as a result of such disaster.
After a disaster, applications for a permit to repair or reconstruct a building located in a single-family residential zone pursuant to the provisions of the
ordinance shall be submitted to the community development department within five (5) years after the date that the mayor or the city council declared
or ratified a state of emergency as a result of such a disaster.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to alter the time limits set forth in title 9, chapter 6 of this code concerning the completion of
disaster repairs in compliance with the city's building code and other technical codes. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4605: REPAIR STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS LOCATED IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
The following standards shall govern the repair or reconstruction of residential buildings which are located in residential zones and do not conform to the
then current city zoning ordinances, provided that the repair or reconstruction is performed pursuant to a permit issued under the authority of this article.
A. Structures In Single-Family Residential Zones: The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such a manner that:
1. The floor area of the replacement structure is equal to or less than the floor area of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
2. The footprint of the replacement structure is within the footprint of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
3. The height envelope of the replacement structure is within the height envelope of the original structure as it is determined by the city.
Any permittee who repairs or reconstructs a building in a single-family residential zone under the provisions of this article shall provide parking for the
replacement or reconstructed building pursuant to the then current Beverly Hills municipal code.
The permittee may request a reduction of the applicable parking requirements by making application to the community development department for a
minor accommodation pursuant to article 36 of this chapter. The director of community development may reduce the applicable parking requirements
if the director determines that such a reduction: 1) is necessary because the subject property cannot physically accommodate additional parking; or
2) is necessary to prevent undue economic hardship for the permittee. The director of community development shall not reduce the applicable
parking requirements to less than the legal number of spaces that was on the subject site prior to the disaster.
The front yard paving restrictions specified in section 10-3-2422, 10-3-2518, or 10-3-2618 of this chapter (or their successor sections) shall apply to
any repair or reconstruction in a single-family residential zone pursuant to this article. The permittee may request a relaxation of the foregoing
restrictions by making application to the department of community development for a minor accommodation pursuant to article 36 of this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 752/797
The director of community development may relax the foregoing paving restrictions if the director determines that such a relaxation: 1) is necessary
because the subject property cannot otherwise physically accommodate the parking required under this section; 2) the required parking under this
section is in excess of the legal number of spaces that was on the subject site prior to the disaster, 3) such relaxation will help to provide additional
necessary parking; and 4) such paving will be compatible with the character of the adjacent streetscape.
The city shall determine the predamage parameters of the building which define the legally permitted scale of such building. Those parameters
include, but are not limited to, the building's envelope, footprint, parking, and floor area. Such determination shall be based on the records of the city,
as well as any additional information provided by the owner pursuant to a request by the director of community development.
No building shall be repaired or reconstructed in a single-family residential zone under the provisions of this article except in conformity with the
design review requirements specified in the director's guidelines for disaster reconstruction.
B. Structures In Multiple-Family Residential Zones:
1. No building shall be repaired or reconstructed pursuant to this subsection B except in conformity with the architectural review requirements of article
30 of this chapter.
2. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that the footprint of the replacement structure is within the footprint of the original
structure as it is determined by the city.
3. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that the height envelope of the replacement structure is within the height envelope
of the original structure as it is determined by the city.
4. The permittee may reconstruct a garage in the rear yard of a property if the city determines that a rear yard garage existing prior to the disaster. The
repaired or rebuilt garage shall be in the same location as the original garage as determined by the city.
5. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that the aggregate floor area in the replacement structure is equal or less than the
aggregate floor area of the original structure as it is determined by the city.
6. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that the average unit size in the replacement structure is equal to or greater than
the average unit size of the original structure as it is determined by the city.
7. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that the number of units in the replacement structure is equal to or less than the
number of units in the original structure as it is determined by the city.
8. Excluding the parking required by subsection B10 of this section, the permittee may repair or reconstruct a building, but only in such manner that the
replacement structure is no more deficient in required numbers of parking spaces under the parking requirements of the then current Beverly Hills
municipal code than the original structure may have been under the parking requirements of the then current Beverly Hills municipal code.
9. The city shall determine the predamage parameters of the existing building which define the legally permitted scale of the replacement structure.
Those parameters include, but are not limited to, the building's envelope, footprint, parking, floor area, and number of dwelling units. Such
determination shall be based on the records of the city, as well as any additional information provided by the owner pursuant to a request by the
director of community development.
10. For each unit repaired or reconstructed in excess of the then current density limitations of the Beverly Hills municipal code, the permittee shall
provide one additional parking space up to the amount of parking otherwise required by the then current Beverly Hills municipal code for the
replacement building.
The permittee may request a reduction of this parking requirement by making application to the planning commission for development plan review
pursuant to article 31 of this chapter. The planning commission may reduce or waive this parking requirement if it makes the findings required to
issue a development plan review permit and additionally determines that such a waiver or reduction: a) is necessary because the subject property
cannot physically accommodate additional parking; or b) is necessary to prevent undue economic hardship for the permittee. In lieu of granting a
waiver or reduction, the planning commission may, upon request by the permittee, allow the permittee to repair or reconstruct the building so that the
building extends beyond the predamage height envelope or footprint, but not beyond the predamage maximum height or minimum setback, for the
sole purpose of accommodating all code required parking on the site.
Unless the permittee requests a reduction in the parking required by this section, or requests a building design that exceeds the height envelope or
building footprint, the permittee shall not be required to obtain a development plan review permit in order to reconstruct the building.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the permittee to provide more parking than is required by the then current Beverly Hills
municipal code for the replacement building, nor shall this subsection be construed to permit a building to be repaired or reconstructed without
providing at least the number of parking spaces provided prior to the damage to the building.
C. Rental Units: Whenever the permittee repairs or reconstructs rental units, such units shall remain subject to the city's rent control laws. However,
notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any tenant required to vacate the rental unit due to damage or destruction, or due to repair or
reconstruction of the unit, shall be provided a right of first refusal to reoccupy the unit. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4606: REPAIR STANDARDS FOR NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS LOCATED IN COMMERCIAL ZONES:
The following standards shall govern the repair or reconstruction of buildings which are located in a nonresidential zone, and nonresidential buildings
located in a residential zone, that do not conform to then current city zoning ordinances, provided that the repair or reconstruction is performed pursuant to
a permit issued under the authority of this article.
A. The permittee may repair or reconstruct a building in such manner that:
The floor area of the replacement structure is equal to or less than the floor area of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
The footprint of the replacement structure is within the footprint of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 753/797
The height envelope of the replacement structure is within the height envelope of the original structure as it is determined by the city.
The city shall determine the predamage parameters of the building which define the legally permitted scale of such building. Those parameters include,
but are not limited to, the building's envelope, footprint, parking, and floor area. Such determination shall be based on the records of the city, as well as
any additional information provided by the owner pursuant to a request by the director of community development.
B. No building shall be repaired or reconstructed pursuant to this section except in conformity with the architectural review requirements of article 30 this
chapter.
C. No building shall be repaired or reconstructed in such manner that the height exceeds the then current maximum height permitted by this code unless a
development plan review authorizing the additional height is first approved pursuant to the provisions of article 31 of this chapter.
D. Any permittee who repairs or reconstructs a building which is located in a commercial zone and which does not meet the then current parking
requirements of this code, may repair or reconstruct that building without providing additional parking if the replacement building does not exceed then
current Beverly Hills municipal code limitations on height and floor area ratio.
However, if a permittee repairs or reconstructs a building in such manner that the height exceeds the then current maximum height permitted by this
code, or in such manner that the floor area ratio exceeds the then current maximum floor area ratio permitted by this code, then the permittee shall
provide parking for the replacement building as required by the then current Beverly Hills municipal code.
The planning commission may reduce or waive this parking requirement as part of its consideration of the permittee's development plan review
application if the planning commission determines that such a waiver or reduction: 1) is necessary because the subject property cannot physically
accommodate additional parking; or 2) is necessary to prevent undue economic hardship for the permittee. In lieu of granting a waiver or reduction, the
planning commission may, upon request by the permittee, allow the permittee to repair or reconstruct the buildings so that the building extends beyond
the predamage height envelope or footprint, but not beyond the predamage maximum setback, for the sole purpose of accommodating parking on the
site.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the permittee to provide more parking than is required by the then current Beverly Hills
municipal code for the replacement building nor, shall this subsection be construed to permit a building to be repaired or reconstructed without
providing at least the number of parking spaces provided prior to the damage of the building. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4607: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW EXEMPTION FOR CONFORMING BUILDINGS:
The repair or reconstruction of a building damaged by a disaster shall be exempt from the development plan review requirements of article 31 of this
chapter provided that the damaged building conformed to all of the zoning provisions of this code at the time of the disaster and the repaired or
reconstructed building does not exceed the height or floor area of the original building, as determined by the city. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4608: REPAIR STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all permittees shall repair or reconstruct damaged buildings in such manner as to conform to any
legislation which, in the opinion of the director of community development, is designed to prevent or ameliorate the type of damage generally caused by
the disaster. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4609: EXEMPTION FROM APPLICATION FEES AND FINE ART ORNAMENTATION REQUIREMENTS:
No application fee shall be required as a condition of any application for planning department approval, architectural commission approval or planning
commission approval to repair or reconstruct any building damaged by disaster.
In addition, the repair or reconstruction of any building damaged by a disaster shall be exempt from the fine art ornamentation requirements set forth in title
3, chapter 1, article 8 of this code. Buildings that previously provided fine art to fulfill the requirements of this code shall replace any destroyed fine art as
set forth in section 3-1-810 of this code. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4610: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
Beginning on the date of the declaration of emergency by the mayor or city council, and for a period of six (6) months thereafter the director of community
development may issue:
A. A permit to construct and utilize a temporary structure for the purpose of housing a use in a zone in which the use is otherwise prohibited or
conditionally permitted if it can be determined that the proposed temporary structure will serve a public need and will be compatible with neighboring
uses, and
B. A permit to construct and utilize a temporary structure if a building may not lawfully be occupied due to damage to the building, the owner of the building
may request for the purpose of housing the use that previously occupied the building if it can be determined that the proposed temporary structure will
not be detrimental to the public health or safety.
Permits for temporary structures and temporary uses shall remain valid for one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance. Permittees may request one
180-day extension from the director of community development. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 754/797
10-3-4611: RECONSTRUCTION OF MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS INVOLUNTARILY DAMAGED FOR
REASONS OTHER THAN A DISASTER:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or any provision of this code, and without a declaration of emergency by the mayor or the city council,
the owner of any multiple-family residential dwelling that is involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, other catastrophic event, or the public enemy may
repair or reconstruct such dwelling pursuant to this section if the owner obtains a building permit for the repair or reconstruction within two (2) years after
the damage or destruction.
A. Determination Of Specifications: If a multiple-family residential dwelling is destroyed by fire, other catastrophic event or the public enemy, the city shall
determine the predamage parameters of the dwelling which define the legally permitted scale of such dwelling. Those parameters include, but are not
limited to, the dwelling's height envelope, footprint, parking, floor area, and number of dwelling units. Such determination shall be based on the records
of the city, as well as any additional information provided by the owner pursuant to a request by the director of community development.
B. Development Plan Review:
1. No building shall be repaired or reconstructed pursuant to this section except in conformity with the development plan review requirements contained
in article 31 of this chapter.
2. Unless the planning commission otherwise conditions the repair or reconstruction pursuant to this development plan review process, the owner may
repair or reconstruct the dwelling in such manner that:
a. The average unit size in the replacement structure is equal to or greater than the average unit size of the original structure as it is determined by
the city;
b. The height envelope of the replacement structure is within the height envelope of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
c. The footprint of the replacement structure is within the footprint of the original structure as it is determined by the city;
d. The aggregate floor area of the replacement structure is equal to or less than the aggregate floor area of the original structure as it is determined
by the city;
e. A garage may be rebuilt in the rear yard of a property if the existence of a rear yard garage is verified by the city, provided that the replacement
garage shall be in the same location as the original garage.
3. However, the planning commission may not impose any condition upon the repair or reconstruction which would prohibit the repair or reconstruction
of the aggregate floor area of the original building or would prohibit repair or reconstruction of the total number of dwelling units of the original
building, unless the Planning Commission determines that:
a. The repair or reconstruction will be detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood, or will be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood; or
b. The existing nonconforming use of the building or structure would be more appropriately moved to a zone in which the existing nonconforming use
is permitted.
C. Parking: For each unit repaired or reconstructed in excess of the then current density limitations of this Code, the permittee shall provide one additional
parking space up to the amount of parking otherwise required by the then current Beverly Hills Municipal Code for the replacement building. The
Planning Commission may reduce or waive this parking requirement as part of its approval of the permittee's development plan review application if the
Planning Commission determines that such a waiver or reduction: 1) is necessary because the subject property cannot physically accommodate
additional parking; or 2) is necessary to prevent undue economic hardship for the permittee. In lieu of granting a waiver or reduction, the Planning
Commission may, upon request by the permittee, allow the permittee to repair or reconstruct the building so that the building extends beyond the
predamage height envelope or footprint, but not beyond the predamage maximum height or minimum setback, for the sole purpose of accommodating
parking on the site.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the permittee to provide more parking than is required by the then current Beverly Hills
municipal code for the replacement building, nor shall this subsection be construed to permit a building to be repaired or reconstructed without
providing at least the number of parking spaces provided prior to the damage to the building.
D. Rental Units: Whenever an owner repairs or reconstructs rental units pursuant to this section, such units shall remain subject to the city's rent control
laws. However, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any tenant required to vacate a rental unit due to damage or destruction, or due to
repair or reconstruction of the unit, shall be provided a right of first refusal to occupy the unit. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10-3-4612: ABANDONMENT OF RIGHTS:
The failure to obtain a building permit for the repair or reconstruction of a building within two (2) years after issuance of a permit pursuant to this article
shall constitute an abandonment of such permit. Additionally, expiration of the building permit to repair or reconstruct a building damaged by a disaster
shall also constitute an abandonment of the permit issued pursuant to this article. Upon abandonment, all rights granted by the permit shall lapse and the
property affected thereby shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to alter the time limits set forth in title 9, chapter 6 of this code concerning the completion of disaster
repairs in compliance with the city's building code and other technical codes. (Ord. 15-O-2681, eff. 8-21-2015)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 755/797
Article 47. Cannabis Prohibitions And Regulations
10-3-4700: PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this article is to expressly prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis uses in the City.
B. The City Council finds that prohibitions on commercial cannabis activity are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare of the City. The prohibition of such uses is within the authority conferred upon the City Council by State law and is an exercise of its police
powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public health, safety and welfare of the City. (Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017)
10-3-4701: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
CANNABIS: All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its
seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" includes cannabis that is used
for medical, non-medical, or other purposes.
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety
Code section 11018.5.
CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Any equipment, products or materials of any kind which is intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the human
body.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling,
transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of any
business licensed by the State or other government entity under division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of State law
that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses.
CONCENTRATED CANNABIS: Manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing
the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate.
CULTIVATION: Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
DELIVERY: The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
DISTRIBUTION: The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under division 10 of the California
Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.
MAUCRSA: The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, as the
same may be amended from time to time.
MANUFACTURE: To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: A house, an apartment unit, condominium, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence. (Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-
2017)
10-3-4702: PROHIBITED USES AND ACTIVITIES:
A. Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is prohibited in all zones, specific plan areas, and overlay zones of the City. No person shall
establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow, or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. To the extent that this prohibition
conflicts with any other provision of this Code, this prohibition will control.
B. A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real property
in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity
on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City.
C. Subsection A of this section shall prohibit all activities for which a State license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended
from time to time. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under
the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. The City shall also not issue any local license to a non-profit entity pursuant to
California Business and Professions Code section 26070.5.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 756/797
D. To the extent not already prohibited by subsection A of this section, all deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products for non-medical purposes, to or from
any location are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products for a non-medical
purpose, which delivery either originates or terminates within the City. This subsection shall not prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through
the jurisdictional limits of the City for delivery or distribution to a person located outside the City, where such transport does not involve delivery or
distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the City. (Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017)
10-3-4703: EXCEPTIONS:
A. Notwithstanding section 10-3-4702 of this article, the delivery of medical cannabis from a business located outside the City and licensed under the
MAUCRSA, or any other provision of law that permits State licenses for medical cannabis businesses, shall be permitted into the City.
B. To the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person twenty one (21) years of age or older
from:
1. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older, without compensation
whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis;
2. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older, without compensation
whatsoever, up to eight grams (8 g) of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis;
3. Smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products except as prohibited by California Health and Safety Code section 11362.3;
4. Possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away cannabis accessories to persons twenty one (21) years of age
or older without compensation whatsoever; or
5. Engaging in the cultivation of six (6) or fewer live cannabis plants within a single private residence, inside an accessory structure located upon the
grounds of a private residence, or if grown outdoors within a locked space that is not visible by normal, unaided vision from a public place.
C. This article shall also not prohibit any commercial cannabis activity that the City is required by State law to permit within its jurisdiction pursuant to the
MAUCRSA. (Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017)
10-3-4704: VIOLATION, PENALTY:
In addition to any other enforcement permitted by section 10-3-205 of this chapter, the City Attorney or City Prosecutor may bring a civil action for
injunctive relief and civil penalties against any person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought pursuant to this article, a court of
competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in section 10-3-205
of this chapter, no provision of section 10-3-205 of this chapter or this article authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or
prohibited by Health and Safety Code section 11362.71, et seq., or section 11362.1, et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event
of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under section 10-3-205 of this chapter and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties
allowable under State law shall govern. (Ord. 17-O-2734, eff. 9-8-2017)
Chapter 4
ZONING; SIGNS
Article 1. General Provisions
10-4-101: SIGN REGULATIONS; OBJECTIVES AND BASIS:
The objectives, justification, and basis for the various regulations relative to signs and as contained in this section and elsewhere in this chapter are to:
A. Direct persons to various activities and enterprises in order to provide for the public convenience;
B. Provide a reasonable system of controls of signs, integrated within and a part of the comprehensive zoning plan set forth by this code, and not as a
distinct police power exercise separate and apart from the zoning power;
C. Encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design relationship, and
spacing;
D. Encourage a desirable urban character which has a minimum of overhead clutter;
E. Enhance the economic value of the community and each area thereof through the regulation of such things as size, location, design, and the
illumination of signs;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 757/797
F. Encourage the signs which are compatible with adjacent land uses;
G. Reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signing; and
H. Relate sign area and height to viewing distance and optical characteristics of the eye. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-102: SCOPE:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign except as provided for and permitted in this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-103: LIMITATION OF ACTIONS:
Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the matters set forth in this chapter otherwise subject to court
review, other than those listed in sections 65860 and 65907 of the Government Code of the state, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or
determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall
not be maintained by any person, unless such action or proceedings is commenced within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such decision.
Thereafter all persons shall be barred from any such action or proceedings or any defense or invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such
proceedings, acts, or determinations. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-104: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ALTERATION: Any change in copy, color, size, shape, position, location, construction, or supporting structure.
AREA OF SIGN: The area of one face of the sign, if the sign exposes only one face to view from any one vantage point, and shall mean the maximum
width of the sign structure times its height for signs which expose more than one face to view from any vantage point.
ATTRACTION BOARD: A sign advertising only nightclub or cabaret entertainment and so constructed that letters and/or other advertising material can be
readily changed.
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign displaying the name and/or address of a building, which sign is located on the same site as the building.
BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign displaying the name of thebusiness to which it pertains and/or the names of the products or services sold or
offered by such business at the site on which the business and sign are located.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign stating the names of those individuals or businesses directly connected with the construction project, their addresses and
telephone numbers.
COURTYARD: Any pedestrian arcade, patio, promenade, or mall, whether covered by a roof or not, within or between any structure or buildings upon
which the principal or main entrance to one or more retail businesses therein are located. "Courtyard" shall include buildings with one or more retail
businesses having their principal or main entrance off and adjacent to a parking lot or parking facility and with no direct public access to any public street
or alley.
EXPOSED TUBE LIGHTING: Any form of lighting that uses electrified gaseous tube lighting such as neon or fluorescent light not shielded from direct view
by some other material in a sign or exterior architectural decoration.
FACE, SIGN FACE, OR FACE OF A SIGN: Any plane or other side of a sign which is painted or stained or lighted or has lettering or is illustrated,
separately or in combination, to attract attention. In the case of a side other than a plane, the area thereof shall be computed as including only the
maximum single display surface which is visible from any one position from which persons might usually view the same.
FLAG, BANNER OR PENNANT: A piece of fabric, canvas or any similar soft material, in any shape, that is attached to a structure, pole or wire.
GRADE: The level of the public sidewalk at the closest distance to the sign.
GROUND SIGN, POST SIGN, OR POLE SIGN: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign which has the source of light on the surface of the sign or in the interior of the sign itself.
LIGHTED SIGN: A sign which has a source of light located such that the beam of the light falls upon the exterior surface of the sign or a sign which is itself
a projected image such as from a slide projector or laser or similar device for projecting images.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign painted on, attached to, or supported by a marquee or awning.
MURAL: A painting or graphic design applied to and made integral with a wall.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building with the display surface of the sign in aplane other than the plane
parallel to the wall.
REAL ESTATE SIGN (Such As A "For Sale" Sign, "For Lease" Sign, "For Rent" Sign, Etc.): A sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located,
or any portion thereof, is for sale, lease, or rent, and containing any of the following information, and no more: a description of the premises offered for
sale, lease, or rent and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, broker, or other person offering the same for sale, lease, or rent. In
addition, the words "sold", "leased", or "rented" may be added to a previously posted sign for one period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The area of the
sign shall include the area of any and all riders.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 758/797
ROOF SIGN: A sign located upon and above the roof of any building.
SIGN: Any writing, name, number, figure, character outline, emblem, graphic, window etching, stained or painted glass, logo, mural, symbol, spectacle,
display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard, signboard, flag, banner, pennant, device, clock, except analog clock without advertising,
appliance, any structure erected for the purposes of supporting a sign, or any other thing of similar nature reasonably likely to attract attention outdoors in
or on any face or wall, window, or storefront of any building, and shall include all parts, portions, units, and materials composing the same, together with
the frame, background, and support or anchorage thereof.
SITE: All of that contiguous ground area legally assembled into one building or business location.
WALL SIGN: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building or structure with the display surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said
wall.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign which is located on or inside a window of a business or building: a) within five feet (5') of and parallel to the window, or b) if lighted
or illuminated, within fifteen feet (15') from the window or within a distance from the window equal to half the width of the courtyard or street frontage of the
business, whichever is less, and lower than the top of the windows of the ground floor frontage occupied by the business.
YARD SIGN: A noncommercial sign that is visible from the public right of way. Yard signs may be temporary in nature, and may express a political,
religious, or ideological view or opinion. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 88-O-2045, eff. 12-15-1988; Ord. 91-O-2119, eff. 7-5-1991; Ord. 96-O-
2268, eff. 10-18-1997; Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000; Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476, eff. 7-5-2005;
Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
Article 2. Permits, Fees, And Inspections
10-4-201: PERMITS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to erect, reerect, construct, alter, or maintain any sign except as provided by this code and pursuant to a required permit for the same
issued by the building official. Except as hereinafter provided, a permit shall be required for each sign. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for
lighted or illuminated signs, and building permits shall be obtained for sign structures. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-202: PERMITS NOT REQUIRED:
The following shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter even though a permit shall not be required therefor:
A. Minor maintenance and repairs to existing signs for which a valid permit was obtained at the time of the initial installation;
B. Repainting without the alteration of existing signs for which a valid permit was obtained at the time of the initial installation;
C. Signs for the public safety and convenience and required for the enforcement of private property rights, such as "Entrance", "Parking", "Office", "No
Trespassing", or "No Parking", provided not more than two (2) such signs are maintained on each street, courtyard, or alley frontage on each site area
and provided such signs do not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square inches in area in any residential zone or four (4) square feet in any commercial
or industrial zone;
D. Public notice signs, such as notices to remove weeds;
E. Yard signs as permitted by section 10-4-806 of this chapter, except distribution permits as required by subsection 10-4-806C of this chapter; and
F. Flags, banners and pennants as permitted by section 10-4-320 of this chapter, that are not attached to a flagpole but are attached to a building. (Ord.
80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476,
eff. 7-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-203: PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
Applications for sign permits shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building official. Such applications shall contain the location by street
and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owner and the person or business erecting the sign. The building
official may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information when, in his opinion, such information is necessary to ensurecompliance with the
provisions of this code, including, but not limited to, chapter 3, article 30 of this title. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-204: GRANTING AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
The building official, before granting a permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of any sign, shall determine that the
proposed sign (with respect to design, construction, location, materials, and character) conforms to all applicable laws and regulations. Any such permit
may at any time be revoked should any of the provisions of this chapter be violated. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-205: EFFECT OF PERMITS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 759/797
The granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or
regulation. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-206: VALIDITY OF PERMITS:
No permit shall be valid except to the extent that the work or use which it authorizes is valid. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-207: CORRECTIONS; STOPPING OF WORK:
The granting of a permit shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the work or from preventing further work
being done thereunder when such work is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any law of the city. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-208: PERMIT FEES:
A. No sign permit shall become valid until the applicant has paid to the director of finance administration a permit fee for fees in an amount or amounts as
may have been established by resolution of the council.
B. No fee shall be required for graphics, murals, etchings, or stained or painted glass that has no name, logo, symbol, or commercial identification
attached or associated therewith, or for signs for the public safety and convenience, or for the signs described in section 10-4-202 of this article and
subsection 10-4-806C of this chapter.
C. Whenever any sign for which a permit fee is required pursuant to subsection A of this section has been installed, replaced, oraltered without first having
obtained a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected, whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be five (5) times the amount of the permit fee
required pursuant to this code and shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person
from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 04-O-2457,
eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476, eff. 7-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-209: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. 1969 Ordinance: Any lawfully existing sign, including its structural supports, which is nonconforming to the requirements of this chapter as adopted by
the council in 1969, shall be removed or made to conform to the requirements of this chapter within a period of five (5) years commencing November
20, 1969.
B. 1980 Amendments: Any lawfully existing sign, including its structural supports, which conforms to the provisions of the 1969 sign ordinance but which is
nonconforming to the requirements of the 1980 amendments to this chapter, shall be removed or made to conform as a condition of, or prior to, the
issuance of any sign permit on and after December 5, 1980, for the same business, residence, or location.
C. Exception: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A and B of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation
pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to allow a legally nonconforming existing sign to be retained if the nonconforming sign is designated as a city
landmark in accordance with chapter 3, article 32 of this title or if the architectural commission finds that such sign is a contributing element of a
building that has been designated as a landmark in accordance with chapter 3, article 32 of this title. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-
2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-210: MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS:
All signs shall be maintained so as to be structurally safe, attractive, and clean. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
Article 3. Regulations
10-4-301: APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS:
A. Applicability: Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the construction, erection, and
maintenance of each signwithin the city. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material, method of construction, size,
shape, or location of any sign not specifically prescribed provided any such alternate has been approved. The building official or the architectural
commission may approve any such alternate provided the material method, size, shape, or location offered is found, for the purpose intended, to be at
least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article.
B. Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the following shall not be deemed to be included within the definition of a "sign" for
purposes of this chapter:
1. Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal devices, or warnings at railroad crossings;
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 760/797
2. Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation provided that the total surface area of all such signs on any one lot
or parcel does not exceed ten (10) square feet;
3. Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or convenience of the public, such as signs identifying high voltage, public telephone, or
underground cable;
4. Signs upon a vehicle provided that any such vehicle and signs thereon are not conspicuously parked or left standing for advertising purposes so as
to constitute a device or other type of sign pursuant to the definition of a sign, except when being used for bona fide delivery and other vehicular
purposes away from a fixed place of business;
5. Signs not more than two (2) in number and noticing or soliciting the sale, lease, or hire of a vehicle to which such signs are attached if such signs are
nine inches by twelve inches (9" x 12") or less; and
6. Promotional displays or devices located inside a building or structure and otherwise defined as a "sign" where such displays or devices are either: a)
not lighted or illuminated, set on a wall, partition or display structure at least five feet (5') away from and perpendicular to the street or courtyard
frontage of the business or structure; or b) lighted or illuminated, set back from the street or courtyard frontage of the business a distance greater
than half the width of the ground floor street or courtyard frontage of the business or fifteen feet (15'), whichever is less, and higher than the top of
the windows on the ground floor frontage occupied by the business.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the regulations set forth in this article shall apply to the construction, erection, and
maintenance of each sign within the city. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material, method of construction,
size, shape, or location of any sign not specificallyprescribed provided any such alternate has been approved. The building official or the architectural
commission may approve any such alternate provided the material, method, size, shape, or location offered is found, for the purpose intended, to be
at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-4-302: UNLAWFUL SIGNS:
A. Posting On Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person to post, suspend, print, stick, stamp, tack, or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be
done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public to, over, or
upon any street right of way, public sidewalk, curb, curbstone, lamp post, hydrant, tree, railroad right of way, electric light pole, telephone pole,
telegraph pole, or upon any future of the fire alarm, police, or telephone system of the city, or upon any public building or utility, unless permission so to
do is first secured from the council.
B. Posting On Private Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to post, print, stick, stamp, tack, or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done, any
notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or other device calculated to attract the attention of the public to, at, from, or upon
any post, fence, wall, building, structure, or any part of any building or structure located in or upon any private premises or property within the city,
unless the written consent of the owner, agent, or occupant has first been obtained so to do.
C. Projecting Signs: Except as permitted in the C-5 zone, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, or maintain a projecting sign within the city
except for signs in nonresidential zones indicating the location of emergency medical facilities, public off street parking facilities, or other similar public
services and subject to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Moving Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, or maintain any sign which, in whole or in part, moves, rotates, flashes, reflects, blinks,
or appears to do any of the foregoing, or which simulates motion in any manner. For the purposes of this section, the following signs shall be examples
of moving signs: flags, banners, and pennants not otherwise permitted by section 10-4-320 of this article; captive balloons; market quotations; time or
temperature recording devices; clocks, except analog clocks without advertising; signs which are constructed of or faced with scotch light or similar
material; signs which change color; and signs in which the intensity of lighting changes, or appears to change, including flashers and blinkers. This list
of examples is not exclusive. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 88-O-2045, eff. 12-15-1988;Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-303: PROHIBITED SUPPORT:
No sign shall be supported in whole or in part from any public utility installation or any tree on private premises. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-304: WALL SIGNS EXTENDING FROM BUILDINGS:
A. Extension From Building: Where a wall or building is on the property line, no portion of a wall sign shall extend more than twelve inches (12") from the
wall of such building or structure to which it is attached where the sign is eight feet (8') or more above the grade, or more than one inch (1") where the
sign is less than eight feet (8') above the grade. The same limitations shall apply to signs which do not extend beyond the property line.
B. Illumination: Wall signs less than eight feet (8') above the grade shall not be illuminated.
C. Parallel To Street: Wall signs shall be placed on a wall parallel to the facing or abutting street, except that if the wall of the structure on which the sign is
to be affixed or attached is not parallel to such street, and is less than ninety degrees (90°) from a line perpendicular to the street, such sign may be
affixed or attached parallel to such wall. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-305: SIGNS PROJECTING FROM BUILDINGS:
Permitted projecting signs shall not project from the wall of the building or structure to which they are attached more than thirty inches (30") and shall not
exceed eight feet (8') in height. Projecting signs less than twelve feet (12') above the grade shall be prohibited. Permitted projecting signs may project over
public sidewalks. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 761/797
10-4-306: SIGNS ON MARQUEES, AWNINGS, CANOPIES OR SIMILAR ARCHITECTURAL ELEMENTS:
A. No marquee, awning, canopy, or similar architectural element which projects more than twelve inches (12") from the face of a building shall be used for
advertising purposes except as specifically provided in this section. No wood, paper, cloth, or temporary sign shall be hung or attached to any such
architectural element. However, one horizontal line of letters and symbols not to exceed seven inches (7") in height which identifies the name and
occupation of the tenant or owner of the building and the street address of the tenant or the building may be painted on or fixed to the architectural
element on the faceof the element which is parallel to the wall of the building or structure to which it is attached. The letters and symbols shall not
extend above the top surface or below the lower edge of such architectural element. No such architectural element, nor any sign mounted on such
element shall be illuminated.
B. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection A of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to
article 9 of this chapter to allow letters and symbols to be painted or fixed in more than one line or exceed seven inches (7") in height if the combined
height of the letters and symbols in all lines and the space or spaces between lines does not exceed fourteen inches (14") in overall height, the
allowable total area of all other signs shown on the required unified sign plan is reduced by at least fifty percent (50%), and, in addition to the findings
otherwise required to grant a sign accommodation, the commission finds that such signs on any marquee, awning, canopy or similar architectural
element shall be the principal identification of the building or business.
C. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection A of this section, pursuant to article 9 of this chapter, the architectural commission may grant a
sign accommodation to permit: 1) one nonilluminated sign, constructed of individual letters that do not exceed fourteen inches (14") in height, above
the top surface of a marquee, awning, canopy, or similar architectural element which projects more than twelve inches (12") from the face of a building,
provided such sign is parallel to the wall of the building to which the architectural element is attached; or 2) one nonilluminated sign, constructed of
individual letters that do not exceed seven inches (7") in height, suspended from such architectural elements, provided such sign is parallel to the wall
of the building to which it is attached. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-307: SIGNS PROJECTING ABOVE BUILDINGS:
No sign shall extend above the roof of the building to which it is attached except:
A. When it is attached to the side of a penthouse and does not extend above the roof of the penthouse; or
B. When it is attached to a parapet wall and does not extend above the top of the parapet wall nor more than three feet (3') above the adjacent roof level.
(Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-308: POLE OR GROUND SIGNS:
A. No portion of a pole or ground sign or its supports shall project or extend beyond the property line, except as provided in article 6.5 of this chapter.
B. No portion of a pole or ground sign or its supports shall project or extend over, above, or beyond a wall or roof of a building or structure. (Ord. 80-O-
1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1997)
10-4-309: OBSTRUCTION OF PASSAGES; MAINTENANCE:
When a sign is located on the roof of a building, a minimum of six feet (6') in width and eight feet (8') in height for access to all parts of the roof shall be
provided for firefighting personnel and equipment. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-310: CONTEXT OF SIGNS:
The lettering and other identification markings on all signs within the city shall only include the following: the name and location of the business or building,
the nature of the business, a logo, and an identification of the services rendered or the type of merchandise sold. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, signs shall not contain multiple listings of business names, services rendered or types of merchandise. Except as otherwise expressly authorized
by law, signs shall contain no references to the prices of merchandise or the prices of services performed. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-
O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-311: DISCONTINUANCE OF THE USE OF SIGNS:
A. Nonstructural Sign Elements: No person shall permit any sign authorized by the provisions of this chapter, other than the structural parts thereof, to
remain in place after the business or activity identified by such sign has ceased discontinued use of the building or premises where the sign is located.
B. Structural Parts: In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section:
1. Notices: No person shall permit the structural parts of any sign authorized by the provisions of this chapter to remain in place after the business
whose products or services are advertised has ceased or discontinued use of the building or premises where the sign is located for a period of ninety
(90) days after written notification from the building official to remove such sign, unless such period is extended by the building official for good
cause.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 762/797
2. Reports: Upon failure to comply with the provisions of subsection B1 of this section, the building official may submit a report to the council requesting
authorization for the removal of such sign by the building official and that the costs for such removal be levied as a special assessment against the
land or building upon which such sign is located.
3. Hearings: Upon the receipt of such report, the council by resolution shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any protests or
objections thereto. The city clerk shall cause notice of such hearing to be served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known
owner of the sign. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall specify the day, hour, and place
when and where the council will hear and pass upon the report of the building official.
Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the council shall hear and pass upon the report of the building official, together with any such objections
or protests. The council may thereupon, by resolution, order the building official to remove such sign.
4. Cost Of Removal: Upon the completion of the removal of the sign, the building official shall submit a report to the council specifying the costs of the
removal of the sign to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the land or building upon which such sign is located.
5. Hearings On Costs Of Removal: Upon the receipt of such report, the council by resolution shall fix a time, date, and place for the hearing on the
confirmation of such report and any protests or objections thereto. The city clerk shall cause notice of such hearing to be served by certified mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the sign. Such notice shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall
specify the day, hour, and place when and where the council will hear and pass upon the confirmation of the report of the building official.
6. Confirmation: Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the council shall hear and pass upon the report of the building official, together with any
such objections or protests. The council thereupon may confirm by resolution the statement of costs of the removal of the sign contained in the report
of the building official and cause the same to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the land or building upon which such sign is
located. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-312: SIGNS ON VACANT LAND:
A. Signs Prohibited: Subject to the exceptions set forth in subsection B of this section, no sign shall be placed upon any vacant lot on which no business is
being conducted or on unimproved property.
B. Exceptions: Signs dealing exclusively with the sale, lease, or transfer of such property may be permitted subject to any and all of the regulations
applicable thereto contained in this chapter and further subject to the following restrictions:
1. Such signs shall not be lighted; and
2. Such signs shall be located not less than ten feet (10') from the street line. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-313: COLOR OF SIGNS:
A. Signs shall be limited to not more than three (3) colors. For the purposes of this section, the following rules shall apply to the determination of the
number of colors in a sign:
1. The color of the lighting or illumination of a sign shall be considered a color of the sign.
2. In the case of a sign placed on a building surface without any border and with its background the same color as the building surface, the color of the
background shall not be considered as a color of the sign.
3. Shades or gradations of color shall each constitute a separate color.
4. Black and white shall not be considered colors.
B. Notwithstanding the restrictions of subsection A of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of
this chapter to authorize more than three (3) colors on a sign, including shades of color or gradations of color.
C. Murals or similar displays painted or placed on a building or construction barricade, or a rendering of the project under construction placed on a
construction barricade, shall be exempt from the color restrictions contained in this section. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 91-O-2119, eff.
7-5-1991; Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-314: LIGHTING OF PREMISES:
A. Any perimeter or flood lighting or other external lighting, whether used for illumination or advertisement, which illuminates private land, buildings, signs,
or structures, whether built upon or not, shall be permitted only when such lighting is installed on private property and hooded or shielded so that no
direct beams therefrom fall upon public streets, alleys, highways, or other private property. Such lighting shall be subject to architectural review
pursuant to chapter 3, article 30 of this title. The reviewing authority shall consider the color, design, and placement of the lighting fixtures and the color,
design and intensity of the lighting.
B. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, any projected light display or exposed tube lighting element, such as neon, on the exterior of any
building or structure that is notsubject to regulation as a sign under article 6 of this chapter shall be subject to architectural review pursuant to the
criteria set forth in section 10-3-3010 of this title, the architectural commission shall be the reviewing authority for purposes of such review.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing exposed tube lighting which is otherwise subject to regulation under subsection B of this section, but which can
be documented to have been a feature of a building prior to November 20, 1969, is exempt from regulation pursuant to this article and may be
refurbished or maintained without architectural review.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 763/797
In addition, except as provided in this subsection, any exposed tube lighting element, such as neon, or projected light display on the exterior of any
building, or any such lighting element or display in the interior of a building which is visible from a public street or alley, shall be subject to architectural
review as a sign pursuant to chapter 3, article 30 of this title and shall be considered a sign, or a portion thereof, for the purposes of this article.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, existing exposed tube lighting which can be documented to have been a feature of a building prior to November 20,
1969, is exempt from regulation pursuant to this article and may be refurbished or maintained without architectural review. Furthermore, restoration of
exposed tube lighting which is not existing but which can be documented to have been a feature of a building prior to November 20, 1969, is exempt
from regulation pursuant to this article, but requires architectural review as a sign pursuant to chapter 3, article 30 of this title. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-
5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-4-315: INTENSITY OF LIGHTING:
A. No sign shall be permitted which, by virtue of the intensity, direction, or color of its lighting or illumination, shall interfere with the proper operation of, or
cause confusion to the operator of, a motor vehicle on the public streets.
B. No sign which is lighted or illuminated to an intensity in excess of that of a public street light shall be constructed or maintained within two hundred feet
(200') of and facing property in a residential zone. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-316: IDENTIFICATION:
A. No person shall erect, construct, maintain, or use any real estate sign or construction sign within the city without having permanently affixed thereto in a
conspicuous place on the frontthereof a self-adhering tag issued by the director of finance administration indicating the year of the permit and such
other information as may be deemed to be necessary.
B. Permanent signs shall have plainly marked in a conspicuous place thereon the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation having the permit
for the erection, construction, or maintenance of such sign.
C. Any sign advertising the lease, rental, or sale of real estate to which it is attached, or upon which it is attached, or upon which it is located shall indicate
whether the name placed thereon belongs to the owner or the agent of the owner of such real estate. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-317: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
A. No person shall erect, install, maintain, or use any construction sign on any premises, unless the required permits for the construction have been
obtained from the city.
B. Construction signs shall be removed prior to the final inspection. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-318: ATTRACTION BOARDS:
No attraction board shall be constructed, erected, or maintained, except as where permitted by other sections of this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-
1980)
10-4-319: MURALS:
Notwithstanding any other restriction contained in this chapter, pursuant to article 9 of this chapter, the architectural commission may grant a sign
accommodation to authorize the installation of a mural, or similar environmental graphics, if such mural or environmental graphics consist of architectural
and landscape features, such as trompe l'oeil. Any mural or environmental graphics which identify a business or building by logo, trademark or slogan,
shall be included in the calculation of the business or building identification sign area. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-320: FLAGS, BANNERS AND PENNANTS:
A. Residential Uses: Each one-family residence, "small family daycare home", "large family daycare home", and multiple-family occupancy as defined in
chapter 3 of this title, may display a total of two (2) flags, banners or pennants. No such flag, banner or pennant shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in
area.
B. Other Uses: Each use not specified in subsection A of thissection may display a total of two (2) flags, banners or pennants per fifty feet (50') of street
frontage or part thereof. No flag, banner or pennant displayed pursuant to this subsection shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area unless reviewed
by the architectural commission. In nonresidential zones, such flags, banners or pennants shall not be suspended from flagpoles less than twelve feet
(12') or more than forty feet (40') in height.
C. Mounting: Flags, banners and pennants shall be mounted in accordance with regulations proscribed by the architectural commission.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 764/797
D. Public School Zone: Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, banners may be posted or otherwise affixed upon fences located
within the public school zone. A permit shall not be required for such banners. No such banner shall exceed the dimensions of four feet by two and
one-half feet (4' x 21/2'). A maximum of five (5) banners shall be permitted upon any one school property. (Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996; amd. Ord.
02-O-2413, eff. 12-6-2002)
Article 4. Single-Family Residential Zones
10-4-401: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this article shall apply specifically to single-family residential zones. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-402: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
Real estate signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square inches in area, including all riders. Signs with more than one face shall not be permitted.
(Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-403: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Building identification signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square inches in area. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-404: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
Construction signs shall not be permitted. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-405: LIGHTED SIGNS:
Lighted or illuminated signs shall not be permitted, except for building identification purposes. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-406: NUMBER OF SIGNS PERMITTED:
Not more than one real estate sign, one building identification sign, and one security protection sign shall be permitted on any site area, unless such site is
abutted by more than one street, in which case one of each such signs may be erected, installed, or maintained on each street frontage. (Ord. 80-O-1775,
eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-407: SIGNS INSIDE BUILDINGS:
Signs inside a building or structure attached to any window or opening with the sign copy visible from the outside or otherwise so located so as to be
conspicuously visible and readable without intentional and deliberate effort from outside the building or structure shall be considered part of the allowable
sign area permitted. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-408: GROUND SIGNS:
Subject to other applicable regulations set forth in this chapter, ground signs shall not be permitted, except for real estate signs, yard signs, and building
identification or address signs. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476,
eff. 7-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-409: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
No sign shall be located less than ten feet (10') from a street line; provided, however, if an established setback, wall, hedge, precipitous slope, or
shrubbery exists, and such setback is less than ten feet (10'), or such wall, hedge, slope, or shrubbery is more than three feet (3') high and nearer the
street line than ten feet (10'), a sign may be placed in front of and against the structure, wall, hedge, slope, or shrubbery. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-410: SECURITY PROTECTION SIGNS:
Signs indicating that the premises, including any accessory buildings, are protected by a security system shall be permitted. Such signs shall not exceed
sixty (60) square inches in area and may be freestanding. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
Article 5. Multiple-Family Residential Zones
10-4-501: SCOPE:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 765/797
The regulations set forth in this article shall apply specifically to multiple-family residential zones. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-502: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
Real estate signs shall not exceed five hundred (500) square inches in area. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-503: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Building identification signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-504: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
Construction signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-505: LIGHTED SIGNS:
Lighted or illuminated signs shall not be permitted, except for building identification purposes. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-506: NUMBER OF SIGNS PERMITTED:
Not more than one real estate sign, one building identification sign, and one security protection sign shall be permitted on any site area, unless such site is
abutted by more than one street, in which case one of each such signs may be erected, installed, or maintained on each street frontage. Not more than
one construction sign shall be permitted on any one site area. Signs pertaining to dining facilities shall not be permitted. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-507: SIGNS INSIDE BUILDINGS:
Occupants of multiple-family housing may display up to five (5) noncommercial signs visible from a public right of way in windows or on property in their
possession. These signs are allowed in addition to other signs allowed in multiple-family residential zones, but shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square inches in size. Window signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square inches or cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of a window
area, whichever is smaller. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476, eff. 7-
5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-508: GROUND SIGNS:
Ground signs shall not be permitted, except for real estate signs, yard signs, construction signs, and security protection signs. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-
1980; amd. Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476, eff. 7-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-509: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
No sign shall be located less than five feet (5') from a street line, except that if an established setback exists which is less than five feet (5'), a sign may be
placed in front of or against the structure. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-510: CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS:
One sign, not larger than one square foot in area, may be located on or adjacent to the gateway through a construction barricade, stating the name and
telephone number of the person to be contacted in case of an emergency. No other sign shall be maintained on any construction barricade. (Ord. 80-O-
1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-511: SECURITY PROTECTION SIGNS:
Signs indicating that the premises, including any accessory buildings, are protected by a burglar alarm system shall be permitted. Such signs shall not
exceed sixty (60) square inches in area and may be freestanding. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-512: NONCONFORMING AND CONDITIONAL USES:
Any use conditionally permitted in the R-4 zone pursuant to section 10-3-1203 of this title, and any nonconforming use in the R-4 zone may construct,
erect or maintain signage in excess of that otherwise permitted by this article by obtaining either: a) a sign accommodation from the architectural
commission in accordance with article 9 of this chapter; or b) a conditional use permit from the planning commission in accordance with chapter 3, article
38 of this title. Such additional signage shall not exceed the standards that would be applicable to signage for a similar use in a nonresidential zone. (Ord.
96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 766/797
Article 6. Nonresidential Zones
10-4-601: SCOPE:
The regulations set forth in this article shall applyspecifically to any nonresidential zone, including commercial and industrial zones. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff.
12-5-1980)
10-4-602: REAL ESTATE SIGNS:
One real estate sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area may be located on each street frontage of a building, parcel, or lot. However, where a
building contains leasable or salable ground floor space, one real estate sign may be placed for each leasable or salable ground floor space in lieu of the
one real estate sign normally allowed for each street frontage of the building, parcel or lot. The real estate signs so placed may contain a minimum total
area of twelve (12) square feet, but where the street frontage of the building, lot or parcel exceeds one hundred twenty (120) linear feet, the real estate
signs advertising leasable or salable ground floor space may contain a total of up to one square foot per ten (10) lineal feet of frontage. No such sign shall
be located except as provided for herein. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 91-O-2119, eff. 7-5-1991)
10-4-603: ALLOWABLE SIGN LOCATION AND SIZE:
A. For the purposes of determining allowable sign location and size, a building shall be considered as facing or abutting one street only.
B. For the purposes of determining allowable sign location and size, a building or business shall be considered as facing or abutting the street upon which
the main entrance or address of such building or business is located, unless such business shall be located within a courtyard with its main public
entrance fronting on the courtyard, in which case the business shall be considered as facing or abutting such courtyard. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-
1980)
10-4-604: BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, any business identification sign which does not comply with each and every regulation set forth in
this section shall be unlawful. Business identification signs shall comply with each and all of the following regulations:
A. Location Of Signs: Business identification signs for ground floor businesses shall be affixed to that portion of an exterior wall which abuts the business
or shall be located inside the space occupied by the business. Except as specifically provided in subsection B3 of this section, business identification
signs for ground floor businesses shall also be limited to those sides of the building directly fronting on a public street. No such sign shall face abutting
alleys or private property except as allowed pursuant to subsections B3 and D1 of this section. Inaddition, no such sign shall be located more than
twenty five feet (25') above grade.
B. Number And Area Of Signs For Ground Floor Businesses: The following business identification signs for ground floor businesses may be erected:
1. A ground floor business with street frontage may erect a business identification sign which is located on the same street face of the building as the
main entrance or address of the business and which does not exceed two (2) square feet in area for each one foot (1') of ground floor street frontage
that such business occupies within the building. However, in no event shall such sign exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
a. A ground floor business with street frontage may also have a business identification sign located on a street face of the building other than the
face that contains the main entrance or address of the business. Such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area for each one foot (1') of
ground floor street frontage that such business occupies within the building. However, in no event shall such sign exceed thirty (30) square feet in
area.
b. Businesses having their main entrance or address on or abutting a courtyard shall not be permitted to have a business identification sign except
as provided in section 10-4-608 of this article.
2. For each fifty feet (50') of ground floor street frontage that a business occupies along a face of a building, that business may have one business
identification sign in addition to the signs permitted by subsection B1 of this section. The sign may only list the business name, address, operating
hours, and other business locations. Such sign shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area.
3. A ground floor business with street frontage shall also be entitled to a business identification sign adjacent to an entrance of the business if such
entrance is from a public right of way and through a wall of the building not permitted to otherwise contain a business identification sign pursuant to
subsection A of this section. Such sign shall be below a height of eight feet (8') above grade. Such sign shall not be lighted or illuminated if it faces a
residential zone, including a residential zone that is located across an alley, parking lot, or other such visually open area from said additional sign.
Such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
4. A business located on a corner of two (2) public streets and having a public entrance located at such corner so that such public entrance directly
faces neither street shall be permitted one business identification sign at and parallel to such entrance in lieu of one business identification sign
located on a street face of the building.
5. In addition to the standards set forth in subsections B1 through B4 of this section, all illuminated signs defined as "window signs" in accordance with
the definition set forth in section 10-4-104 of this chapter and not otherwise exempted by subsection 10-4-301B of this chapter or subsection 10-4-
608C3 of this article shall meet the following requirements:
a. No more than two (2) illuminated window signs shall be permitted for a business with a ground floor street frontage of less than thirty feet (30') in
length.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 767/797
b. The top edge of any illuminated window sign less than five feet (5') behind a street frontage window shall be set at the fixed height of seven feet
(7') above sidewalk grade on all sites.
c. When used as a business identification sign as permitted by subsection B1 of this section, the total area of all illuminated window signs shall be
the lesser of: 1) twenty five percent (25%) of the area otherwise allowable for a given frontage; 2) ten percent (10%) of the glazed area of a given
frontage; or 3) fifteen (15) square feet.
d. The maximum character height within an illuminated five (5) square foot additional business identification sign for phone numbers, web sites, other
locations and hours of operation, as permitted by subsection B2 of this section, shall not exceed three inches (3").
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, if a proposed sign is the only illuminated window sign to be located at a business or
establishment and such sign does not exceed a maximum dimension of three feet (3'), a maximum area of three (3) square feet, contains two (2)
colors including white, and otherwise complies with the provisions of this section, including, without limitation, subsections B1 through B4 of this
section, then such sign may be approved by the city's planning official without architectural commission review, provided the approval of such sign
does not defeat the objectives of chapter 3, article 30 of this title and meets the criteria set forth in section 10-3-3010 of this chapter. The decision
of the planning official may be appealed to the architectural commission by filing an appeal petition with the city planning official no later than
fourteen (14) days after the official's decision. The petition shall be on a form designated by the city planning official.
C. Businesses Located On A Floor Other Than The Ground Floor: A business located above or below the ground floor of any building and not having its
main entrance or address on or abutting a courtyard shall be permitted one business identification sign, or a portion thereof, at each ground floor
entrance to such building. The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. The sign shall be shared by all such businesses desiring signage. For
those businesses not located on the ground floor and havingtheir main entrance or address on or abutting a courtyard, section 10-4-608 of this article
shall govern the permissible signage for the business.
D. Accommodation: Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to the
requirements contained in subsections A, B, and C of this section as follows:
1. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection A of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to allow a
sign to be located on a wall abutting an alley or private property and not abutting a public street, if the sign is affixed to that portion of an exterior wall
which abuts the business and the sign area does not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the area otherwise permissible if the wall abutted a public
street.
2. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection B1 of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to allow
ground floor businesses located on a corner lot adjacent to two (2) public streets to increase the size of a business identification sign permitted by
subsection B1 of this section and located on a nonentry street frontage if such sign does not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, the total
combined sign area of the signs does not exceed one hundred thirty (130) square feet, and the total combined sign area does not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the vertical surface area of that portion of the wall below twenty feet (20') in height and occupied by the frontage of the business.
3. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsections B2, B3, B4 and B5 of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign
accommodation to allow multiple business identification signs in place of the individual signs otherwise permitted by those subsections if the total
area of all business identification signs does not exceed the lessor of: a) one hundred (100) square feet, b) the total business sign area otherwise
permitted by this section, or c) ten percent (10%) of the vertical surface area of that portion of the wall below twenty feet (20') in height and occupied
by the frontage of the business. In addition to limitations a) through c) of this subsection D3, the maximum permissible area for all illuminated window
signs permitted by accommodation under this subsection D3 is fifteen (15) square feet for the first fifty feet (50') in length of street frontage, with
additional square feet permitted for each additional amount of street frontage thereafter up to a maximum of five (5) square feet for every additional
fifty feet (50') in length of street frontage, and the total sign area for all other business identification signs within any unified sign plan that includes
any illuminated window sign shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of what would otherwise be allowable by accommodation. For a business with a
ground floor street frontage of less than thirty feet (30') in length, the maximum number of illuminated window signs permitted at such business by
accommodation or otherwise is two (2).
4. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection C of this section, with respect to businesses located above or below the ground floor, the
architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to allow one freestanding or wall mounted business directory sign to be located at a
building's street or courtyard entry if the size of such business directory sign is not greater than fifty five (55) square feet.
5. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-4-305 and article 6.5 of this chapter, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to
allow projecting signs in place of the individual signs otherwise permitted by subsection B of this section if the total area of all business identification
signs does not exceed the lesser of: a) one hundred (100) square feet, b) the total business sign area otherwise permitted by this section, or c) ten
percent (10%) of the vertical surface area of that portion of the wall below twenty feet (20') in height and occupied by the frontage of the business.
However, no more than two (2) projecting signs may be erected for any business and no projecting sign may have a dimension greater than four feet
(4') nor an area greater than eight (8) square feet. Furthermore, there shall be at least eight feet (8') of clearance between the bottom of the
projecting sign and the grade below.
6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, with respect to ground floor tenants whose primary entrance is located on an alley, the
architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation to allow one projecting business identification sign adjacent to that entrance in addition to
any other signs authorized by this chapter. The projecting sign shall be located at least fourteen feet (14') above the grade of the adjacent alley and
no more than twenty five feet (25') above such grade. The sign shall project no more than four feet (4') from the side of the building to which it is
attached and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height as measured from the bottom of the sign. The sign shall not be illuminated after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.
If a projecting sign authorized by this subsection encroaches over the public right of way, then such sign shall require a location approval from the
city, as provided in section 10-4-657 of this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-
10-1996; Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-4-605: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
Except as otherwise specifically permitted in this chapter, building identification signs shall be subject to each and all of the following regulations:
A. Location Of Signs:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 768/797
1. No building identification sign shall be permitted below twenty five feet (25') in height above grade except for amonument sign otherwise permitted
by this chapter and one sign not to exceed five (5) square feet in area adjacent to any public entrance to a building that provides access to more than
one business. Any building identification sign adjacent to a public entrance shall have identical text as any sign erected pursuant to subsection A3 of
this section.
2. Except as permitted in subsections A3 and C of this section, building identification signs shall be restricted to those sides of a building directly
fronting on a public street. No such sign shall face an abutting alley or private property.
3. When a building equals or exceeds one hundred feet (100') in height above grade, in addition to the signs permitted by subsection A2 of this section,
one building identification sign shall be permitted on each side of the building not fronting on a public street. Any such sign shall be located above a
height of seventy five feet (75') above grade.
When a building is greater than forty five feet (45') in height but less than one hundred feet (100') in height, one building identification sign may be
erected on the side of a building not fronting on a public street in lieu of erecting an otherwise permitted building identification sign provided that such
sign is located above a height of twenty five feet (25') above grade, does not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the allowable size and area of the
otherwise permitted building identification sign, and does not face a residential property line that is located within two hundred feet (200') of the sign.
B. Number And Area Of Signs: The total building identification sign area on any one side of a building shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the vertical
surface area of such side, excluding penthouse walls. Except for the five (5) square foot business identification sign permitted in subsection A of this
section, no more than one building identification sign shall be permitted on any one side of a building and no more than four (4) such signs, in total,
shall be permitted on any building.
C. Accommodation: Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in subsection A1, A2, and B of this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign
accommodation to allow a greater number of building identification signs or to allow such signs to be located in areas other than those otherwise
permitted, provided that the signs located on any one side of a building do not exceed two percent (2%) of the vertical surface area of that side,
excluding penthouse walls. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-606: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-607: LIGHTED SIGNS:
Lighted or illuminated signs shall not be permitted, except for building and business identification signs. Such signs shall conform to the requirements of
section 10-4-315 of this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-608: COURTYARD SIGNS:
A. Each business having its main public entrance fronting on a courtyard shall be permitted one square foot of business identification sign area for each
one lineal foot of that store frontage to a maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet. Such signs shall be uniform and architecturally integrated with the
courtyard structure and appearance. Businesses fronting on a courtyard shall not be permitted any other business identification sign, except to the
extent provided for it in subsection 10-4-604C of this article.
B. In addition to those signs permitted by subsection A of this section, courtyards shall be permitted the following signs:
1. Ground or wall signs naming the courtyard and/or containing its address. The number and area of such signs shall be determined pursuant to
section 10-4-604 of this article, provided that for the purposes of determining the number and area of such signs, any part of the first story street
frontage which has been used to compute allowable business identification signs for any business contained in the courtyard shall be excluded from
the computation of the first story street frontage occupied by the courtyard; and
2. One ground sign or one wall sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area containing a directory of businesses located within the courtyard.
Courtyards containing entries separated by a portion of the building, or by another building, shall be permitted one such ground sign or wall sign per
entry to the courtyard.
C. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this
chapter to allow a courtyard sign for an individual business to exceed eight (8) square feet in area provided that:
1. The total area of business identification signs for a business which fronts on the courtyard does not exceed one and one-quarter (11/4) square feet
for each linear foot of courtyard frontage,
2. The total area of building identification signs along any one wall of a courtyard does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of a square foot for each linear foot of
that wall, and
3. If the courtyard sign is an illuminated window sign that is visible from and less than fifty feet (50') from any publicstreet, alley, sidewalk or other public
right of way, such illuminated window sign shall, in addition to the requirements of subsections C1 and C2 of this section, comply with the limitations
for comparable street front signs as set forth in section 10-4-604B5 of this article.
If the courtyard sign is an illuminated sign that is not visible from or is more than fifty feet (50') from any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public
right of way then, notwithstanding any provision of subsection 10-4-604B5 of this article to the contrary, it shall be exempt from the requirements of
said subsection 10-4-604B5 of this article, but shall still comply with subsections C1 and C2 of this section.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 769/797
D. Notwithstanding the prohibition against moving signs set forth in section 10-4-302D of this chapter, flags and banners may be permitted in a courtyard if
the flags or banners are at least twenty feet (20'), measured horizontally, from the nearest public right of way, the flags or banners are used solely to
identify the courtyard and/or its seasonal activities, and the flags or banners do not identify any specific business, the product of any business or any
event not specifically associated with the activities of the courtyard. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; Ord. 96-O-
2268, eff. 10-18-1996; Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-4-609: SIGNS INSIDE BUILDINGS:
Signs located inside a building or structure and not otherwise excluded from the definition of a sign shall not obstruct more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the view or light through an opening of a building, such as a window or showcase. Such signs shall not be calculated as part of the otherwise allowable
sign area or number and, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, shall not be subject to approval as to design by the architectural commission
and only if limited to the following:
A. Where merchandise is physically displayed behind shop windows or otherwise in view of the public from the street, the price of each separate item of
such merchandise may be indicated in letters or numbers not exceeding three-fourth inch (3/4") in height attached or in near proximity to the displayed
item.
B. Where goods, services, rentals, or sales are not on physical display to the public, information concerning such goods, services, rentals, or sales may be
indicated by one sign facing each street frontage, not to exceed eighteen inches (18") by twenty four inches (24") in letters, and numbers not to exceed
three-fourths inch (3/4") in height. Such signs shall not be affixed to the window.
C. While a sale of goods or services is being conducted or while a store is being relocated, temporary "sale", "coming soon", "closing out sale", or similar
signs may be displayed facing eachstreet frontage provided the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the area
permitted for a business identification sign pursuant to section 10-4-604 of this article, no letter or number exceeds twelve inches (12") in height, and
no prices are advertised. A permit for such signs shall be obtained, and any such signs shall not be maintained for more than thirty (30) days in any
consecutive one hundred eighty (180) day period.
D. Announcements, such as, but not limited to, available parking, acceptability of credit cards, trade association memberships, and the like, with letters or
numbers not exceeding three-fourths inch (3/4") in height, may be displayed. Such announcements shall be limited to a total one hundred fifty (150)
square inches facing each street frontage. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 00-O-2345, eff. 5-19-2000)
10-4-610: GROUND SIGNS:
A. General: Notwithstanding the provisions of the definition of "area of sign", section 10-4-104 of this chapter, pole or ground signs shall not exceed fifty
five (55) square feet in area. Such signs shall be restricted to the street that the business or building represented by such sign has as its main entrance
or address. Not more than one pole or ground sign shall be maintained on any one site area, unless such site area is abutted by more than one of the
streets designated in this section, in which case one such sign may be maintained on each street frontage. A pole or ground sign with more than one
face shall be considered as a single sign.
B. Height: The maximum height of any portion of a pole or ground sign, including its supporting member or members, shall be twenty feet (20'). Pole or
ground signs shall also conform to the requirements for business identifications signs and building identification signs where such requirements are
applicable.
C. General Restrictions: In addition to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the following restrictions shall apply:
1. No pole or ground sign shall be erected except on commercially zoned sites along La Cienega Boulevard, Robertson Boulevard, Doheny Drive,
Olympic Boulevard, Wilshire Boulevard, and Sunset Boulevard. This restriction shall not apply to courtyards, gas stations, or parking facilities.
2. Visual interference, such as awnings, marquees, or street trees which interfere with the view of the site of a building or business, shall not be
grounds to qualify a building or business for a ground or pole sign.
D. Sign Accommodation: Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in this section, the architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation
pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to allow aground sign to be located on streets other than those set forth in subsection C of this section.
E. Combining Directories: Such ground signs as permitted under subsections 10-4-604D4 and 10-4-608B of this article, for business directories and
courtyard directories, may be combined within a single sign structure provided the total sign area does not exceed fifty five (55) square feet. (Ord. 80-
O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-611: PROHIBITED LOCATIONS:
Except as provided in article 6.5 of this chapter regarding parking facilities signs, no sign shall be located so as to face in the direction of and be visible to
property in a residential zone when such sign would be less than two hundred feet (200') from such residential property, unless such sign faces and is
parallel to a street. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-612: CONSTRUCTION SIGNS AND CONSTRUCTION BARRICADE SIGNS:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 770/797
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, the term "construction barricades" shall include both temporary construction barricades constructed of wood
or other material and construction fences.
B. Construction Signs: Construction signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area except that such signs may contain up to fifty five (55) square feet
in area when the extra footage is necessary to display specific health, safety and welfare information including, but not limited to, construction purposes
such as seismic safety upgrade, historic preservation and asbestos removal. Renderings of the project under construction may be included on
construction signs. Not more than one such sign shall be permitted on any one site, and any such sign shall face the street upon which said site fronts.
If said site fronts on more than one street, one such sign shall be permitted on each street frontage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where construction
signs are placed on construction barricades covering frontages exceeding seventy five feet (75'), one construction sign may be placed every fifty feet
(50') along the construction barricade.
C. Construction Barricade Signs:
1. Emergency Contact Sign: One sign, not larger than one square foot in area, shall be placed on or adjacent to the gateway through the construction
barricade stating the name and telephone number of the person to be contacted in case of an emergency.
2. Permitted Signs: The following signage may be painted or placed on construction barricades. The total area of suchsignage, including the
emergency contact sign required by subsection C1 of this section, shall not exceed sixty two (62) square feet.
a. Large Business Identification Sign: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when a business remains open while remodeling its
premises, and a construction barricade is required, one large business identification sign may be placed on the construction barricade adjacent to
the entrance to the business. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and may contain only the name of the business, a
company logo and the fact that the business remains open while remodeling. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the business identification sign may
also contain an advertisement for a new business coming to the site. An advertisement for a new business may contain only the name of the
business, a company logo and the opening date of the business. If a large business identification sign contains an advertisement for a new
business, no real estate sign shall be allowed in front of the building, lot or parcel, or placed on the construction barricade.
b. Small Business Identification Signs: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, small additional business identification signs may be
placed on the sides of the construction barricades, perpendicular to the street facade for the convenience of pedestrian traffic. Such signs may
state only the name of the business and the fact that it is open for business while remodeling. One sign of two (2) square feet in area shall be
permitted on each side of the construction barricade facing a sidewalk or other pedestrian access through the barricade.
c. Construction Sign: One construction sign may be placed on a construction barricade in accordance with the regulations set forth in subsection A of
this section.
d. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs may be placed on a construction barricade in accordance with the regulations set forth in section 10-4-602 of
this article.
3. Murals: Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, murals or similar displays may be painted on a construction barricade subject to the
approval of the architectural commission.
4. Posters Prohibited: No posters shall be permitted on a construction barricade. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 91-O-2119, eff. 7-5-1991;
Ord. 96-O-2268, eff. 10-18-1996)
10-4-613: ATTRACTION AND MENU BOARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful for a restaurant to have more than one (1) menu board for each street frontage upon which such restaurant abuts. One (1) attraction
board shall be permitted per street frontage. No such attraction board may exceed twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18") in area, nor shall it be
considered as part of the total sign area permitted. Lettering on attraction boards shall not exceed one inch (1") in height.
B. A nightclub or cabaret shall be permitted one (1) attraction board for each street frontage upon which such nightclub or cabaret abuts. Such signs shall
not exceed five (5) square feet in area and shall not be considered as part of the total sign area permitted. Copy shall be limited to coming and current
entertainment only. Rates and prices shall be prohibited. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-614: PUSHCARTS:
A. Each pushcart or other nonmotorized conveyance used for the sale of merchandise or services shall be permitted a maximum of two (2) business
identification signs, each not to exceed two (2) square feet in area. No more than one (1) such sign shall be allowed on any one (1) side of the pushcart
or other nonmotorized conveyance, nor shall any such sign be located on any umbrella attached to or used in connection with the pushcart or other
nonmotorized conveyance.
B. In lieu of those signs permitted pursuant to subsection A of this section, a maximum of two (2) business identification signs shall be permitted to be
located upon any umbrella attached to or used in connection with a pushcart or nonmotorized conveyance used for the sale of merchandise or services
provided the letters and numbers used on such signs shall not exceed four inches (4") in height. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-615: TEMPORARY SIGNAGE DURING SUBWAY CONSTRUCTION:
Notwithstanding any other restriction contained in this chapter, an additional sign or signs may be placed or affixed on commercially zoned property
fronting Wilshire Boulevard while the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority constructs the Westside Purple Line Extension subway
project in the City, provided that construction obstructs the visibility of a substantial portion of the property or building entrance and the requesting business
is otherwise permitted to display business identification signage pursuant to section 10-4-604 or 10-4-608 of this chapter. Such signage shall be subject to
approval by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee provided that the signage satisfies the requirements of this section and
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 771/797
comports with design guidelines approved by the City Council. Any sign placed or affixed pursuant to this section shall immediately be removed at such
time when construction no longer obstructs the visibility of the property or building entrance. (Ord. 17-O-2731, eff. 5-21-2017)
Article 6.5. Parking Facilities
10-4-650: APPLICATION OF THIS ARTICLE:
Except as specifically provided in section 10-4-651 of this article, the regulations set forth in this article shall govern signage related to parking facilities in
nonresidential zones. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-651: PARKING LOTS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
In a residential zone which allows parking as a primary use of a property, if a parking lot or structure or other approved parking use is the primary use of
the property, then one wall sign or one ground sign on each street frontage of the property shall be permitted. The area of each sign shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet for each sign face. Such sign shall be limited to the name of the parking facility owner or operator, validation information, a City
approved "park and shop logo", directional information to a parking entrance on the site, and any other information required by law. In order to determine
sign area forthe purposes of this section, a multi-faced sign shall be subject to the provisions of section 10-4-610 of this chapter. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-
10-1996)
10-4-652: PARKING ENTRANCE IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
One sign that does not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area on each face may be erected adjacent to each garage entrance from a public street or alley
for the purpose of identifying the garage entrance. Except as provided in this section, the sign shall be limited to the name of the parking facility owner or
operator, validation information, a City approved "park and shop" logo, directional information to a parking entrance on the site, a directory of no more than
five (5) ground floor tenants served by the parking, and any other information required by law. The sign may be either a wall sign, ground sign or projecting
sign. The highest element of such a sign shall not exceed twenty feet (20') above the level of the adjacent street.
The Architectural Commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to authorize a sign permitted by this section to vary
from the City's parking sign guidelines and to authorize additional tenants and tenants above the ground floor to be listed on the sign.
A. Alley Signage: The City Council may authorize the placement of a sign identifying an alley if the Council finds that such sign is necessary to preserve
the safe flow of traffic along a street or alley by helping vehicle drivers locate an off street garage entrance or approved off street valet area. Such sign
shall resemble a street name sign and if such sign is located in the public right of way, then such sign shall require a location approval from the city, as
provided in section 10-4-657 of this article. Prior to any approval of such sign by the city council, the planning commission shall review the application
for the sign and shall make a recommendation to the city council regarding the placement of the sign and the name used to identify the alley.
B. Public Right Of Way: In addition to any other sign permitted by this section, one ground sign that identifies a parking entrance, does not exceed twelve
(12) square feet in area and meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be erected in the public right of way adjacent to a parking facility provided that
the owner of the sign obtains a location approval from the city to maintain the sign in the public right of way, as provided in section 10-4-657 of this
article.
The architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to authorize a sign permitted by this subsection to
vary from the city's parking sign guidelines. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-653: GROUND DIRECTIONAL SIGN:
In addition to any other sign permitted by this article, one ground sign that meets the city's parking guidelines may be erected along each street frontage of
a building to direct traffic from a street to a garage entrance or valet parking station that is on an alley or otherwise not readily visible from the street. The
face of such sign shall not exceed one and one-half feet (1.5') in width and two feet (2') in height and the sign shall not exceed fifty inches (50") in height. If
the sign is placed in the public right of way, then such sign shall require a location approval from the city, as provided in section 10-4-657 of this article.
(Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-654: BUILDING DIRECTIONAL SIGNS:
One sign that meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be placed over each driveway ramp of a parking garage indicating the proper use or direction of
such ramp. The lettering of any sign erected pursuant to this section shall not exceed eighteen inches (18") in height.
The architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to authorize additional directional signs in a parking
garage and to authorize signs permitted by this section to vary from the city's parking sign guidelines. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-655: INFORMATIONAL PARKING SIGNS:
One movable ground sign or wall sign that meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be placed within a parking facility and outside of the public right of
way for the purpose of identifying parking rates or indicating that a parking lot is full. The face of the sign shall not exceed one and one-half feet (1.5') in
width and two feet (2') in height and a ground sign shall not exceed fifty inches (50") in height.
Additionally, two (2) signs which meet the city's parking sign guidelines shall be permitted in each parking facility for the purpose of providing information
regarding the parking facility operation to patrons of the parking facility. Such information may include, but is not limited to, warnings concerning potential
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 772/797
tire damage, disabled access information, and signs indicating the location of ticket machines or payment booths. Each face of these signs shall not
exceed four (4) square feet in area and a ground sign shall not exceed fifty inches (50") in height.
The architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to authorize signs permitted by this section to vary from
the city's parking sign guidelines and to exceed four (4) square feet in area. However, in no event shall the commission authorize the face of a sign
permitted by this section to exceed ten (10) square feet in area. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-656: VALET PARKING SIGNS:
In conjunction with each valet parking station approved by the traffic and parking commission, one movable ground sign that identifies the availability of
valet parking and meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be located in the public right of way. The face of the sign shall not exceed two feet (2') in
width and two and one-half feet (2.5') in height and the sign shall not exceed fifty inches (50") in height. Prior to placement of the sign in the public right of
way, the sign owner must obtain a location approval from the city as provided in section 10-4-657 of this article. The sign shall only be visible from the
public right of way during hours that the valet parking is in operation.
A. Frontage On Two Streets: In addition to any sign otherwise authorized by this section, if a business has frontage on two (2) streets, then an additional
movable ground sign that meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be placed along the second street frontage to direct drivers to valet parking. The
second valet parking sign shall be subject to the same restrictions set forth in this subsection and applicable to the first valet parking sign.
B. Parking Meter Signs: In addition to any sign otherwise authorized by this section, an additional sign that identifies the availability of valet parking and
meets the city's parking sign guidelines may be placed on a parking meter located in the valet parking zone authorized by the traffic and parking
commission. The sign shall not exceed one square foot in area.
C. Sign Accommodation: The architectural commission may grant a sign accommodation pursuant to article 9 of this chapter to authorize signs permitted
by this section to vary from the city's parking sign guidelines. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-657: LOCATION APPROVAL:
A location approval shall be required for any sign that encroaches into the public right of way. A location approval shall be issued only if the city engineer
determines that the sign will not interfere with safe pedestrian and vehicular travel in the right of way. As a condition of granting the location approval, the
city may require the owner of the sign and the owner of the property benefited by the sign to enter into a recordable covenant holding the city harmless
and indemnifying the city from any damages that may result from the placement of the sign in the public right of way. Additionally, if required by the city, the
applicant shall maintain a bond, or equivalent security satisfactory to the city, and insurance for the period during which the approval is effective. The city
shall require the hold harmless and indemnification agreement, the security, and the insurance as the city determines is necessary to protect its interests.
A. Security: The security, if required, shall be in an amountestablished by the city engineer and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. The security shall
be provided for the purpose of securing the removal of the sign and the repair of the public right of way in the event that the applicant fails to comply
with the conditions of the location approval or fails to remove the sign and repair the public right of way upon termination of the business or activity
identified by the sign.
B. Insurance: The insurance, if required, shall be in an amount satisfactory to the city's risk manager and shall comply with the requirements set forth in
title 3, chapter 4 of this code. The insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and shall insure the applicant and the city against injuries to
persons or property as a result of the placement of the sign in the public right of way. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-658: ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, signs governed by the city's parking sign guidelines and erected in compliance with those guidelines shall
be exempt from the architectural review requirements of this code. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-659: PARKING SIGN GUIDELINES:
The architectural commission shall adopt parking sign guidelines for the purposes of this article and such guidelines shall remain on file in the department
of planning and community development. The director of planning and community development shall consult, as necessary, with the city engineer
concerning the application of the guidelines. (Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996; amd. Ord. 09-O-2576, eff. 1-15-2010)
Article 7. Construction
10-4-701: MATERIALS OF SIGN CONSTRUCTION:
A. Commercial And Industrial Zones: In commercial and industrial zones, all signs and their supporting members shall be constructed of incombustible
materials, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. Multiple-Family Residential Zones: In multiple-family residential zones, all signs and their supporting members shall be constructed of incombustible
materials, unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 773/797
C. Single-Family Residential Zones: In single-family residential zones, signs and their supporting members may be constructed of any material, subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
D. Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs may be constructed of compressed wood particle board or other material of similar or greater fire resistivity.
E. Construction Signs: Construction signs may be constructed of compressed wood particle board or other material of similar fire resistivity.
F. Internally Illuminated Signs: Internally illuminated signs may be faced with plastics which comply with the Building Code and the Electrical Code.
G. Glass: Glass in all signs shall be shatter resistant.
H. Signs Within Buildings: Signs located completely inside a building or structure may be of any material not prohibited by other requirements of this code.
I. Wood: Wood in contact with the ground shall be foundation grade redwood, foundation grade cedar, all heartwood cypress, or any species of wood
which has been pressure treated with an approved preservative. Trim and backing strips may be of wood.
J. Wall Signs: Wall signs with an area of twenty (20) square feet or less may be constructed of wood. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-702: CONSTRUCTION OF SIGNS:
Signs shall be constructed as building elements or structures in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-703: ELECTRICAL:
All electrical installations in connection with any sign shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
Article 8. Special Signs
10-4-801: THEATERS:
A. Theaters shall not be subject to the limitations of section 10-4-305 of this chapter.
B. For the purposes of a theater, a product or service sign may include the name of the production, the names of the people associated with the production
(such as stars, producer, director, etc.) the type of performance (such as premiere, reserved, seat, etc.), the duration of the production, and the time of
the performances.
C. If no production is in progress, a product or service sign may include the name of the next production and the date such production shall be open to the
public. Such sign shall not be installed or maintained more than fourteen (14) days prior to the date when such production shall be open to the public.
D. For the purposes of this section, the term "theater" shall include multiple theaters contained in the same building or structure being operated as a single
business. In such circumstances, the multiple theaters shall be deemed to be only one "theater". (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-802: HOTELS IN MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES:
A. Hotels in multiple-family residential zones shall be permitted building or business identification signs not to exceed twenty (20) square feet for each sign
face. For the purpose of determining sign area for this section only, a multi-faced sign shall be subject to the provisions of section 10-4-610 of this
chapter.
B. Hotels in multiple-family residential zones fronting on La Cienega Boulevard, Robertson Boulevard, Doheny Drive, Olympic Boulevard, or Wilshire
Boulevard shall not be subject to the limitations of section 10-4-508 of this chapter. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-803: PARKING FACILITIES:
(Rep. by Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-804: GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS:
A. Business Identification Signs: Business identification signs for gasoline service stations shall be limited to:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 774/797
1. One identification ground sign which shall not exceed thirty six (36) square feet in area on each face and height not to exceed twenty feet (20'). A
ground sign shall be limited to two (2) faces; and
2. One identification wall sign which shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area.
B. Price Signs: One price sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area shall be posted in such a fashion as to be clearly visible from any street adjacent
to such gasoline service station. Such sign shall clearly and plainly indicate the actual price per gallon, including all taxes, at which each grade of
gasoline or other motor fuel is currently being offered for sale or sold. Such sign shall not exceed a width of three feet (3') nor a height of four feet (4')
and shall not be illuminated. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-805: AUTOMOBILE AGENCIES:
In addition to the signs allowed in this chapter, when new and used cars are being sold by the same owner or operator from separate areas of a single
business location, the used car sale operation shall be allowed one additional sign indicating "Used Cars", such sign not to exceed twenty (20) square feet
in area. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980)
10-4-806: YARD SIGNS:
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the following regulations shall apply to yard signs:
A. Purpose: Yard signs tend to be impermanent, flimsy, and vulnerable to the elements. Because of the tendency of yard signs to proliferate, creating litter,
visual blight, and traffic safety hazards, the council hereby adopts the regulations set forth in this section. It is the purpose and intent of the council to
provide minimal regulations regarding the posting, display, maintenance, and removal of yard signs in order to protect the first amendment rights of
persons posting yard signs on their property while protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the general public and maintaining the aesthetic
qualities of the city.
B. General Provisions: The general provisions of article 1 of this chapter and the provisions of sections 10-4-302 through 10-4-309, 10-4-314, 10-4-315,
10-4-409, 10-4-509, and 10-4-611, of this chapter shall apply to yard signs. In addition, the following restrictions shall apply solely to yard signs:
1. No person shall maintain more than five (5) yard signs, measuring a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square inches in area, on any one lot or site
area, whichever is larger, in any single-family or multi-family residential zone. Two (2) signs placed back to back shall count as one sign.
2. No person shall maintain more than three (3) yard signs, each measuring a maximum of five (5) square feet in area, on any one lot or site area,
whichever is larger, in any nonresidential zone. Two (2) signs placed back to back shall count as one sign.
3. Freestanding signs shall not exceed four feet (4') in height from the ground.
C. Voluntary Sign Approval And Distribution Permit:
1. Voluntary Sign Approval: Any person who wishes to post yard signs in the city may, at his or her option, bring a sign or signs to the building officer to
review the signs for conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Any person wishing to distribute more than ten (10) yard signsto property owners in the city must first apply for and receive a permit from the building
official. The permit application shall contain an actual sized prototype of the sign and the name, address, and telephone number where the person
may be reached by the building official or police chief or the respective deputies responsible for the enforcement of these provisions. The permit
application shall be approved unless the sign does not meet the size requirements set forth in this section. The decision to grant or deny a permit
shall be made within four (4) hours after submission of the application. One permit shall govern all signs of each type distributed to property owners
in the city.
D. Maintenance And Removal:
1. Yard signs must be maintained, on a continuing basis, in good repair, and must be securely attached or grounded so that the yard sign will not be
dislodged by the elements. Yard signs need not comply with the structural requirements pertaining to more permanent signs.
2. Yard signs specifically advertising or pertaining to an event, such as an election, must be removed within ten (10) days immediately following the
event.
E. Violations: The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter regulating yard signs which may result in the conditions described in either section 3479
or 3480 of the California Civil Code is hereby deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by the city in the manner prescribed by law. If the
building official, the police chief, or their authorized representatives, after inspection, find that a yard sign has been posted at a location which is in
violation of this section or that a yard sign has become unsafe, insecure, or is a menace to the public safety, such official shall take action as follows:
1. If the yard sign has been posted on private property or on property owned by another public agency, such official of the city shall give forty eight (48)
hours' written or oral notice to the property owner or tenant on whose property the sign has been posted, to remove, relocate, repair, or alter such
sign.
2. If the sign has not been removed, relocated, repaired, or altered within such period of time, or such other further time as agreed to by such official of
the city, the official may remove such sign, and the property owner or tenant responsible for the sign shall be liable to the city for the city's actual
costs of removal. Such costs of removal shall be deemed a civil debt due and owing the city which may be collected by appropriate legal means.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a city official may summarily and without notice remove any yard sign posted on property owned or
controlled by the city. In addition, a city official may summarily remove any yard sign which poses an immediate danger to persons or property. In
addition, any yard sign, regardless of where posted, left posted after the tenth dayfollowing the event to which such sign specifically relates shall be
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 775/797
deemed abandoned by its owner and may be summarily removed without notice. (Ord. 80-O-1775, eff. 12-5-1980; amd. Ord. 04-O-2457, eff. 11-30-
2004; Ord. 05-O-2459, eff. 1-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2476, eff. 7-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-2480, eff. 9-2-2005)
10-4-807: RETAIL BUILDINGS TEMPORARILY CLOSED TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC:
Notwithstanding any other restriction contained in this chapter, prior to the opening to the general public of a retail building larger than fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet, or prior to the reopening to the general public of such a building if a substantial portion of the building is closed to the general public,
flags or banners may be erected announcing the opening or reopening of the building. The flags or banners may also identify the principal occupant of the
building. Such flags or banners shall be removed no more than three (3) months after they are erected or within fourteen (14) days after the opening or
reopening, whichever occurs first.
Any flag or banner erected pursuant to this section shall be considered a sign for the purposes of chapter 3, article 30 of this title and therefore shall
require architectural review as a sign pursuant to that article.
In addition to the above requirements, any flag or banner erected pursuant to this section shall meet the following requirements:
A. The flag or banner shall be mounted on a wall of the building which fronts directly on a public street and does not front directly on an alley; and
B. If the flag or banner exceeds forty (40) square feet in area, the flag or banner shall not be erected except pursuant to a building permit issued pursuant
to title 9 of this code. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-808: SIGNS REQUIRED BY STATE OR FEDERAL LAW:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the erection of any sign required by state or federal law. Examples of such signs include, but are not limited to, signs
indicating whether smoking is permitted within a building and signs warning of the presence of certain designated substances. Signs issued by a
governmental agency for the purpose of aiding compliance with state or federal law shall not require architectural review pursuant to this code. (Ord. 96-O-
2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
Article 9. Accommodations To Sign Regulations
10-4-901: ACCOMMODATIONS THAT MAY BE GRANTED:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon application by a property owner pursuant to this article, sign accommodations to the following
sign regulations may be granted as provided within this chapter:
1. Section 10-4-209 regarding nonconforming signs;
2. Section 10-4-306 regarding signs on marquees and awnings;
3. Section 10-4-310 regarding context of signs;
4. Section 10-4-313 regarding the color of signs;
5. Section 10-4-319 regarding murals and similar environmental graphics;
6. Section 10-4-512 regarding nonconforming and conditional uses;
7. Section 10-4-604 regarding business identification signs;
8. Section 10-4-605 regarding building identification signs;
9. Section 10-4-608 regarding courtyard signs;
10. Section 10-4-610 regarding ground signs;
11. Section 10-4-652 regarding parking entrance identification signs;
12. Section 10-4-653 regarding ground directional signs;
13. Section 10-4-654 regarding building directional signs;
14. Section 10-4-655 regarding informational parking signs; and
15. Section 10-4-656 regarding valet parking signs. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993; amd. Ord. 96-O-2257, eff. 5-10-1996)
10-4-902: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for a sign accommodation shall be made on a form approved by the director of planning and community development and shall be
accompanied by a proposed unified sign plan, as described below:
A. Building Identification Signs: An application for an accommodation that relates to a sign which identifies a building shall be accompanied by a proposed
unified sign plan that shows all signs that will identify the building or that concern the operations of the buildings.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 776/797
B. Business Identification Signs: An application for an accommodation that relates to a sign which identifies a business shall be accompanied by a
proposed unified sign plan that shows all signs that will identify the business or that concern theoperations of that business.
C. Multiple Business Identification Signs: An application for an accommodation that relates to a business identification sign that identifies multiple
businesses within a building or courtyard shall be accompanied by a proposed unified sign plan that shows all signs that identify, or concern the
operations of, each business represented on the sign and all signs that identify the building or the courtyard. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-903: APPROVAL AUTHORITY:
The approval authority for a sign accommodation shall be the architectural commission. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-904: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Noticing shall be completed in accordance with chapter 3, article 2.5 of this title and the city's public notice guidelines. (Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-4-905: STANDARD OF REVIEW FOR SIGN ACCOMMODATIONS:
The architectural commission shall approve a sign accommodation application if the commission finds that the unified sign plan submitted with such
application utilizes colors, materials and other design features which are architecturally compatible with the subject building and the commission finds that:
A. The unified sign plan is in conformity with good taste and good design and, in general, contributes to the image of Beverly Hills as a place of beauty,
spaciousness, balance, taste, fitness, broad vistas, and high quality;
B. The unified sign plan indicates the manner in which the signs will be reasonably protected against external and internal noise, vibrations and other
factors which may tend to make the environment less desirable;
C. The proposed signs are not, in their design and appearance, of inferior quality such as to cause the nature of the local environment to materially
depreciate in appearance and value; and
D. The proposed signs are in harmony with proposed development in the area of the subject property, with the general plan for Beverly Hills, and with any
specific plans governing the subject site.
The architectural commission may impose such conditions on anaccommodation approval as it deems necessary to make the findings required by this
section or as it deems appropriate to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
10-4-906: APPEALS FROM DECISIONS:
The applicant or any person aggrieved by any decision regarding a sign accommodation may appeal such decision to the city council as provided in title 1,
chapter 4, article 1 of this code. (Ord. 93-O-2181, eff. 11-19-1993)
Chapter 5
MINING AND EXTRACTION
Article 1. Mines
10-5-101: MINING PROHIBITED:
No person shall open or operate any mine in the city, nor shall any person remove any minerals from any property in the city, nor shall any person enter
the subsurface of the city from any point inside or outside the city for the purpose of removing any minerals from any property in the city; except that a
person who complies with the requirements of article 2 of this chapter may remove water from property within the city, and a person who complies with the
requirements of article 3 of this chapter may remove oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances from property within the city.
For the purposes of this chapter, "mine" includes all mineral bearing properties of whatever bind or character, whether underground, quarry, pit, well,
spring, or other source from which any mineral substance is or may be obtained. "Mineral", for the purposes of this chapter, includes all mineral products,
both metallic and nonmetallic, solid, liquid, or gaseous, and mineral waters of whatever kind or character. (Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967)
Article 2. Water Wells
10-5-201: WATER DEVELOPMENT; PERMIT REQUIRED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 777/797
No person shall proceed with the drilling or digging of any well, cistern, pit, or reservoir for the development or production of water, except for the collection
of rainwater, on the surface of the owner's property without first obtaining approval of the council so to do.
Any person desiring to obtain such permit shall file an application therefor setting forth the following information:
A. The location;
B. The name of the owner;
C. Details of the proposal as to depth, extent, method, equipment, proposed use, and the claimed necessity therefor; and
D. The opinion of recognized authorities and experts in the field of water development that such development will in no way interfere with or detract from
the development of water by the public works division of the available supply of such water, that the discharge and ultimate disposal of the water
proposed to be developed will in no way injure, damage, or overtax existing sewers and facilities for the disposal of water from the city, and that no
expense need be incurred by the city in connection with either the proposed development of water or the disposal thereof.
Upon the receipt of any such application, the council shall set the matter for a regular hearing within not less than one week nor more than four (4)
weeks, which hearing may be continued from time to time within the discretion of the council, but action thereon after an investigation by the council
shall be taken within six (6) months after the receipt of any such application.
The decision of the council thereon after such investigation and hearing shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967)
10-5-202: WATER DEVELOPMENT; APPLICATION FEE:
The filing of any application referred to in section 10-5-201 of this chapter shall be accompanied by the payment of the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) to the city to defray the costs of investigation and hearing by the council concerning the matters set forth in the application. (Ord. 1258, eff. 1-
5-1967)
10-5-203: WATER DEVELOPMENT; CONNECTING WITH CITY WATER SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It hereby is declared to be unlawful for any person to connect any water well or any pipe connected with such water well to the city's water system, or any
portion thereof, or to any water pipe connected with the city's water system without a permit so to do from the public services division. Such permit shall be
in addition to any plumbing permit required from the building division. No such permit shall be granted except upon a showing satisfactory to the public
services division and the council that such connection will in no way endanger the water supply of the city, or any portion thereof, and will in no way
endanger the health of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 1258, eff. 1-5-1967)
Article 3. Oil Wells
10-5-301: PURPOSES OF ARTICLE:
A. The purposes of the provisions of this article are to prohibit the drilling either on the surface or in the subsurface of the city for oil and gas, to prohibit the
production of oil and gas, and to prohibit the storing and transportation of oil and gas in the city, except as permitted by the provisions of this article.
B. The council hereby declares that it is also the object and purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and controls
for the drilling for and production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances within and under the city. Such limitations, safeguards, and controls are
found to be necessary in order to protect the citizens, their property rights, and the general public of the city and to put into effect practices which will
provide a plan for the orderly drilling for and production of oil and gas, which substances are important to the national economy. Such orderly
development is necessary and will protect the surface uses and the value and character of residential, commercial, and other real property in the city
as such uses are set forth in and regulated by chapter 3 of this title. The council recognizes that many of its citizens and property owners have made
substantial investments in real property. Therefore, in order to protect such citizens and their property rights, to protect the owners of mineral rights,
and to provide for the orderly exploration, development, and production of oil and gas, it is necessary to regulate the drilling for and production of oil
and gas in the manner set forth in this article.
C. The council hereby finds and determines that the uncontrolled drilling in the subsurface for oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, and the
uncontrolled production thereof, would be detrimental to the general welfare of the citizens and residents of the city and detrimental to the general
public peace, health, safety, comfort, convenience, and prosperity. The council finds and determines that subsurface areas within the city may be
explored for oil and gas, and, if such substances are found, they may be produced by directional or slant drilling methods from surface locations
outside the city. Such operations must comply with the regulations of the city or county having local control of the drill site area, as well as the
limitations and regulations set forth in this article to protect the citizens and residents of the city from odors, noise, dust, and the spreading of oil, dirt,
and debris upon the public streets of the city, and to protect buildings and structures from vibrations, sinking, or other damages caused by the drilling
for and production of oil and gas in an unrestricted location and manner.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall drill, produce, or extract oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from any surface location
in the city. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979; amd. Ord. 11-O-2603, eff. 1-25-2011; Ord. 11-O-2614, eff. 11-18-2011)
10-5-302: DRILLING AND PRODUCTION RESTRICTED:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 778/797
A. No person shall drill for or produce oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances from any surface location within the city, including any controlled drill site,
whether the subsurface operation from such well is within or outside the city except that production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances may
continue from controlled drill site no. 1, as defined in subsection 10-5-306B of this chapter, until the date specified in section 10-5-323 of this chapter for
cessation of such activity.
B. The council hereby finds and determines that it is, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person hereafter to erect any
derrick or drilling equipment and hereafter to drill a well in order to produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from drill sites that are located in
the city.
C. No person shall drill for or produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from the subsurface of the city from drill sites located outside the city,
except as permitted by this article.
D. The council hereby finds and determines that it is, and it is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance for any person hereafter to drill an oil
well or produce oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances by directional or slant drilling methods from surface locations or sites outside the city which
said wells pass through or bottom in the subsurface of any property located within the city, except in the manner provided in this article.
E. No person shall drill or redrill or deepen below its present bottom any oil well for the production of or exploration for oil, gas or other hydrocarbon
substances where any portion of the surface operation or the subsurface operation of such well is located within the city, except as authorized by this
article. (Ord. 11-O-2614, eff. 11-18-2011)
10-5-303: DEFINITIONS:
ACIDIZING: Any well stimulation treatment that uses, in whole or in part, the application of one or more acids, at any pressure, to an underground geologic
formation with the intent to cause or enhance the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from a well. Acidizing may be used in conjunction
with hydraulic fracturing or any other well stimulation treatment. Acidizing may include, but is not limited to, processes known as acid fracturing and acid
matrix stimulation. Acidizing does not include standard maintenance work or other routine activities that do not affect the integrity of the well or the natural
porosity or permeability of an underground geologic formation.
APPLICANT: Any person who seeks a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
CONTROLLED DRILL SITE: A surface location in the city set forth in section 10-5-306 of this chapter upon which surface operations incident to oil well
drilling or deepening and the production of oil and gas and other hydrocarbon substances from beneath the surface of real property, within or outside the
city, may be permitted under the terms and conditions of this article and as prescribed by the terms and conditions of the permit of the council.
DEVELOPED AREA: That subsurface area under real property in the city under which there are proven oil and gas reserves and on which and from which
real property there is a currently producing oil and gas or oil or gas well being operated and produced under and by virtue of an oil and gas lease in full
force and effect and which lease was executed and delivered prior to February 20, 1968, in which subsurface area the drilling for and production of oil and
gas is permitted as provided in this article. Such area shall contain not less than one acre.
DIRECTIONAL DRILLING: The whipstocking or slant drilling of an oil and gas well more than five degrees (5°) off vertical.
DRILLING EQUIPMENT: All temporary structures, tanks, equipment, and facilities necessary or convenient for the drilling of a well or well hole, including,
but not limited to, wood or steel derricks, portable masts, engines, pumps, temporary fuel and water tanks, and other like facilities ordinarily used in
connection with the drilling of an oil and gas well.
EXPLORATORY AREA: A described area established by the council containing not less than forty (40) acres, the boundaries of which shall follow property
lines, public streets, highways, or alleys so far as practicable in which subsurface area the drilling for oil and gas or oil or gas and the production of oil and
gas are permitted only by the person upon whose application the exploratory area is established, or his successor in interest. It shall be the subsurface
portion of real property in which there is likely to be found deposits of oil and gas or oil or gas in which drilling and production operations may be carried on
and oil and gas or oil or gas wells bottomed for the production of such substances.
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING: Any well stimulation treatment that, in whole or in part, includes the pressurized injection of hydraulic fracturing fluid or fluids,
which may include a mixture of water, chemicals and sand, into an underground geologic formation in order to fracture or with the intent to fracture the
formation, thereby causing or enhancing the production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from a well.
OIL WELL: Any well or hole already drilled, being drilled, or to be drilled from the surface into the earth, which well or hole is used or intended to be used in
connection with the drilling for, prospecting for, or production of oil, natural gas, or other hydrocarbon substances. "Oil well" shall also include a well or hole
used for the subsurface injection into the earth of oil field waste, gases, water, or liquid substances, including any well or hole which has not been
abandoned and is now in existence.
PERMITTEE: Any person who receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
WELL STIMULATION TREATMENT: Any treatment or process of a well designed to enhance oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substance production or
recovery by increasing the permeability of the underground geologic formation. Well stimulation treatments include, but are not limited to, hydraulic
fracturing and acidizing. Well stimulation treatments do not include standard maintenance work or other routine activities that do not affect the integrity of a
well or the natural porosity or permeability of an underground geologic formation. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979; amd. Ord. 14-O-2660, eff. 6-6-2014)
10-5-304: EXISTING WELLS:
The right to maintain and operate oil and gas wells lawfully drilled into the subsurface of the city prior to February 20, 1968, which wells are still being
drilled or are producing oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances at the time this article becomes effective, shall not be prohibited; provided, however,
any such wells shall be maintained and operated in accordance with law and in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the permits pursuant to
which they were drilled. Any such well shall hereafter be referred to as an "existing well". No existing well shall be drilled, redrilled, or deepened below its
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 779/797
present bottom without first complying with or having complied with all the terms, conditions, and provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, the
payment of the application fee and permit fee, the securing from the council of a permit as required by sections 10-5-311 through 10-5-316 of this chapter,
and the approval of the exploratory area as required by sections 10-5-308 and 10-5-309 of this chapter; provided, however, no existing well, drilled from a
surface site within the city, shall be drilled or redrilled or deepened below its present bottom. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-305: DRILLING FROM OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS:
Subject to the approval of the exploratory area as required by section 10-5-308 of this chapter and the issuance of a council permit as required by section
10-5-311 of this chapter, the drilling of an oil and gas or oil or gas well and the production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances may be conducted
from drill sites located outside the city limits where such oil and gas wells are drilled into the subsurface of real property in the city by directional or slant
drilling in accordance with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-306: DRILLING AND PRODUCTION WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS:
A. The council finds and determines that the location of drill sites on real property within the city is contrary to the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. Drilling from or producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from surface locations within the city is
hereby prohibited except that production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances may continue from controlled drill site no. 1 until the date
specified in section 10-5-323 of this chapter for cessation of such activity.
B. Controlled drill site no. 1 shall be and embrace the real property in the city of Beverly Hills, county of Los Angeles, state of California, described as
follows:
That portion of Lots 843 and 844, Tract No. 7710, in the city of Beverly Hills, County of Los Angeles, State of California, as recorded in Book 83, pages
94 and 95 of Maps in the office of the Recorder of said County, described as follows:
Beginning at the most southerly corner of said Lot 843; thence along the southwesterly line of said lot north 30 (30°) degrees 53'05" west 120.00
feet; thence north 59 (59°) degrees 13'04" east 233.00 feet; thence south 30 (30°) degrees 46'56" east 22.50 feet; thence north 59°13'04" east 30.50
feet; thence south 30 (30°) degrees 46'56" east 102.76 feet to a point on the northwesterly line of Olympic Boulevard, which is a curve concave to the
southeast and having a radius of 593.11 feet; thence southwesterly along said curve a distance of 79.07 feet to the end of said curve; thence
continuing southwesterly along said northwesterly line of Olympic Boulevard south 59 (59°) degrees 13'04" west 184.45 feet to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 11-O-2614, eff. 11-18-2011)
10-5-307: WHIPSTOCKING; EASEMENTS REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS OF OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
No oil or gas well may be drilled unless the applicant holds and presents to the council evidence that such applicant has the right to enter or pass through
each parcel of property such drilling will take the well through between the drilling site and the well bottom, including the right to take oil and gas from the
property in which the well will be bottomed. Slant drilling or whipstocking of any well into, out of, or through the city is hereby prohibited, unless the
applicant for any such permit meets and fully complies with all the requirements of every city, or, in the case of unincorporated territory, of every county in
which such well or any part thereof is or will be located and meets and fully complies with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. (Ord. 79-O-
1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-308: APPLICATIONS FOR EXPLORATORY AREAS:
A. No council permit shall be granted or considered by the council or set for hearing until the council has approved the boundaries of the exploratory area
into which such a well or wells may be drilled. An application for the approval of the boundaries of the proposed exploratory area shall be required, and
in such application the applicant shall set forth and describe with a proper legal description the real property in the city which the applicant proposes to
explore for oil and gas purposes. A map shall also be attached to the application, which map shall clearly show and outline the proposed exploratory
area. Such area shall be known and designated as the "exploratory area". Such exploratory area shall contain not less than forty (40) acres. The
exploratory area may include property within and property outside the city. Each such application shall have attached thereto geological information
and the opinion of a geologist or petroleum engineer indicating that the boundaries proposed for the exploratory area include the subsurface portion of
real property in which there is likely to be found deposits of oil and gas.
B. Each application for the approval of the boundaries of an exploratory area shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00). The application fee shall be to defray the costs to the city of studies, investigations, and hearings by the city manager and other officers
and employees of the city, by consultants employed by the council, and by the council concerning the proposed exploratory area set forth in the
application. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-309: EXPLORATORY AREA BOUNDARIES AND POOLING OF PROPERTY; HEARINGS AND APPROVAL:
A. Each applicant requesting the approval of an exploratory area shall have the contractual or proprietary right and authority to drill for oil and gas under
the surface of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the area of the real property in the city described and included in any exploratory area. The council
may require the applicant to prove any such authority by submitting a lease agreement or evidence of ownership thereof.
B. In order to determine the proper boundaries of any exploratory area, the council may employ such engineers or consultants as it deems necessary to
advise the council in such matter, and the cost of such services shall be paid by the city.
C. The council, in consultation with the applicant, shall determine the nature and probable extent of the exploratory area. Having determined the probable
extent of the exploratory area, the council shall delineate and describe the approved exploratory area.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 780/797
D. The council, as a condition to granting its approval, may require each applicant or permittee to pool all real property which it controls within the
exploratory area as approved. After such pool is created, the property included therein shall thereafter be referred to as the "pooled area" or the
"community lease". The applicant shall not be required to obtain leases or contractual rights to explore all of the real property within such exploratory
area, but the applicant shall agree, in writing, that the owners of any oil and gas rights within the exploratory area may join in any leasing arrangement
covering the pooled area or any community lease for the production of oil and gas from the exploratory area. The owners of oil and gas rights within the
exploratory area shall have the right to join in any such lease and to share in the rental or royalty payments for oil and gas produced from the approved
exploratory area. The shares of royalty to be paid shall be computed on the same basis as that of the average of the real property owners, by surface
area, who have by lease or other document agreed to the drilling for and production of oil and gas by the applicant from the subsurface of the
exploratory area.
E. The owner of any oil and gas rights within the exploratory area shall be granted the right to join in any such pooled area or community lease on the
basis set forth in this section. The permittee or lessee shall accept the owner of such rights into the pooled area or community lease as provided in this
section upon receiving written notice that such owner will join in and become a part of such pooled area or community lease covering the exploratory
area and upon the execution of the same form of lease executed by other owners provided the oil and gas rights are appurtenant to real property
included in the exploratory area. The owners of oil and gas rights within the exploratory area may join such pooled area or community lease and be
included in the right to receive his pro rata share of oil and gas royalty the same as if he joined such lease by giving notice to the permittee at any time
after the exploratory area is approved; provided, however, such owner shall waive any right to oil and gas royalties, rentals, or proceeds on or for any
and all production from the exploratory area up to the first day of the following month after the time such notice is given to the permittee, unless such
notice is given to the permittee within five (5) years of the effective date of the first council permit issued in the exploratory area. The permittee shall be
required to impound the oil and gas royalty for all property within the exploratory area (in which the permittee does not have a contractual or proprietary
right to drill for oil and gas beneath the surface) for a period of five (5) years from and after the effective date of the said first council permit and, during
such five (5) year period, to pay such royalty, as they are entitled, to the owners of oil and gas rights who give written notice and execute the same form
of lease or agreement executed by other owners. Upon the expiration of five (5) years from the effective date of the said first council permit, the
permittee shall distribute the remainder of the funds impounded to the owners of oil and gas rights who have executed the lease in the same manner
as shares of royalty are apportioned. No such owner of oil and gas rights shall be entitled to a council permit or the right to drill an oil and gas well
because he has failed to join any community lease or pooled area or because he does not participate in an oil and gas royalty from real property
located within the exploratory area.
F. The pooling or unitizing of oil and gas rights within the exploratory area as between owners, lessees, or others having rights therein may be made a
condition to the approval of the exploratory area.
G. The council may modify the restrictions and conditions required by section 10-5-308 of this article and this section and impose such other conditions as
it may deem necessary to carry out the purpose and intention of these sections and to fairly and equitably protect the oil and gas rights of the owners in
any exploratory area.
H. Upon the receipt of an application for the approval of an exploratory area, the council shall set such application for a hearing not sooner than sixty (60)
days and not later than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application and shall refer such application to the city manager for study and
investigation. The city manager, not later than ten (10) days before the hearing by the council, shall file a report upon his study and investigation with
the council and with the city clerk. The council, at the request of the city manager, or on its own motion, may retain engineers, geologists, or other
persons to assist the city manager in his study and investigation. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper by two (2)
publications not more than thirty (30) days nor less than ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing and by mailing a written notice of such hearing
to the applicant.
I. In its action upon the application, if the council shall find that the boundaries of the proposed exploratory area include all of the subsurface portion of real
property in which there is likely to be found deposits of oil and gas from a probable single pool, the council shall approve the boundaries of the
proposed exploratory area, or, if such boundaries can be modified to justify such a finding, the council shall approve the boundaries of the exploratory
area as modified. In all other cases, the council shall disapprove the boundaries. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-310: PRODUCTION OF OIL AND GAS; DEVELOPED AREAS LESS THAN FORTY ACRES:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article requiring that the exploratory or producing area contain not less than forty (40) acres, the holder of a valid
council permit, as hereinafter required, may drill and produce an oil and gas well where such well is bottomed and produced from a "developed area"
as defined in section 10-5-303 of this article; provided however, in no event shall any person hereafter erect any derrick or drilling equipment or drill an
oil and gas well or an oil well or a gas well from surface drilling sites or locations within the city other than on a controlled drill site.
B. The council hereby declares that the following described real property is a developed area and shall hereafter be entitled to be treated, for the purposes
of this article, as if it were a "developed area" as that term is defined in section 10-5-303 of this article:
Lots 838 through 844, inclusive, of tract 7710, in the city of Beverly Hills, county of Los Angeles, state of California, as per map recorded in book 83,
pages 94 and 95 of maps, in the office of the county recorder of said county, together with such portions of the subsurface of adjoining streets as will
pass with a conveyance of the aforesaid lots. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-311: PERMITS REQUIRED FOR ALL DRILLING AND PRODUCING OPERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to conduct any drilling operation for a well hole or to drill and produce any oil and gas well or well hole in
the surface or subsurface of the city from any drill site without first having applied for and obtained from the council a permit so to do. Such permit shall be
designated and thereafter referred to as the council permit. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-312: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS FOR DIRECTIONAL DRILLING:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 781/797
A. Each application for a council permit shall be made in writing and shall include:
1. The legal description of the proposed drill site;
2. The legal description of all properties, both within and outside the city, through which such well is proposed to pass;
3. A statement that the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or the permission of the owner, to pass through and enter all property through
which such well is proposed to pass;
4. The proposed location, the type, kind, size, and amount of equipment, and the method of operation of the proposed well;
5. The proposed method of handling and using any product proposed to be developed;
6. In all cases where the well is proposed to be bottomed in the city, a statement that the applicant has the contractual or proprietary right and authority
to drill for oil and gas under the surface of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the real property described and included in the approved exploratory
area in accordance with the requirements of sections 10-5-308 and 10-5-309 of this article or a statement bringing the application within the
requirements of section 10-5-311 of this article; and
7. In all cases where the well is proposed to be drilled from a controlled drill site within the city, a statement that the applicant has complied or will
comply, before spudding in the well, with all the requirements of the city (or in the case of unincorporated territory, the county) in which the well is to
be bottomed.
B. At the time such application for a permit is made, the application fee hereinafter required shall be paid to the city controller.
C. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed written report of a geologist, or other person experienced in the field of subsidence as a result of
petroleum extraction, indicating the nature and extent of the subsidence, if any, that can reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the proposed
drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be, and indicating the nature and extent of the damages to property, if any, that could
reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be, and setting forth the
qualifications and experience in the field of land subsidence as a result of petroleum extraction of the person making the report. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-
15-1979)
10-5-313: CITY CONTROLLER RELOCATION PERMITS; LIMITATIONS:
A. Any permittee holding a council permit issued pursuant to an application filed under the provisions of section 10-5-311 of this article and having drilled
or commenced drilling any well may make an application to the city controller for a relocation permit.
B. Such application shall be in writing, shall be accompanied by a permit fee of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and shall set forth the following:
1. The description of the well proposed to be relocated;
2. The legal description of all properties, both within and outside the city, through which such relocated well is proposed to pass and a statement that all
such properties are not more than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from the properties through which the original well was proposed
to pass;
3. A statement that the permittee has the right, by reason of ownership or the permission of the owner, to pass through and enter all property through
which such relocated well is proposed to pass;
4. A statement that the permittee will use such relocated well for exploratory purposes only and will not produce oil and gas or oil or gas from such well
without first applying for, paying the necessary application and permit fees, and receiving a council permit for such relocated well as required by the
provisions of sections 10-5-311, 10-5-312, 10-5-315, and 10-5-319 of this article;
5. A statement that the permittee shall be bound as to such relocated well by all of the conditions imposed by the council in the council permit issued
for the well proposed to be relocated; and
6. A statement that the bottom hole location of the relocated well will be within the same exploratory area and not more than one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') from the bottom hole location approved for the original well.
C. The city controller, upon the receipt of an application meeting the requirements of this section, shall issue a relocation permit to the permittee without
first verifying the information contained in the application and shall report such issuance to the council within thirty (30) days.
D. It shall be unlawful to drill or redrill any well or well hole pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section through any property
located more than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from property approved by the council as the property through which the original
well was proposed to pass.
E. It shall be unlawful to produce any oil and gas or oil or gas through any well or well hole drilled pursuant to a relocation permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this section unless the permittee first applies for and receives a council permit for such relocated well.
F. The fee paid for a relocation permit shall be credited toward the application fees required by section 10-5-315 of this article if an application is made for
a council permit for the same well within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date the relocation permit is issued by the city controller. (Ord. 79-O-
1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-314: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS FOR VARIABLE DIRECTIONAL DRILLING:
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 782/797
A. As an alternative to the provisions of section 10-5-312 of this article, an application for a council permit may be made pursuant to the provisions of this
section. When an application is made pursuant to the provisions of this section, a permit issued shall not be subject to the relocation provisions of
section 10-5-313 of this article. Each application for a council permit pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be made in writing and shall include:
1. The legal description of the proposed drill site;
2. The legal description of a bottom area location entirely within a single exploratory area not exceeding one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320') in diameter and the legal description of a corridor connecting such bottom area location with the drill site;
3. A statement of what property the applicant has the right, by reason of ownership or permission of the owner, to pass through and enter and a further
statement that the applicant agrees, in finally locating the well, not to pass through or enter any property where he does not have such right;
4. The proposed location, type, kind, size, and amount of equipment and the method of operation of the proposed well;
5. The proposed method of handling and using any product proposed to be developed;
6. In all cases where the well is proposed to be bottomed in the city, a statement that the applicant has the contractual or proprietary right and authority
to drill for oil and gas under the surface of at least seventy five percent (75%) of the real property described and included in the approved exploratory
area in accordance with the requirements of sections 10-5-308 and 10-5-309 of this article or a statement bringing the application within the
requirements of section 10-5-311 of this article;
7. In all cases where the well is proposed to be drilled from a controlled drill site within the city, a statement that the applicant has complied or will
comply, before spudding in the well, with all requirements of the city (or, in the case of unincorporated territory, the county) in which the well is to be
bottomed; and
8. A statement of the exploratory area within which such well will be bottomed.
B. At the time such application for a permit is made the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) as
provided in section 10-5-315 of this article and a supplemental fee in the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to cover the additional costs to the
city of evaluating the wider well hole corridor permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section.
C. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed written report of a geologist, or other person experienced in the field of subsidence as a result of
petroleum extraction, indicating the nature and extent of the subsidence, if any, that can reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the proposed
drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be, and indicating the nature and extent of the damages to property, if any, that could
reasonably be expected to occur as a result of the drilling and production or drilling or production, as the case may be, and setting forth the
qualifications and experience in the field of land subsidence as a result of petroleum extraction of the person making the report.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-5-319 of this article, when the council has granted any council permit pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the council permit shall be of no virtue, force, or effect until it is issued by the city controller. The city controller shall issue a council permit
granted by the council pursuant to an application under this section, in a form contemplated in this article, and upon written acceptance of the council
permit being received from the permittee, accompanied by a statement by the permittee of the well corridor finally selected by the permittee through
which the well shall pass, a statement that the permittee has the right by reason of ownership or permission of the owner to pass through and enter all
property through which such well is proposed to pass, and a permit fee in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
E. The application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be processed in the manner provided in section 10-5-316 of this article, except that the
condition contained in subsection C10 of said section shall be modified as follows for the purpose of this section: "The oil and gas or oil or gas well
drilled pursuant to any council permit issued pursuant to the provisions of section 10-5-312 of this article shall be drilled only within the properties which
the permittee shall hereafter before the final issuance of the permit by the city controller, set forth, in conjunction with his acceptance of the permit, with
the city controller as the property through which such well is proposed to pass, unless the permittee secures the subsequent approval of the council to
cause such well to pass through other properties". (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-315: DEVELOPMENT OF OIL, GAS, AND MINERALS; APPLICATION FEES:
The filing of any application referred to in section 10-5-312 or 10-5-314 of this article shall be accompanied by an application fee of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). The application fee shall be to defray the costs to the city of studies and investigations by the city manager, other staff members, consultants
employed by the council, and the council concerning the proposal set forth in the application. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-316: HEARINGS AND DECISIONS:
A. Upon the receipt of an application for a council permit, as provided in section 10-5-312 of this article, or an application for a variable directional drilling
permit, as provided in section 10-5-314 of this article, the city clerk shall refer such application to the city manager. Upon the receipt of any such
application, the city manager shall undertake such studies and investigations as he may consider appropriate to enable him to make a report to the
council concerning such permit.
B. The city manager shall file a report with the council and the city clerk not later than forty five (45) days after the filing of the application.
C. The council, at the request of the city manager or on its own motion, may retain engineers or other persons to assist the city manager in his
investigation of the application. In its action upon the application, if the council finds that the terms and conditions of this article have been complied
with, and that persons and property within the city will not be adversely affected by the granting of the application, and that there is no reasonable
probability of danger or damage to any real or personal property or injury to any person within the city by reason of the subsidence of the surface of the
earth or other reason due to the extraction of oil or gas or oil and gas, and if, in a case where the proposed drill site is located within the city, the council
shall find that there is no reasonable probability of danger or damage to any real or personal property or injury to any person by reason of the
production and extraction of oil or gas or oil and gas or other hydrocarbon substances, the council shall grant the application and the council permit
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 783/797
upon such terms and conditions as the council may set and fix in granting such permit in order to protect persons and property within the city from
injury or damage or hazard of injury or damage, and, when the drill site is in the city, such further conditions as the council may impose in order to
eliminate or minimize the adverse effect of such drill site on persons and property in the vicinity. In all other cases, the council shall deny the
application. No permit shall be granted without the following standard conditions being required and made a part and condition of such permit:
1. Drilling operations for any well shall commence within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the permit and thereafter be prosecuted diligently to
completion, and, if a producing well is not secured within one year after the effective date of the permit, the well shall be abandoned. The council, for
good cause, may allow additional time for the commencement of the well.
2. The permittee shall comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city and of any other city through which the well, or any part thereof, is
located or to be drilled, and the permittee shall comply with all ordinances of the county when the well, or any part thereof, is located or is to be
drilled partly within the unincorporated territory of the county. The permittee shall comply with all the rules and regulations of the South Coast air
quality management district.
3. A copy of the complete record of any such well furnished to the division of oil and gas of the state shall be concurrently filed by the permittee with the
city clerk. The permittee, within thirty (30) days after any oil and gas or oil or gas well is placed on production, shall file with the city clerk a plat
showing the location of the producing interval and the route of the well hole between the producing interval and the drill site. All records submitted
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be confidential and privileged to the extent permitted by law.
4. All well holes and oil and gas wells passing through or bottomed in or under any real property in the city, which wells are drilled from drilling sites
outside the city, shall be below five hundred feet (500') upon entering any real property within the city.
5. All well holes and oil and gas wells passing through or bottomed in the city shall be bottomed in an exploratory area approved pursuant to the
provisions of section 10-5-309 of this chapter or in a developed area pursuant to the provisions of section 10-5-310 of this chapter.
6. The mayor, members of the council, city manager, public services administrator, building official, and their authorized assistants or deputies, and
other officers, employees, agents, and independent contractors designated from time to time by the council, shall be permitted at all reasonable
times to review and inspect the drill site and any operation or method used in the drilling for and producing of oil and gas.
7. The permittee shall hold the city, the council and its members, and its officers and employees harmless from any claim by third parties arising out of
or resulting from the permittee's operation under any council permit. The permittee, at all times during the existence of any council permit, shall be
insured for not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) against liability in tort arising from the drilling or production activities or operations
incident to the drilling and production of an oil and gas well pursuant to any council permit, and such policy shall name as additional insureds the city,
its mayor, members of its council, members of its boards and commissions, and its officers, agents and employees, while acting as such, for liability
arising out of the permittee's operation pursuant to such permit. Such policy of insurance shall be issued by a good and responsible insurance
company and shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. A certificate of such insurance shall be filed with the city clerk before drilling is
commenced. Drilling and production shall be suspended at any time when the required insurance is not in full force and effect.
8. The council permit shall become null and void unless the permit is accepted by the applicant in its entirety in writing and filed with the city clerk within
thirty (30) days after the effective date thereof, together with the payment of the permit fee required by section 10-5-319 of this chapter, and no work
on such drill site shall be commenced until such permit is accepted and issued.
9. The operation of any oil and gas well and production therefrom drilled pursuant to a council permit shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the division of oil and gas of the state, or any successor agency or body thereto.
10. Any oil and gas or oil or gas well drilled pursuant to any council permit shall be drilled only within the properties which the permittee set forth in its
application as the properties through which such well was proposed to pass, unless the permittee secures the approval of the council to cause such
well to pass through other properties.
11. Any and all above surface equipment and extraction activities associated with any oil and gas or oil or gas well drilled pursuant to any council
permit shall be located at least five hundred feet (500') from any school or park site located in the city of Beverly Hills.
D. No permittee shall drill, operate, or maintain any oil and gas well except in conformity with the terms and conditions of the permit pursuant to which such
well is being drilled. After a council permit has been granted, the council may alter, amend, or add to the conditions of such permit in order to protect
the citizens and property rights within the city. Such new, amended, or added conditions shall be made only after ten (10) days' notice to the applicant
or permittee and after a hearing before the council.
E. Any council permit may be suspended or revoked by the council for any material violation of the conditions of the permit by the permittee or for the
persistent violation of any law by the permittee in the operation of any such well. The council shall not revoke any council permit without first giving the
permittee ten (10) days' written notice of the nature of the violations and the council's intention to revoke such permit. If, within such ten (10) day
period, the permittee requests a hearing before the council, the council shall grant such hearing within fifteen (15) days after the date of such request.
At such hearing evidence shall be presented to establish to the satisfaction of the council the extent and nature of the violation which constitutes
grounds for the revocation, and the permittee shall be given an opportunity to cross examine all witnesses testifying at such hearing. The permittee
shall thereafter be permitted at that hearing, or at a continued hearing (if a continuance is requested by the permittee), to present evidence to disprove
or explain such alleged violations. The council thereupon, after hearing all the evidence, shall determine whether or not the permit should be revoked,
and the council determination thereon shall be final. If the council determines that the permit should be revoked, the council shall order the revocation,
and the permittee shall thereafter abandon the well in strict conformity with the requirements of law. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979; amd. Ord. 11-O-
2614, eff. 11-18-2011; Ord. 13-O-2637, eff. 2-24-2013)
10-5-317: APPLICATIONS FOR EXTENSIONS OF TIME WITHIN WHICH TO COMMENCE DRILLING WELLS:
A. Whenever a person holding a permit pursuant to the provisions of section 10-5-316 of this article wishes to request an extension of the time within
which drilling operations are required to be commenced to a period beyond ninety (90) days after the effective date of the permit, a request for such
extension shall be filed with the city clerk in writing and be accompanied by a fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each well for which
an extension is requested.
B. Such request for an extension shall set forth facts showing good cause for the council to allow additional time for the commencement of the well.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 784/797
C. Upon the receipt of such written request, the city clerk shall forward such written request to the city manager who shall investigate the request and
secure such reports from staff members and consultants as he deems appropriate.
D. The city manager shall forward the written request to the council, together with his report and recommendation.
E. The council, upon the receipt of such report and recommendation, may allow additional time for the commencement of the well. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-
15-1979)
10-5-318: PERMITS; FURTHER CONDITIONS:
A. No council permit shall be issued where all or any part of the proposed drill site is located within the city without the following additional conditions being
required and made a part and condition of such permit:
1. All buildings, structures, equipment, systems, and operations located on a controlled drill site, and all pipelines in connection therewith, shall comply
with all laws, including, without limitation, the provisions of this code, the statutes of the state, the ordinances of the city of Los Angeles where any
portion of the well or pipeline will be within the city of Los Angeles, and all applicable governmental administrative regulations.
2. All drilling operations on a controlled drill site shall be conducted within closed buildings or structures in compliance with the standards of title 9,
"Building And Property Health And Safety Regulations", of this code. To the extent permitted by law, temporary drilling derricks and temporary
foundations may be installed and used. Not more than one drilling derrick shall be in use at any one time.
3. All buildings, structures, equipment, systems, and operations located on a controlled drill site shall comply with title 5, chapter 1, "Noise
Regulations", of this code. The method and equipment to be used for moving the drilling derrick from one conductor to another shall be described in
writing by the applicant and shall not be implemented by the applicant until approved in writing by the council.
4. Buildings, structures, drill site enclosures, derrick enclosures, derricks, drill collars, dampers, landscaping, and the surrounding wall on a controlled
drill site shall be completed in accordance with plans reviewed by the architectural commission and approved by the council.
5. No pump for the production of oil may be installed above the surface of the earth.
6. All tanks located on a controlled drill site shall have been approved by the American Petroleum Institute.
7. Any drilling derrick shall be completely covered inside and out with a fire retardant, soundproofing material in a manner and with materials approved
by the fire chief. Drilling shall not be commenced until the covering of the drilling derrick, as installed, has been approved by the building official and
shall be discontinued at any time the building official determines that the derrick is not covered in accordance with such standards.
8. Soundproofing shall be installed around the drilling floor and work platform of any drilling derrick in a manner approved by the building official.
9. Any drilling derrick shall be mounted on vibration isolators or springs to minimize the transmission of drilling vibrations to the ground and to
surrounding areas. No drilling shall be commenced until the building official has approved the vibration isolators or springs. Drilling shall be
discontinued at any time the building official determines that the vibration isolators or springs are not effectively isolating the vibrations from
transmission to the ground.
10. The exterior surface of the drilling derrick shall be constructed of a solid material to prevent noise levels emitted from the interior of the derrick
structure from feeding the noise levels specified in subsection A19 of this section.
11. All access doors to any drilling derrick shall be constructed to "seal" close. At all times when drilling is underway, the access doors shall be closed.
Any vee door to a drilling derrick shall be constructed to "seal" close. Any vee door shall be closed at all times between six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of one
day and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the next day.
12. a. Within thirty (30) days after commercial production has been established, there shall be commenced and prosecuted diligently to completion on
each controlled drill site adequate landscaping and screening, either with shrubbery, masonry, or concrete walls or their equal, so that the same shall
not be unsightly nor hazardous. All tanks shall be depressed so that the top of any tank and other equipment and appurtenances shall not extend
more than five feet (5') above the surface of any controlled drill site, unless otherwise permitted by the council.
b. Within six (6) months after the completion of the drilling and the removal of the drilling derrick, any controlled drill site shall be landscaped with
suitable shrubbery and trees in accordance with a plan approved by the architectural commission.
13. After the removal of any temporary derrick housing, the servicing and repair necessitating the use of a portable derrick shall not be undertaken by
any permittee except in the manner and at the times approved in writing by the council.
14. At all times after any drilling is started on a controlled drill site, parking facilities shall be provided for use by vehicles employed in the drilling and
maintaining of wells on the controlled drill site. Parking for automobiles of employees or workers engaged in a drilling activity shall be provided by the
permittee at parking lots or in parking facilities, other than public streets, at locations other than the controlled drill site. If the parking lot or parking
facilities are not located within a reasonable walking distance of the controlled drill site, the permittee shall provide transportation to and from the
parking site for employees and workers.
15. At all times vehicular access to a controlled drill site shall be provided in accordance with the plans for vehicular access reviewed by the
department of community development and approved by the council.
16. All entrances to a controlled drill site shall be equipped with sliding gates which shall be kept closed at all times except when authorized vehicles
are entering or leaving the drill site.
17. When traffic lanes on any public street are closed or impaired by the permittee's operations, flagmen, and safety officers as required by the police
chief shall be provided by the permittee at all such times to aid traffic and maintain traffic flow.
18. Trucking for the delivery of equipment and supplies and for the removal of materials from a controlled drill site shall be limited to the hours between
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday through Friday; provided, however, the council may further restrict the hours and days
as a condition of issuing a permit if such trucking may interfere with traffic or be detrimental to the surrounding area.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 785/797
19. No permittee shall produce from any well or combination of wells in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at any
point on the exterior boundary of any controlled drill site to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five (5) decibels based upon a reference
sound pressure of 0.0002 microbars, as measured in any octave band center frequency, in cycles per second as follows: 63, 125, 250, 500, 1,000,
2,000, 4,000, and 8,000, and for the combined frequency bands (all pass). The permittee shall shut down and discontinue production from as many
wells as is necessary to reduce the noise to such limits at any time the building division notifies the permittee that its operation exceeds such noise
limits.
20. In addition to the other provisions of this section regulating noise, the following specific measures shall be taken to reduce noise being transmitted
from any controlled drill site:
a. All equipment, such as cathead motors, mud pump motors, and shakers, and all equipment used for the production of oil and gas or the operation
of the production units, such as hydraulic pumps, shipping pumps, and compressors, shall be housed in substantial buildings which have been
acoustically treated so as to be substantially soundproof in order not to permit any sound to be emitted which would exceed the noise levels set
forth in subsection A19 of this section. Should valve noise occur in gas lines to the degree that it becomes a significant annoyance, pipes should
be lagged by the permittee with commercially available materials.
b. All equipment located on any controlled drill site which emits noise when operating shall be equipped with manufacturer supplied noise control
devices or modifications of such devices that more effectively suppress noise levels, and all such noise attenuating features, including (without
limiting the general provision) mufflers on construction equipment, shall be checked daily to ensure that they are in good repair.
21. No well may be maintained as a producing well unless it is equipped with safe and proper producing units which shall be placed in pits or cellars
below the surface of the ground so that no visible pumping unit shall be above the ground adjacent to the surface location of the well, and such wells
shall be serviced with only portable well servicing equipment. The equipment operating the production units shall be housed in substantial buildings
which have been acoustically treated so as to be substantially soundproofed.
22. All workover operations where permitted shall be restricted to normal daylight working hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
"Workover operations" shall mean work performed in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there has been none, restore
production that has ceased, or increase production.
a. Workover rigs shall be equipped so that any noise emitted from any such operations shall not exceed the noise levels provided in subsection A19
of this section.
b. Workover rigs for redrilling and deepening wells shall be enclosed in the same manner as drilling derricks as required by subsection A7 of this
section.
23. All oil and gas or oil or gas produced from any well on a controlled drill site shall be shipped and transported from a controlled drill site solely
through pipelines.
a. All pipelines outside of such drill site shall be laid to a depth of at least three feet (3') below the surface of the ground.
b. As soon as commercial production has been established in any new well, the acquisition of a right of way or the construction of a pipeline shall be
started within ten (10) days and work thereon diligently prosecuted until such pipeline is completed.
c. Any and all water or brine produced shall be disposed of in reinjection wells or by other means approved in writing by the council.
d. The permittee shall not install any pipeline in the city without the prior written approval of the council.
24. Pipeline construction in the city shall be confined to normal daylight hours. The permittee, in the construction of any pipeline in the city, shall adhere
to all excavation locations specified by the city. Excavations shall be covered with plating to permit traffic use during construction. The permittee shall
comply with the regulations of the city concerning the stacking or removal of fill generated during excavating. All pipe, other material, or construction
equipment used in the pipeline construction in the city shall be stored at a controlled drill site and not on any street during nonconstruction hours.
25. All draw-works and pumps shall be electric powered.
26. All drill cuttings, rotary mud, and wastewater generated during drilling operations on a controlled drill site shall be disposed of by vacuum trucks.
Any wastewater reinjection shall be accomplished by approved American Petroleum Institute methods. No sump hole shall be permitted. All drill
cuttings, rotary mud, and waste materials shall be removed from the controlled drill site upon the completion of drilling operations.
27. Private roads for ingress and egress to and from the drill site shall be surfaced with gravel, oiled and maintained in good condition at all times
during drilling and production operations. No sign shall be erected on the drill site, except those required by law or permitted by this code.
28. The permittee shall require proven competence and knowledge of emergency procedures from drilling and workover personnel and shall also
require or provide full training and testing of production personnel in normal emergency operations.
29. The permittee shall ensure that at all times speeds within a controlled drill site are restricted to a maximum of ten (10) miles per hour.
30. The permittee shall not use volatile hydrocarbons for cleanup on a controlled drill site, except to the extent approved by the fire chief.
31. The permittee shall ensure that all petroleum storage containers on a controlled drill site have positive seals.
32. The permittee shall monitor drilling mud during drilling on any controlled drill site for odorous substances and take such measures to eliminate any
odor which would be perceptible outside the drill site.
33. The permittee shall implement all procedures or directions required by the air pollution control board of the state, the South Coast air quality
management district, and the city.
34. In addition to conventional design features incorporated in construction plans and guidelines, the permittee shall provide automatic vapor detection
sensors for hydrocarbons coupled to automatic shutdown mechanisms on any controlled drill site.
35. All tools, pipes and other equipment in connection with the drilling and production activities at a controlled drill site shall be stored and kept on the
drill site. The manner of stacking and storage shall be approved by the fire chief.
36. The permittee shall undertake no refining process or any process for the extraction of products from natural gas at a controlled drill site, except for
such minor processes as necessary to make natural gas acceptable to city gas mains for domestic use.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 786/797
37. The permittee shall protect the public water supply system on any controlled drill site against backflow in a manner approved in writing by the
building official in conformity with the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
38. All utility services for any controlled drill site shall be provided underground.
39. All drilling operations shall be carried on diligently from the commencement of the drilling until the completion of the well or until such well is
abandoned.
40. Within ninety (90) days after the completion of drilling operations or the abandonment of further drilling, the derrick and all drilling equipment,
including temporary tanks, shall be removed from any controlled drill site.
41. Well abandonment shall be in accordance with the requirements of the division of oil and gas of the state. Upon such well abandonment, the
permittee shall restore the property as nearly as possible to its original condition and shall remove all concrete foundations, oil soaked soil, and
debris, and all holes or depressions shall be filled to the natural surface.
42. Unless otherwise permitted by the council, no permanent derrick shall be installed or maintained on any controlled drill site or used for the drilling or
production of any oil or gas well.
43. Oil produced from such wells may be stored in steel tanks on a controlled drill site. Unless otherwise permitted by the council, the total amount of
storage for production, recycling, and all storage and operational purposes shall not exceed two thousand (2,000) barrels, and no tank shall exceed
one thousand (1,000) barrels capacity.
44. When required by the council, the applicant or permittee shall designate a competent representative who shall be responsible for the supervision of
drilling operations and the carrying out of the conditions of any permit. Such representative shall be available at all times during drilling operations
and shall be the responsible contact agent of the applicant or the permittee whom the council may require to carry out the provisions of the permit.
45. All of the operations at a controlled drill site shall be conducted in a careful and orderly manner, and the premises shall at all times be maintained in
a neat, clean, and orderly manner.
46. All firefighting equipment as required and approved by the fire chief shall be installed and maintained on any controlled drill site at all times during
the drilling and production operations.
47. The council may restrict the use of certain streets, alleys, or roadways in connection with the permittee's operations. In the event any street, alley,
or roadway is damaged by the permittee's operations, such damages shall be paid for by the permittee upon demand by the city, and the failure to
pay such damages, being the reasonable cost of the repair of any such damaged portions, shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit and the
collection of such damages at law by the city.
48. The permittee shall not use or cause to be used hydraulic fracturing, acidizing, or any other well stimulation treatment. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-
1979; amd. Ord. 14-O-2660, eff. 6-6-2014; Ord. 14-O-2662, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-5-319: PERMIT FEES:
A. When the council has granted any council permit, the council permit shall be of no virtue, force, or effect until it is issued by the city controller. The city
controller shall issue a council permit granted by the council, in the form contemplated by this article, upon the receipt of written acceptance of the
permit by the permittee and payment to the city of a permit fee for each well or well hole in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
B. Such permit fee shall be in addition to the application fee required by section 10-5-315 of this chapter. Such permit fee shall be to defray the costs to the
city of assuring that the permittee complies with the requirements of this article and his council permit and to defray the expense of enforcing the
provisions of sections 10-5-321 and 10-5-322 of this chapter. The permit, when issued by the city controller, shall show the effective date as the date
upon which the council granted the permit and the date of issue as the date when the permit was actually issued by the city controller. (Ord. 79-O-1720,
eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-320: ABANDONMENT OF WELLS:
Any well which has not been produced, or which has not been used for subsurface injection into the earth of oil, gas, oil field wastewater, or liquid
substances for a period of one year preceding November 1, 1978, shall be permanently and finally abandoned in strict compliance with the rules and
regulations of the division of oil and gas of the state or any regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-15-1979)
10-5-321: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS; SUBSIDENCE AND MONITORING PUBLIC RECORDS OF DRILL SITE AND WELL
INSPECTIONS:
The director of public works, from time to time as he deems appropriate but no less often than once every two (2) years, shall determine if any adverse
effect upon the surface of the city is occasioned or is in danger of being occasioned by reason of the removal of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances
from the subsurface of the city pursuant to a well regulated by the provisions of this article or pursuant to a well, no part of which is located within the city
but which drains a subterranean oil or gas pool, part of which is in the city. In the event the director of public works observes any such adverse effect or
danger, the director may order the immediate suspension of further production from such well or wells as may be located entirely or partly within the city,
and, in the event of such an order, production on such wells shall be suspended by the permittee or other operator immediately upon receiving notice of
such order. The permittee or other person lawfully producing oil or gas or oil and gas or any other hydrocarbon substance from any such well may appeal
to the council. The council, upon good cause being shown by the permittee or such other person, may vacate or modify the order of the director of public
works, or, if no part of the well is in the city, the council may direct the city attorney to immediately commence such actions or proceedings as may be
necessary for the abatement, removal, and enjoining of further drilling operations which adversely affect property within the city in the manner provided by
law and to take such other action and to apply to any court having jurisdiction to grant such relief as will restrain or enjoin any person from drilling or
producing any such well.
The director of public works shall annually request from those agencies that inspect oil wells drilled beneath the city, and from those agencies that inspect
the sites from which such wells are drilled, all public records relating to inspections or notices of violation created within the previous year. Upon compiling
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 787/797
the records each year, the director shall provide to the city council a summary of their contents.
The city council may impose a regulatory fee on oil well operators to recover the cost of subsidence monitoring and the monitoring of public records
pursuant to this section. (Ord. 13-O-2637, eff. 2-24-2013)
10-5-322: ENFORCEMENT:
Any well drilled or produced, and any building or structure erected, operated, or maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this article
shall be and the same hereby are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney, upon an order of the council, shall immediately
commence an action and proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other action,
and shall apply to any court having jurisdiction to grant such relief, as will restrain and enjoin any person from drilling or producing any such well, or from
erecting, operating, or maintaining such building or structure, or from using any property contrary to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 79-O-1720, eff. 2-
15-1979)
10-5-323: CESSATION OF ACTIVITY:
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 3, article 41 of this title, all drilling, production, and extraction activities occurring from surface locations in the
city, including controlled drill site no. 1, shall cease by December 31, 2016.
B. The city council may extend the date set forth in subsection A of this section for controlled drill site no. 1 upon application of the property owner and
upon finding that an extension of time would be in the public interest. (Ord. 11-O-2614, eff. 11-18-2011)
10-5-324: PROHIBITION AGAINST THE USE OF LAND FOR HYDRAULIC FRACTURING, ACIDIZING AND WELL
STIMULATION TREATMENTS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, it shall be unlawful to use or cause to be used any land within the city for the purpose of conducting or
enabling hydraulic fracturing, acidizing, or any other well stimulation treatment in conjunction with the production or extraction of oil, gas or other
hydrocarbon substance from any subsurface location within the city.
However, to the extent that any permittee demonstrates to the city engineer, or the city engineer's designee, that: a) well stimulation, other than hydraulic
fracturing, is necessary to recover the permittee's reasonable investment backed expectation established through investment made before April 22, 2014,
and b) that such well stimulation will not create a nuisance due to an adverse impact on persons or property within the city, then the city engineer may
authorize such well stimulation pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to procedures adopted by the city engineer. (Ord. 14-O-2660, eff. 6-6-2014)
Article 4. Limitation Of Actions
10-5-401: LIMITATION OF ACTIONS:
Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision of the matters set forth in this chapter otherwise subject to court
review, other than those listed in sections 65860 and 65907 of the Government Code of the state, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or
determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall
not be maintained by any person unless such action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the effective date of such decision.
Thereafter all persons shall be barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of such decision or of such
proceedings, acts, or determinations. (Ord. 78-O-1699, eff. 8-31-1978)
Chapter 6
STREET, ALLEY, AND HIGHWAY DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
10-6-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures, or land owned, operated, or controlled by any person, corporation, or, to the extent
permitted by law or government agency. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-2: STREET DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, reconstruct, or enlarge any building or structure on any lot which abuts a highway, street, or alley
unless the one-half (1/2) of the highway, street, or alley which is located on the same side of the center of such highway, street, or alley as such lot has
been dedicated and improved, or such dedication and improvements have been assured, in the manner set forth in this chapter. Such dedication and
improvements shall be for the entire width of such lot, and the dedication shall be in conformance with the master plan of streets, alleys, and highways,
and the improvements shall comply with the standard specifications for such improvements on file in the office of the city engineer.
B. Exceptions:
1. Dedications shall not be required for any portion of a lot occupied by a main building where such main building is not demolished or renovated in
excess of fifty percent (50%) of its existing value.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 788/797
2. Neither dedication nor improvement shall be required for additions to a residential building legally existing on a lot, or accessory buildings incidental
to such residential building, provided that additional dwelling units or guestrooms are not created, and all setbacks are complied with.
3. Neither dedication nor improvement shall be required for additions to a nonresidential building legally existing on a lot, or the construction of
accessory buildings incidental to the use of such nonresidential building, provided that the cumulative floor area of such addition and accessory
buildings does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, and all setbacks are complied with. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-3: AUTHORITY OF THE CITY ENGINEER:
The city engineer may approve and allow such variations from the requirements of the master plan of streets, alleys, and highways or required
improvements for any street, alley, or highway as he determines are made necessary by the conditions of the terrain on existing improvements contiguous
to the lot. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-4: DEDICATION PROCEDURE:
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, any person required to dedicate land pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall make an offer to dedicate
on a form approved by the city attorney and the city engineer. Such offer shall be properly executed by all parties with an interest in such land,
including beneficiaries and trustees in deeds of trust, as shown by current preliminary title report furnished by the owner and prepared by a title
company approved by the city attorney for such purpose, and shall be binding on the owner, his heirs, assigns, or successors in interest. The offer shall
provide that the dedication will be complete upon acceptance by the council.
B. The offer to dedicate land shall continue until accepted or rejected by the council. For the purposes of this section, an offer to dedicate shall be deemed
filed at such time as the city attorney and city engineer have verified that it meets all the requirements of this chapter. If the offer is rejected by the
council, the city will issue a release from such offer and record such release in the office of the county recorder.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, dedication shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the city attorney and city engineer verify that the offer to
dedicate meets all the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984; amd. Ord. 12-O-2622, eff. 7-8-2012)
10-6-5: IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURE:
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, any person required to make improvements by the provisions of this chapter shall either make and complete
the improvements to the satisfaction of the city engineer or shall deposit with the city engineer a surety bond in such an amount as the city engineer
shall estimate and determine to be necessary to complete all the required improvements.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, improvements shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the improvements have been completed to the
satisfaction of the city engineer. Improvements shall be completed within two (2) years after the issuance of the building permit. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-
3-1984)
10-6-6: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AFTER THE CERTIFICATION OF DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS:
When all dedications and improvements required by this chapter have been completed or satisfactorily assured, a building permit may be issued. (Ord. 84-
O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-7: FEES WAIVED:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no administrative fee shall be charged for the rendering of any service by the city in
connection with any dedication or improvement required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-8: LOTS AFFECTED BY STREET WIDENING:
A. On a lot which is affected by the dedication of land for street widening required by the provisions of this chapter, all setback, parking area, loading
space, and building location requirements for new buildings or structures or additions to buildings or structures set forth in this code shall be measured
and calculated from the lot lines being created by such widening.
B. In applying all other provisions of this chapter, the area of such lot shall be considered as that which existed immediately prior to the dedication of land
for street widening. (Ord. 84-O-9123, eff. 5-3-1984)
10-6-9: CITY MAY SHARE THE COST OF MAKING UNUSUAL IMPROVEMENTS:
The council may provide for a contribution toward the cost of making any improvement required by the provisions of this chapter. Upon an application by
the property owner for contribution by the city, the city engineer shall make a recommendation to the council, and the council shall determine the amount of
the contribution, if any, to be made by the city. (Ord. 84-O-1923, eff. 5-3-1984)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 789/797
Chapter 7
CONGESTION MANAGEMENT
Article 1. Definitions
10-7-100: WORDS DEFINED:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this article shall govern the construction of this chapter. In addition, except as provided in
this article, the definitions contained in chapter 3 of this title shall also govern the construction of this chapter.
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION: The use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger vehicle, including, but not limited to, carpools,
vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.
BUSPOOL: A vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed
schedule.
CARPOOL: A vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.
DEVELOPER: The person who is ultimately responsible for the planning, design and construction of a development project.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction or addition of new building square footage.
EMPLOYEE PARKING: The portion of total required parking assumed to be used by on site employees. Employee parking shall be calculated as follows:
Type Of Use
Percent Of Total
Required Parking
Devoted To Employees
Retail/commercial 30%
Office/professional 85%
Industrial/manufacturing 90%
PREFERENTIAL PARKING: Parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles
carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided
for single occupant vehicles.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal owner of a development who may serve as the lessor to a tenant.
SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD): The regional authority appointed by the California state legislature to meet federal
standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast air basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino
Counties).
TENANT: The lessee of space at a development project.
TOTAL AREA: The "total area" of a development shall mean the area of all floors or levels included within the exterior walls of a building or structure. If a
building or structure does not have exterior walls, the "total area" of the building or structure shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the
roof or floor above.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): The alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of
incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work
schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).
TRIP REDUCTION: Reduction in the number of work related trips made by single occupant vehicles.
VANPOOL: A vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating
arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis.
VEHICLE: Any motorized form of transportation, including, but not limited to, automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. (Ord. 93-O-2164, eff. 3-19-1993)
Article 2. Additional Environmental Review Requirements
10-7-201: CONGESTION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM COMPLIANCE:
Prior to certification of any environmental impact report (EIR) prepared for a development project pursuant to the requirements of the California
environmental quality act (CEQA), the EIR author shall identify and consult with regional and municipal fixed route transit operators providing service to the
project. In addition, the EIR author shall use the "transportation impact analysis method" contained in the Los Angeles County congestion management
program to assess traffic and transit impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, fixed route transit operators providing service to the project shall be
sent a notice of preparation (NOP) for all EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given an opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to
identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures
which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures timely identified by the transit operator shall be
evaluated in the draft EIR prepared for the project. Transit mitigation measures which are adopted shall be monitored pursuant to the mitigation monitoring
requirements of CEQA. (Ord. 93-O-2164, eff. 3-19-1993)
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 790/797
Article 3. Development Requirements
10-7-301: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND AND TRIP REDUCTION MEASURES:
A. Except as provided in section 10-7-302 of this article, prior to occupancy of any development project, the developer shall provide for transportation
demand management and trip reduction measures as follows:
1. Prior to occupancy of any non-residential development, the developer shall designate as least one existing parking space for carpool usage. Such
designation shall include signage satisfactory to the director of transportation.
2. Prior to occupancy of a nonresidential development that equals or exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in total area, the developer shall
comply with subsection A1 of this section and shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the director of transportation:
a. A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information in a prominent area accessible to employees. Such information shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;
(2) Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;
(3) Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter oriented organizations;
(4) Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;
(5) A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site;
(6) A notice which provides as follows:
The Owner of this building is required to comply with the Transportation Demand Management Program of the City of Beverly Hills. If you
have any questions about the requirements of the Program or about enforcement of the Program, please contact the Beverly Hills Department of
Transportation at (310) 285-2553.
3. Prior to occupancy of a nonresidential development that equals or exceeds twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet in total area, the developer
shall comply with subsections A1 and A2 of this section and shall comply with the following additional requirements to the satisfaction of the director
of transportation:
a. Not less than ten percent (10%) of the employee parking shall be signed, striped and reserved for use by carpool or vanpool vehicles and located
as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s) without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential parking shall be
identified on the site plan upon the application for a building permit.
b. A statement that preferential carpool or vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces
shall be included on the transportation information board required by subsection A2 of this section.
c. Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools shall be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum
vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches (7'2") shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by vanpool vehicles.
Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall be provided for vanpool parking areas to the satisfaction of the director of
transportation.
d. Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four (4) bicycles for the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of
nonresidential development and one bicycle for each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. If such
calculations result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher, then the fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. Secure bicycle parking may
consist of a fully enclosed space or a locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle which protects the bicycle from inclement
weather. Specific facilities and their location shall be provided to the satisfaction of the director of transportation.
The director of transportation may require additional bicycle racks or secure bicycle parking if the director determines that:
(1) The anticipated occupant or occupants of the development are likely to generate a greater than usual demand for bicycle parking by
commuters; or
(2) Additional bicycle facilities are necessary to mitigate substantial traffic impacts; or
(3) The location or design of the development allows for the provision of additional bicycle facilities without imposing a hardship on the developer
or the property owner.
If the director requires additional bicycle facilities pursuant to this section, then the director shall promptly provide the developer with written
notice of his or her decision. The developer or property owner may appeal the decision of the director to the city council within ten (10) days after
the notice is deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid. The procedures governing the appeal shall be the procedures set forth in title
1, chapter 4 of this code.
4. Prior to occupancy of nonresidential development that equals or exceeds forty thousand (40,000) square feet in total area, the developer shall
comply with subsections A1 through A3 of this section, and shall comply with the following requirements to the satisfaction of the director of
transportation:
a. The development shall include sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation
system to each building in the development.
b. If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the impacts of the development project, bus stop improvements shall be provided to the satisfaction
of the director of transportation. The director will consult with the local bus service provider in order to determine appropriate improvements.
(1) The director shall notify the developer in writing of any bus stop improvements required pursuant to this section. The director's decision to
require bus stop improvements may be appealed by the developer to the city council pursuant to title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 791/797
(2) When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, the developer and the city shall consider that commuters should be afforded
entrances that are safe, efficient and that have direct access to nearby transit stations or stops.
c. The development shall include safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on site. (Ord. 93-O-
2164, eff. 3-19-1993)
10-7-302: EXEMPTION:
A developer shall be exempt from the requirements of section 10-7-301 of this article if the development qualifies for seismic safety program incentives
under section 9-5-204 of this code. (Ord. 93-O-2164, eff. 3-19-1993)
10-7-303: MAINTENANCE:
All facilities and improvements required by this article shall be maintained by the property owner in compliance with the requirements of this article and in a
state of good repair. (Ord. 93-O-2164, eff. 3-19-1993)
Chapter 8
VIEW RESTORATION
Article 1. Trousdale Estates View Restoration
10-8-101: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent of this article is to restore and preserve certain views from substantial disruption by the growth of privately owned trees, vegetation, or a
combination thereof while providing for residential privacy and security; maintaining the garden quality of the city; ensuring the safety and stability of the
hillsides; and, acknowledging the importance of trees and vegetation in the city as an integral part of a sustainable environment. It is the further intent to
establish a process by which residential property owners in Trousdale Estates may seek to restore and preserve certain views, with an emphasis on early
neighbor resolution of view restoration issues. It is also the intent of this article to educate residents to consider the potential to block neighbors' views
before planting foliage and in maintaining foliage. It is not the intent of this article to create an expectation that any particular view or views would be
restored or preserved. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-102: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this article:
ARBORIST: An individual certified as an arborist by the International Society Of Arboriculture (ISA), or an individual who is currently listed as a consulting
arborist by the American Society Of Consulting Arborists (ASCA).
CITY ADVISORY OPINION: A nonbinding opinion rendered by the director of community development or his/her designee, to a view owner who requests
such an opinion and pays a fee as set by the city council.
DAMAGE: Any action which may cause death or significant injury to a tree, or which places the tree in a hazardous condition or an irreversible state of
decline. Such action may be taken by, but is not limited to, cutting, topping, girdling, poisoning, trenching, grading, or excavating within the drip line of the
tree.
FOLIAGE: The aggregate of leaves, branches and trunks of one or more plants. Trees and hedges, including hedges that otherwise meet the standards of
the zoning code, are included in the definition of foliage.
FOLIAGE OWNER: An owner of real property in Trousdale Estates upon which is located foliage that is subject to an action filed pursuant to this article
and which property is within five hundred feet (500') of a view owner's property. "Foliage owner" shall reference one or more owners of the same property.
FORESTER: An individual licensed in California as a registered professional forester (RPF).
HEDGE: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 10-3-100 of this title.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A landscape architect registered by the state of California.
PRIMARY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE: The main structure or building on a site zoned for residential use and used or occupied as a private one-family
residence.
PROTECTABLE VIEW: A protectable view may include any view of the Los Angeles area basin from a "viewing area" as defined in this section. The view
of the Los Angeles area basin may include, but is not limited to, city lights (Beverly Hills and other cities), ocean, and horizon. The term "protectable view"
does not mean an unobstructed panorama of all or any of the above. For purposes of this section, a protectable view shall be determined from a point
thirty six inches (36") above the finished grade of the viewing area.
PROTECTED VIEW: A protectable view that has been determined by the reviewing authority to merit restoration.
RESTORATIVE ACTION: Any specific steps taken affecting foliage that would result in the restoration or preservation of a protected view.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 792/797
SAFE HARBOR AREA: The area below a safe harbor plane.
SAFE HARBOR PLANE: A plane defined by points at the edge of view owner's level pad to points measured from grade at the edge of an adjacent
downslope foliage owner's principal building area that is farthest from the edge of view owner's level pad located in a line of sight of a protectable view.
The points of the plane on foliage owner's property shall be at a height of one foot (1') above the height of the roof of the primary residential structure on
foliage owner's property, not to exceed a maximum height of fifteen feet (15') as measured from grade (see illustration in section 10-8-103 of this chapter).
If the downslope property is undeveloped, or if the upslope property's view is over the driveway or "pole" portion of a flag lot, then the maximum height of
fifteen feet (15') from grade shall apply.
For the purposes of this definition, the height of the roof of the primary residential structure excludes chimneys, stair or elevator shafts, vent pipes,
mechanical equipment, parapets, architectural features that extend above the primary roof elevation, antennas, and other rooftop equipment. If the
roof height varies, the height of the roof of the primary residential structure shall be the highest point of the roof of the primary structure.
For purposes of this definition, downslope and upslope properties separated by a public street shall be deemed to be adjacent.
If a view owner's level pad is less than one foot (1') above the height of the roof of the primary residential structure on foliage owner's property, then
the safe harbor plane shall be defined as a plane above the foliage owner's level pad at a height of one foot (1') above the height of the roof of the
primary residential structure on foliage owner's property.
TREE: A woody perennial plant, consisting usually of a single elongated main stem or trunk and many branches.
TREE SURVEY: A tree survey includes the following information for trees alleged to impair a view and all trees within the vicinity of the alleged view
impairing trees as determined by a landscape architect, arborist, or forester:
A. Species of each tree, based on scientific name, and the common name;
B. Tree identifying number and location recorded on a map;
C. Physical measurements of the tree such as height and circumference: tree circumference shall be measured on the primary trunk at a height of four
feet six inches (4'6") above natural grade;
D. Age of the tree;
E. Report of overall health and structural condition of the tree;
F. Life expectancy and suitability for preservation;
G. Potential restorative actions to address trees alleged to disrupt a view, impact of such restorative actions on trees, and long term maintenance
activities to prevent future potential view disruption; and
H. Tree management recommendations.
The survey shall be signed or stamped by a registered landscape architect, arborist or forester.
If a foliage owner does not grant access to his/her property for the purpose of conducting a tree survey, a tree survey report shall be prepared with as
much of the above information as possible, using other information sources such as photographs taken from other properties, satellite photographs
from commercially available sources, public record permit information for work performed on foliage owner's property, and other similar information
sources.
VIEW OWNER: Any owner or owners of real property in Trousdale Estates that has a protectable view and who alleges that the growth of foliage located
on a property within five hundred feet (500') of their property is causing substantial disruption of a protectable view. "View owner" shall include one or more
owners of the same property.
VIEW RESTORATION GUIDELINES: Guidelines for implementation of the ordinance prepared by the community development department, adopted by
the planning commission, and made available to the public.
VIEW RESTORATION PROPERTY SURVEY: A survey completed by a certified professional, such as an ALTA (American Land Title Association) survey,
of view owner's site and foliage owner's site that may include calculation of the "safe harbor plane" as defined in this article and any other information or
calculations as may be of assistance to a reviewing authority pursuant to this section.
If access to the foliage owner's property is necessary to complete the survey and the foliage owner does not grant access to his/her property for the
purpose of conducting the survey, a view restoration property survey report shall be prepared using other information sources such as measurements
taken from other properties, photographs taken from other properties, satellite photographs from commercially available sources, public record permit
information for work performed on foliage owner's property, and other similar information sources.
VIEWING AREA: An area from which a protectable view is assessed, located on the level pad that contains the primary residential structure. A viewing
area shall be a room of the primary residential structure (excluding hallways, laundry rooms, closets and garages), or a patio, deck or landscaped area
adjacent to the primary residential structure that does not extend beyond the level pad. There may be one or more viewing areas on a property. The
reviewing authority shall establish the viewing area or areas as part of its finding that the view owner has a protectable view. The reviewing authority may
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 793/797
designate a location as a viewing area if, in the opinion of the reviewing authority, an average resident would often observe a protectable view from that
area. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-103: EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to foliage where the highest point of the foliage is below a "safe harbor plane" as defined in this article. The
exemption applies to foliage on foliage owner's property. Foliage shall be maintained in accordance with all other requirements of this code, including
landscape maintenance standards.
SAFE HARBOR AREA
(Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-104: PROCEDURES:
Except for violations of section 10-3-2616 of this title, complaints received by the city regarding foliage blocking views in Trousdale Estates shall be
addressed through the view restoration permit preapplication procedures in this article. The procedures in this article will be augmented by the view
restoration guidelines.
The procedures set forth below shall be followed in order for a view owner to pursue remedies available in this article. More than one view owner may
pursue remedies simultaneously with one or more foliage owners as determined by the parties involved.
A. Parties' Option To Enter Binding Arbitration; Effect Of Arbitration Decision: Nothing in this article is intended to preclude interested parties from agreeing
to resolve the dispute or disputes through binding arbitration, in which case compliance with the procedures set forth in this section shall not be
required. View owners who are subject to a binding arbitration decision shall be precluded from applying for a view restoration permit as to any foliage
owner who is a party to the binding arbitration decision.
B. Initial Neighbor Outreach:
1. If a view owner wishes to pursue remedies available in this article, the view owner shall notify each foliage owner in writing of concerns regarding
disruption of the view owner's protectable view by foliage on foliage owner's property (the "initial neighbor outreach"). This initial neighbor outreach
shall be on a form provided by the city in the view restoration guidelines on file in the city, shall be signed by the view owner, and shall include a
signed statement from view owner that view owner or the view owner's representative shall offer to meet with each foliage owner. The initial neighbor
outreach notification shall clearly identify the remedy sought by view owner and include a good faith estimate of the cost of the remedy, and an offer
to pay that amount.
2. Agreement to participate in the initial neighbor outreach by each foliage owner shall be voluntary, but each foliage owner shall have no more than
thirty (30) days from service of written request to respond to the view owner, unless foliage owner requests a ten (10) business day extension in
writing or the response period is otherwise extended by mutual agreement of the view owner and the foliage owner. Failure to respond shall be
considered rejection by the foliage owner. The initial neighbor outreach should be followed by discussions between view owner and each foliage
owner to attempt to reach a mutually agreeable solution.
3. If the view owner and a foliage owner are unable to resolve the matter, or if a foliage owner fails to respond to the initial neighbor outreach, the view
owner may proceed with a mediation process. To participate in the city sponsored mediation process, the view owner shall submit to the city proof of
the initial neighbor outreach in the form of a certified letter and mailing receipt. If a foliage owner did not respond to the initial neighbor outreach, then
the view owner shall also provide an affidavit, signed under penalty of perjury, indicating the nonresponse of foliage owner.
4. If, pursuant to an agreement between the view owner and a foliage owner, the view owner or foliage owner may damage or remove, or cause to be
damaged or removed, any "protected tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this title, a tree removal permit must first be obtained in accordance
with the requirements of section 10-3-2901 of this title.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 794/797
C. Mediation:
1. If the parties are unable to reach agreement through the initial neighbor outreach process and the view owner wishes to pursue remedies available
in this article, then, as a prerequisite, the view owner shall notify each foliage owner of an offer to mediate. The notice shall be on a form provided by
the city in the view restoration guidelines, shall be signed by view owner, and shall include a signed statement from the view owner that the view
owner or the view owner's representative shall offer to meet with each potential foliage owner and a mediator. The notice shall clearly identify the
remedy sought by the view owner and include a good faith estimate of the cost of the remedy.
2. Acceptance of mediation by each foliage owner shall be voluntary, but each foliage owner shall have no more than thirty (30) days from service of a
written request for mediation to accept or reject the offer of mediation, unless the foliage owner requests a ten (10) business day extension in writing
or the response period is otherwise extended by mutual agreement of the foliage owner and the view owner. Failure to respond shall be considered
rejection. Each mediation session may involve one or more view owners and one or more foliage owners at the discretion of the parties involved.
3. The view owner and each foliage owner shall comply with requirements in the view restoration guidelines regarding submittal of information to the
mediator.
4. The mediator shall not have the power to issue binding orders for restorative action but shall strive to enable the parties to resolve their dispute at
this stage. If an agreement is reached between the parties as a result of mediation, the mediator will encourage the participants to prepare, and can
assist in the preparation of, a private agreement for the parties to sign.
5. If the view owner and a foliage owner are unable to resolve the matter, or if a foliage owner fails to respond to the mediation notice or to participate in
the mediation process as prescribed in the view restoration guidelines, then the view owner may proceed to file for a view restoration permit.
6. If, pursuant to an agreement between the view owner and a foliage owner, the view owner or foliage owner may damage or remove, or cause to be
damaged or removed, any "protected tree" as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this title, a tree removal permit must first be obtained in accordance
with the requirements of section 10-3-2901 of this title.
D. City Advisory Opinion: A view owner may request a nonbinding advisory opinion at any time prior to the view owner filing an application for a view
restoration permit in accordance with the requirements of section 10-8-106 of this chapter. If the view owner wishes to pursue the process set forth in
section 10-8-106 of this chapter, the view owner must wait twelve (12) months from receipt of the city advisory opinion to file a view restoration permit
application. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-105: CONTINUATION OF PROCESS AFTER AGREEMENT:
If the view owner and a foliage owner enter into a private agreement as a result of initial neighbor outreach or mediation before the filing of a view
restoration permit application, and that agreement is not adhered to by parties to the agreement, the parties may pursue civil litigation; however, if the view
owner wishes to pursue remedies available in this article, then the view owner may continue with the preapplication process at the step after the step at
which the agreement was entered into, provided that less than two (2) years have passed since the date of the private agreement. If the view owner
wishes to pursue remedies available in this article and more than two (2) years have passed since the date of the private agreement, then the view owner
shall begin view restoration procedures with the initial neighbor outreach. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-106: VIEW RESTORATION PERMIT:
A. View Restoration Permit: After exhaustion of the prehearing steps set forth in section 10-8-104 of this chapter, and upon application by a view owner in
a form satisfactory to the director of planning and community development, the reviewing authority may issue a view restoration permit to a view owner
with a protectable view as defined in this article where the protectable view from a viewing area is substantially disrupted by "foliage" as defined in this
article and the reviewing authority makes all of the findings as set forth in this section.
B. Reviewing Authority: The reviewing authority for a view restoration permit application shall be the planning commission. If a view restoration permit
application includes review of a "protected tree" or trees as defined in section 10-3-2900 of this title, then the reviewing authority may order the removal
of the tree or trees pursuant to section 10-3-2902 of this title as part of the restorative action required by a view restoration permit.
C. Application: Application for a view restoration permit shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the director of community development and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
1. Proof that view owner has attempted or completed the following procedures as required in this section:
a. Initial neighbor outreach; and
b. Mediation.
2. Identification of the specific remedy sought by view owner and an estimate of cost.
3. A view restoration property survey documenting that the subject foliage is on foliage owner's property, that the foliage owner's property is within five
hundred feet (500') of view owner's property, and the foliage is above the safe harbor plane.
4. A tree survey.
If an applicant does not submit the necessary information and the application remains incomplete for six (6) months after the city, in writing, deems
the application incomplete, the director of community development shall deny the application without prejudice, and shall provide notice to the
applicant of that determination.
Once a complete application has been received, the city shall send a formal notice of the application to the foliage owner including a copy of the
application, a copy of the view restoration guidelines and a request for an invitation to staff and the reviewing authority to visit foliage owner's
property with foliage owner's authorization.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 795/797
D. Verification Of Information: All applicants for a view restoration permit shall submit an affidavit, signed under penalty of perjury, that the information
provided in the application and other submitted documents is complete, true, and accurate based on the applicants' knowledge and reasonable
investigation.
E. Public Hearing Notice: The reviewing authority shall hold a public hearing concerning each application for a view restoration permit.
Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this section shall be completed in accordance with chapter 3, article 2.5 of this title and the city's public notice
guidelines.
F. Public Hearing: The director of community development or the reviewing authority may, at its discretion, require the review or additional review of any
view restoration case by a qualified soils engineer, landscape architect, arborist, or other appropriate professional, based on the specific conditions of
foliage owner's property. Foliage owner authorization shall be required prior to accessing the foliage owner's property. If foliage owner does not permit
access to foliage owner's property, the reviewing authority shall review the case using other information as may be available, including information
provided by the view owner.
G. Restrictions And Conditions: In approving a view restoration permit, the reviewing authority may impose such restrictions or conditions, including
restorative action, as it deems necessary or proper to restore a protected view; protect the foliage owner's reasonable enjoyment of its property; protect
the public health, safety and welfare; or any combination thereof.
H. Appeals; Effective Date: Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this section may be appealed to the city council by view owner or
foliage owner pursuant to the provisions set forth in title 1, chapter 4, article 1 of this code. The appeal period shall commence at the date of mailing of
the notice of decision.
Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this section takes effect fourteen (14) days from the issuance of a notice of decision unless
an appeal is filed. If appealed, then the effective day is the date on which the city council acts.
I. Findings:
1. The reviewing authority may issue a view restoration permit to remove or alter foliage on any lot that is all or partly within five hundred feet (500') of a
view owner's property if it makes all of the following findings:
a. The view owner has a protectable view. The reviewing authority shall determine the viewing area or areas in order to make this finding.
b. The view owner has substantially complied with the initial neighbor outreach and mediation procedures of this article.
c. The view owner's protectable view is substantially disrupted by foliage on foliage owner's property that is not exempt under section 10-8-103 of
this chapter. The following criteria shall be considered in determining whether or not a protectable view is substantially disrupted:
(1) Foliage Position Within A Protectable View: Foliage located in the center of a protectable view is more likely to be found to substantially disrupt
a view than foliage located on the protectable view's periphery.
(2) Foliage Size And Density: Foliage that by virtue of its size and density obstructs a large portion of a protectable view is more likely to be found
to substantially disrupt the view than is foliage that obstructs only a small portion of the protectable view. Trees located in close proximity to each
other and maintained in such a way as to collectively form an uninterrupted "green barrier" are more likely to be found to substantially disrupt a
view than are individual trees.
(3) View Diminished By Other Factors: The extent to which the view has been or is diminished by other factors such that removal of the foliage at
issue will not substantially restore the protectable view. Other factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to, permitted structures,
and foliage that is not on a private property within five hundred feet (500') of the view owner's property.
d. With respect to any tree protected pursuant to section 10-3-2902 of this title, removal of the tree will not:
(1) Adversely affect the neighboring properties or the general welfare or safety of the surrounding area; or
(2) Adversely affect the garden quality of the city.
2. The reviewing authority may allow foliage to substantially disrupt a protectable view if the reviewing authority makes one or more of the following
findings:
a. The foliage is important to the integrity of an existing landscape plan.
b. Alteration of the foliage will unreasonably impact the privacy and security of the foliage owner.
c. Alteration of the foliage will have a substantial adverse impact on stability of a hillside, drainage, or erosion control.
d. Restoration of the protectable view would not substantially enhance a reasonable person's enjoyment of the view owner's property taken as a
whole.
J. Restorative Action: The reviewing authority may, through issuance of a view restoration permit, require restorative action on foliage owner's property. All
restorative action must be performed by a licensed and bonded tree or landscape service unless mutually agreed upon by the view owner and the
foliage owner. Restorative action may include, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Trimming, culling, lacing, or reducing foliage to a height or width to be determined by the reviewing authority but not below the safe harbor plane.
2. Requiring the complete removal of the foliage when the reviewing authority finds that the trimming, culling, lacing, or reduction of the foliage is likely
to kill the foliage, threaten the public health, safety, or public welfare, or will destroy the aesthetic value of the foliage that is to be pruned or reduced.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 796/797
Removal of a healthy tree not on a list of nuisance trees maintained by the city is to be avoided unless the reviewing authority determines such
removal is necessary to avoid substantial disruption of a protected view.
3. Requiring replacement foliage when the reviewing authority finds that removal without replacement will cause a substantial adverse impact on one or
more of: a) the public health, safety and welfare; b) the privacy of the property owner; c) shade provided to the dwelling or property; d) the energy
efficiency of the dwelling; e) the stability of the hillside; f) the health or viability of the remaining landscaping; or g) the integrity of the landscape plan.
K. Notice Of Decision:
1. Written Decision Required: The action taken by the reviewing authority shall be set forth in writing.
2. Notice Of Action: Within five (5) days after the issuance of a decision by the reviewing authority, the director of community development shall cause
a copy of the decision to be mailed through the United States mail, postage prepaid, in accordance with chapter 3, article 2.5 of this title and the
city's public guidelines.
The failure of the person addressed to receive a copy of the decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of any decision.
L. Indemnification: View owner shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, attorneys and employees from any claim, action or
proceeding brought by a party other than the view owner against the city or its agents, officers, attorneys or employees to attack, set aside, void or
annul the entitlements that may be granted by the city through issuance of a view restoration permit or that otherwise challenges, or seeks damages
resulting from, the issuance, defense, implementation, or enforcement of a view restoration permit (collectively "action").
The view owner shall fulfill this obligation by depositing with the city an amount established by city council resolution and allowing that amount to be
drawn upon by the city to reimburse the city for: 1) its actual costs to defend any action, and 2) any damages or penalties assessed to the city as a
result of the action (collectively, the "city costs"). Alternatively, the view owner may deposit with the city security, satisfactory in form and content to the
city attorney, guaranteeing reimbursement to the city of the city costs up to the amount established by city council resolution. The city shall not draw
upon such deposit or otherwise be reimbursed for any city costs attributable solely to defending the legality of the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in
this reimbursement obligation shall provide to the view owner any control over decisions made by the city in connection with an action.
M. Enforcement Costs: View owner shall also be responsible for reimbursing the city for any and all costs incurred in enforcing a view restoration permit
through the judicial process, except for those costs of enforcement as the city may recover from a foliage owner. View owner shall not be responsible
for reimbursing the city for any costs incurred prior to the initiation of a judicial process. The view owner shall fulfill this obligation by depositing with the
city an amount established by city council resolution and allowing that amount to be drawn upon by the city to reimburse the city for its actual costs of
enforcement. Alternatively, the view owner may deposit with the city security, satisfactory in form and content to the city attorney, guaranteeing
reimbursement to the city of its enforcement costs up to the amount established by city council resolution. Nothing in this reimbursement obligation
shall provide to the view owner any control over decisions made by the city or the city prosecutor in connection with the enforcement process.
Additionally, nothing in this section is intended to modify the provisions of section 10-8-108 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012; amd. Ord.
12-O-2627, eff. 9-23-2012; Ord. 13-O-2640, eff. 5-3-2013; Ord. 14-O-2661, eff. 6-20-2014)
10-8-107: DECISIONS INTENDED TO RUN WITH THE LAND; DISCLOSURE:
Decisions regarding view restoration shall be binding on all current and future owners of view owner's property and foliage owner's property, and such
decisions must be disclosed by each owner to subsequent owners of the property. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-108: PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; SUBSEQUENT ENFORCEMENT BY VIEW OWNER AND ATTORNEY FEES:
The city shall take such action, as appropriate, to ensure initial compliance with a view restoration permit. After an initial determination by the city that a
foliage owner has complied with a view restoration permit, any further dispute regarding the foliage owner's compliance with the view restoration permit
shall be resolved by a civil action initiated by the view owner.
At any time, before or after an initial determination of compliance with a view restoration permit by the city, any view owner may sue in Los Angeles
superior court to enjoin violation of, or compel compliance with, a view restoration permit. The prevailing party in any such civil action between a view
owner and a foliage owner shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred in the litigation. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-109: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS:
The view restoration guidelines shall include landscape standards that include a list of nuisance trees that should not be planted in hillside view areas.
(Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)
10-8-110: APPORTIONMENT OF COSTS:
It is the intent that procedural fees referenced in this section shall reflect the actual cost of administrative activities required of the city to implement this
article. Additional clarification of fees and costs may be included in the view restoration guidelines.
A. Initial Neighbor Outreach:
1. Procedural Costs: Any costs associated with obtaining information, mailing the required notice, or preparing an agreement shall be borne by the view
owner. The view owner shall pay the cost of a view restoration property survey or tree survey if such a survey is completed.
2. Restorative Action: The cost of restorative action agreed upon by the view owner and the foliage owner shall be borne by the view owner unless
otherwise agreed to by the foliage owner.
10/20/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=466 797/797
3. Maintenance Costs: The cost of subsequent maintenance of foliage on the foliage owner's property shall be allocated as agreed upon by the parties.
B. Mediation:
1. Procedural Costs: Any costs associated with obtaining information, mailing the required notice, or preparing an agreement shall be borne by the view
owner. The view owner shall pay the cost of a view restoration property survey or tree survey if such a survey is completed.
2. Restorative Action: The cost of restorative action agreed upon by the view owner and the foliage owner shall be borne by the view owner unless
otherwise agreed to by the parties.
3. Maintenance Costs: The cost of subsequent maintenance of foliage on the foliage owner's property shall be allocated as agreed upon by the parties.
C. View Restoration Permit With Public Hearing:
1. Procedural Costs: View owner shall bear the cost of application fees and other application costs including the view restoration property survey and
tree survey and the cost of any other information requested by the reviewing authority.
2. Restorative Action:
a. The foliage owner shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of restorative action if the foliage owner did not participate in mediation and
the reviewing authority finds restorative action is required.
b. The view owner and foliage owner shall each pay fifty percent (50%) of the cost of restorative action if the foliage owner participated in mediation
and the reviewing authority finds restorative action is required.
3. Maintenance After Initial Restorative Action: The foliage owner shall pay for subsequent maintenance of the foliage consistent with the view
restoration permit.
D. Appeal To City Council:
1. Procedural Costs: Appellant shall bear the costs of the appeal application including the appeal fee, public notice cost, and any other application
costs.
2. Restorative Action: The cost of restorative action resulting from an appeal to the city council shall be apportioned in the same way as the cost of
restorative action pursuant to a decision by the planning commission.
3. Maintenance After Initial Restorative Action: The foliage owner shall pay for subsequent maintenance of the foliage consistent with the view
restoration permit. (Ord. 11-O-2616, eff. 1-6-2012)